THE
MARYVILLE
MUNICIPAL
CODE
Prepared by the
MUNICIPAL TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICE
INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE
THE UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE
in cooperation with the
TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL LEAGUE
April 1999
Change 17
February 5, 2019
CITY OF MARYVILLE, TENNESSEE
MAYOR
Tom Taylor
VICE MAYOR
Andy White
COUNCILMEMBERS
Tommy Hunt
Fred Metz
Joseph A. Swann
CITY MANAGER
Greg McClain
CITY RECORDER/FINANCIAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATOR
Sherri Phillips
CITY ATTORNEY
Melanie Davis
ii
PREFACE
The Maryville Municipal Code contains the codification and revision of
the ordinances of the City of Maryville, Tennessee. By referring to the historical
citation appearing at the end of each section, the user can determine the origin
of each particular section. The absence of a historical citation means that the
section was added by the codifier. The word "modified" in the historical citation
indicates significant modification of the original ordinance.
The code is arranged into titles, chapters, and sections. Related matter
is kept together, so far as possible, within the same title. Each section number
is complete within itself, containing the title number, the chapter number, and
the section of the chapter of which it is a part. Specifically, the first digit,
followed by a hyphen, identifies the title number. The second digit identifies the
chapter number, and the last two digits identify the section number. For
example, title 2, chapter 1, section 6, is designated as section 2-106.
By utilizing the table of contents and the analysis preceding each title and
chapter of the code, together with the cross references and explanations included
as footnotes, the user should locate all the provisions in the code relating to any
question that might arise. However, the user should note that most of the
administrative ordinances (e.g. Annual Budget, Zoning Map Amendments, Tax
Assessments, etc...) do not appear in the code. Likewise, ordinances that have
been passed since the last update of the code do not appear here. Therefore, the
user should refer to the city's ordinance book or the city recorder for a
comprehensive and up to date review of the city's ordinances.
Following this preface is an outline of the ordinance adoption procedures,
if any, prescribed by the city's charter.
The code has been arranged and prepared in loose-leaf form to facilitate
keeping it up to date. MTAS will provide updating service under the following
conditions:
(1) That all ordinances relating to subjects treated in the code or which
should be added to the code are adopted as amending, adding, or deleting
specific chapters or sections of the code (see section 8 of the adopting ordinance).
(2) That one copy of every ordinance adopted by the city is kept in a
separate ordinance book and forwarded to MTAS annually.
iii
(3) That the city agrees to pay the annual update fee as provided in the
MTAS codification service charges policy in effect at the time of the update.
When the foregoing conditions are met MTAS will reproduce replacement
pages for the code to reflect the amendments and additions made by such
ordinances. This service will be performed at least annually and more often if
justified by the volume of amendments. Replacement pages will be supplied
with detailed instructions for utilizing them so as again to make the code
complete and up to date.
The able assistance of Sandy Selvage, the MTAS Sr. Word Processing
Specialist who did all the typing on this project, and Tracy G. Gardner,
Administrative Services Assistant, is gratefully acknowledged.
Steve Lobertini
Codification Consultant
iv
ORDINANCE ADOPTION PROCEDURES PRESCRIBED BY THE
CITY CHARTER
Section 14. All ordinances shall begin with the clause: Be it ordained by
the Council of the City of Maryville, Tennessee. Every proposed ordinance shall
be introduced in writing in the form required for final adoption. An ordinance
may be introduced by any member of the Council or by the Manager. Upon
introduction, a copy shall be distributed to each Council member, the Recorder,
the Manager, and the City Attorney. The body of ordinances may be omitted
from the journal, but reference therein shall be made to the ordinance by title
and/or subject matter. Each ordinance enacted by the Council shall be
presented to the Council and passed by a majority of the Council members
present on two (2) separate days, the second presentation to be not less than
fourteen (14) days following the first presentation unless a majority of the entire
Council shall by recorded vote waive this time requirement. Upon the first
presentation, the caption of the ordinance shall be read or its substance stated
and upon request of any member of Council or upon the request of any taxpayer
of the City, the ordinance shall be read in full before final passage. The second
presentation of an ordinance may be included in a consent agenda and may be
voted upon without formal presentation. The consent agenda may include
ordinances, approvals, or other matters deemed appropriate by Council for
inclusion in the consent agenda. Any Council person may request that an item
be withdrawn from the consent agenda and be considered and voted upon
separately. Except in the ordinance adopting the budget, no material or
substantial amendment may be made on second or final passage unless such
amendment is passed in the same manner as an amendment to an existing
ordinance. Every ordinance shall become effective upon final passage unless by
its terms the effective date is deferred. Every ordinance upon final passage
shall be signed by the Mayor or Vice-Mayor or the Mayor's other designee on
Council in the Mayor's absence. Every ordinance shall immediately be taken
charge of by the Recorder and numbered, copied in ordinance book, and
authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and Recorder. The ordinance shall
then be filed and preserved in the Recorder's office.
v
1-1
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION1
CHAPTER
1. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION.
2. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
3. CODE OF ETHICS.
4. PUBLIC RECORDS.
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION2
SECTION
1-101. Departments.
1-101. Departments. The administrative organization shall consist of
the following departments to be under the direction of the department heads as
indicated.
(1) Department of administration comprising the city manager's office.
(2) Department of finance to be under the immediate direction of the
director of financial services, who shall have all of the vested powers and duties
of the city recorder, and to be operated in accordance with the administrative
regulations issued by the city manager.
(3) Department of human resources under the immediate direction of
the director of human resources and to be operated in accordance with the
administrative regulations issued by the city manager.
(4) Department of engineering and public works to be under the
immediate direction of the director of engineering and public works and to be
1Charter references
See the charter index, the charter itself, and footnote references to the
charter in the front of this code.
Municipal code references
Building, plumbing and electrical inspectors: title 12.
Fire department: title 7.
Utilities: titles 18 and 19.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Zoning: title 14.
2Charter references: art. II, § 31 and art. VIII.
1-2
operated in accordance with the administrative regulations issued by the city
manager.
(5) Department of police to be under the immediate direction of the
police chief and to be operated in accordance with the administrative regulations
issued by the city manager.
(6) Department of fire to be under the immediate direction of the fire
chief and to operated in accordance with the administrative regulations issued
by the city manager.
(7) Department of computer information technology to be under the
immediate direction of the director of computer information technology and to
be operated in accordance with the administrative regulations issued by the city
manager.
(8) Department of developmental services to be comprised of the offices
of the economic development, planning, and codes to be under the immediate
direction of the director of development services and to be operated in
accordance with the administrative regulations issued by the city manager.
(9) Department of water and sewer to be under the immediate
direction of the director of public utilities and to be operated in accordance with
administrative regulations issued by the city manager.
(10) Department of electricity to be under the immediate direction of the
director of electric utility and to be operated in accordance with the
administrative regulations issued by the city manager. (1985 Code, § 1-101, as
amended by Ord. #96-32, Nov. 1996, modified, replaced by Ord. #2009-10, March
2009, and amended by Ord. #2014-28, Sept. 2014)
1-3
CHAPTER 2
COUNCIL MEETINGS
SECTION
1-201. Time of meeting.
1-202. Place of meeting.
1-201. Time of meeting. The time of the regular monthly meeting of
the council as authorized under Article IV of the Charter of the City of Maryville
is hereby fixed at 7 o'clock PM on the first Tuesday of each month except when
such day falls on a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be held on the following
day. (Ord. #99-10, Feb. 1999)
1-202. Place of meeting. The place of the regular monthly meeting of
the council as authorized under Article III of the Charter of the City of Maryville
is hereby fixed at the Municipal Building, 400 West Broadway, Maryville,
Tennessee, or at such other location as designated by the mayor and city
manager, provided that public notice of such other location is given at least five
(5) days prior to the meeting. (Ord. #99-10, Feb. 1999)
1-4
CHAPTER 3
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION
1-301. Applicability.
1-302. Definitions.
1-303. Disclosure of personal interest.
1-304. Prohibition of acceptance of gifts and gratuities.
1-305. Use of information.
1-306. Violation and penalty.
1-301. Applicability. (1) This is the code of ethics for officials and
employees of the city. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or
appointed officials and employees of the city, whether compensated or not,
including those of any separate board, commission, committee, authority,
corporation, or other instrumentality appointed or created by the city including,
but not limited too; Maryville City Council, Maryville Regional Planning
Commission, Maryville Board of Zoning Appeals, Code Review Committee,
Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, Maryville Public Building
Authority, Maryville Parking Authority, Maryville School Board, Big Springs
Industrial Park Design Review Board, Historical Zoning Commission and
Design Review Board. The words "city" and "municipal" include these separate
entities. As provided by chapter 1, section 49(d), Tennessee Public Acts of 2006,
this code of ethics shall apply to the municipal board of education and its
employees.
(2) In any situation in which a personal interest under this code of
ethics is also a conflict of interest under state law, the provisions of the state law
shall section 3 of this chapter supersede. (as added by Ord. #2007-23, June
2007)
1-302. Definitions. As used in this chapter: (1) "City" means the City
of Maryville, Tennessee.
(2) "City council" means the city council of the city.
(3) "Municipal board" means any board, commission, committee,
authority, corporation, or other instrumentality appointed or created by the city.
(4) "Personal interest" means:
(a) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest which is
the subject of a vote by a municipal board or city council, not otherwise
regulated by state statutes on conflict of interest; or
(b) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a
matter to be regulated or supervised by city council or a municipal board.
1-5
(c) Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the
official's or employee's spouse, parent(s), step parent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren), or step child(ren).
(5) The words "employment interest" include a situation in which an
official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible
employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that
is to be regulated or supervised. (as added by Ord. #2007-23, June 2007)
1-303. Disclosure of personal interest. (1) An official on city council
or any municipal board with the responsibility to vote on a matter shall disclose
during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it
appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects, or that would lead a
reasonable person to infer that it affects, the official's vote on the matter. In
addition, the official may recuse himself or herself from voting on the matter.
(2) An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any
matter, other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter
that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the
exercise of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion
when possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with the recorder.
In addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter,
ordinance, or policy, recuse himself or herself from the exercise of discretion in
the matter. (as added by Ord. #2007-23, June 2007)
1-304. Prohibition of acceptance of gifts and gratuities. An official
or employee may not accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, or
other consideration or favor of any kind from anyone other than the
municipality:
(1) For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of
an act, that he or she would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing,
in the regular course of his or her duties; or
(2) That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence
his action, or reward him or her for past action, in executing municipal business.
(as added by Ord. #2007-23, June 2007)
1-305. Use of information. (1) An official or employee may not disclose
any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that
is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law.
(2) An official or employee may not use or disclose information
obtained in his or her official capacity or position of employment with the intent
to result in financial gain for himself or herself or any other person or entity.
(as added by Ord. #2007-23, June 2007)
1-6
1-306. Violations and penalty. Violation of this chapter is punishable
under the city's general penalty clause or other applicable laws. (as added by
Ord. #2007-23, June 2007)
1-7
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC RECORDS1
SECTION
1-401. Procedures regarding access to and inspection of public records.
1-401. Procedures regarding access to and inspection of public
records. (1) Consistent with the Tennessee Public Records Act ("Act"),
personnel of the City of Maryville shall provide full access and assistance in a
timely and efficient manner to Tennessee residents who request access to public
documents by submitting an "inspection/duplication of records request,"
Appendix A. City of Maryville personnel may require presentation of
government issued photo identification that shows the requestor's Tennessee
address to verify citizenship. A copy of the form of identification used will not be
routinely retained by the city unless an issue is presented as to its applicability,
validity or authenticity or for some other valid reason.
(2) Employees of the City of Maryville shall protect the integrity and
organization of public records with respect to the manner in which the records
are inspected and copied. All inspections of records must be performed under the
supervision of the records custodian or designee. The records custodian shall be
the City Recorder. All copying of public records must be performed by employees
of the city, or, in the event that city personnel are unable to copy the records, by
an entity or person designated by the records custodian.
(3) To prevent excessive disruptions of the work, essential functions,
and duties of employees of the City of Maryville, persons requesting copying of
public records shall complete a records request form to be furnished by the city.
Requests to view and not copy a public record are not required to be in writing
unless otherwise required by law. Persons requesting access to open records
shall describe the records with specificity so that the records may be located and
made available for public inspection or duplication. All requests for public
records shall be directed to the Public Records Request Coordinator ("PRRC").
The PRRC shall be the city community relations manager or his or her designee.
The PRRC may be contacted at 400 West Broadway Ave., Maryville, TN 37801.
(4) When records are requested for inspection or copying, the records
custodian has up to seven (7) business days to determine whether the city can
retrieve the records requested and whether the requested records contain any
confidential information, and the estimated charge for copying based upon the
number of copies and amount of time required and will be provided a "records
1Appendices A-C (inspection/duplication of records request form,
records production letter and records request denial letter) are available in the
office of the recorder.
1-8
production letter," Appendix B. Confidential information will be redacted prior
to providing for inspection or copying of the requested record.
Within seven (7) business days of a request for records the records
custodian shall:
(a) Produce the records requested;
(b) Deny the records in writing, giving explanation for denial, "records
request denial letter," Appendix C; or,
(c) In the case of voluminous requests, provide the requestor, in
writing, with an estimated time frame for production and an estimation
of duplication costs.
(5) There is no charge assessed to a requester for inspecting a public
record. Up to ten (10) pages of black and white standard sized copies of records
requested are free of charge to the requestor, with one (1) such set of free copies
permitted per person per year. Otherwise, charges for physical copies of records
where the copies total more than ten (10) per person per year, in accordance
with the Office of Open Records Counsel schedule of reasonable charges, are as
follows:
(a) $0.15 per copy for black and white copies.
(b) $0.50 per copy for colored copies.
(c) $0.15 per copy for accident reports.
(d) Maps, plats, electronic data, audio discs, video discs, and all other
materials shall be duplicated at actual costs to the city
Due to security concerns, flash drives may not be used to copy electronic
data. Electronic copies are available at a rate of $0.15 per page. Pictures may
be taken of requested documents, but only after redaction of personal or
confidential information has been done. Due to the costs of review and redaction
of such records, copies taken by photo are also charged at a rate of $0.15 per
page.
Payment is to be made in cash, personal check or accepted credit card
presented to the City of Maryville prior to receipt of any copies.
(6) Requests for copies requiring less than one (1) hour of municipal
employee labor for research, retrieval and duplication are free to the requester.
Labor in excess of one (1) hour may be charged by the city, in addition to the cost
per copy, as provided in (5). The city may require payment in advance of
producing voluminous records. Requests for copies of records may not be broken
down to multiple requests for the same information in order to qualify for the
first free hour. For a request requiring more than one (1) employee to complete,
labor charges will be assessed based on the following formula:
In calculating the charge for labor, a department head shall determine
the number of hours each employee spent producing a request. The
department head shall then subtract the one (1) hour threshold from the
number of hours the highest paid employee(s) spent producing the
request. The department head will then multiply the total number of
hours to be charged for the labor of each employee by that employee's
1-9
hourly wage. Finally, the department head will add together the totals for
all the employees involved in the request and that will be the total
amount of labor that can be charged.
(7) The police chief shall maintain in his or her office records of
undercover investigators containing personally identifying information. All
other personnel records of the police department shall be maintained in human
resources. Requests for police officer personnel records, other than for
undercover investigators, shall be made to the PRRC who shall forward such
requests to the director of human resources, who shall promptly notify the police
chief of such request. The police chief shall make the final determination as to
the release of said police officer information requested. In the event that the
police chief refuses to release the information, he shall provide a written
explanation of the reasons for not releasing the information.
(8) In certain cases, access cannot be provided to original records and
copies of such records will be deemed sufficient compliance with the Act. For
example, the original records cannot be provided when redaction is required or
when records are frail due to age or other conditions and direct access may cause
damage to the originals. In such instances the records custodian should inform
the requestor that access will be provided to copies of the records.
(9) If a record contains confidential information or information that is
not open for public inspection, the records custodian shall prepare a redacted
copy as such redacted copy shall suffice as access to the document. (as added by
Ord. #2009-38, Sept. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #2017-18, June 2017)
2-1
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS BOARD OF APPEALS.
2. [DELETED.]
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION
2-101. Appointments.
2-102. Appeals.
2-103. Decisions.
2-104. Actions.
2-105. Decisions are final.
2-106. Board members.
2-107. Terms of office.
2-108. Quorum.
2-109. Secretary of the board.
2-110. Procedures.
2-101. Appointments. There is established a board to be called the
Development Standards Board of Appeals which shall consist of five members.
Said board shall be appointed by the mayor per the requirements established
herein. (1985 Code, § 4-1001)
2-102. Appeals. Whenever a determination or decision is made by a city
official acting in his/her official capacity with regard to either the utility or
public works standards, it shall be the right of the owner, contractor, or duly
authorized agent to appeal said determination or decision to the board. Notice
of appeal shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30) days from the time a
decision is rendered by the city official. (1985 Code, § 4-1002)
2-103. Decisions. Upon hearing an appeal, the board may uphold the
decision of the city official, or the board may vary the application of any
provision of the city's adopted standards when, in the board's opinion, the
enforcement thereof would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the adopted
standards or the public interest. (1985 Code, § 4-1003)
2-104. Actions. The Development Standards Board of Appeals shall in
every case reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each
2-2
decision of the board shall also include the basis for its decision. If a decision of
the board reverses or modifies a decision of the city official, or varies the
application of any provision of the adopted standards, the city official shall
immediately take action in accordance with that decision. (1985 Code, § 4-1004)
2-105. Decisions are final. Each decision of the board shall be final,
subject to such remedy as may be obtained by a court of law or equity. (1985
Code, § 4-1005)
2-106. Board members. The board shall consist of five members
selected as follows: One member shall be appointed from the Maryville Regional
Planning Commission. Said member shall be a city resident. One member shall
be appointed from the City Board of Adjustments and Appeals. Said member
shall be a city resident. One member shall be appointed from the City Board of
Zoning Appeals. Said member shall be a city resident. Two members at-large
shall be appointed--one that resides in the city and one that resides in Blount
County outside the city's corporate boundaries. (1985 Code, § 4-1006)
2-107. Terms of office. Of the members first appointed, two shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years, two for a term of four (4) years, one for
a term of five (5) years, and thereafter they shall be appointed for terms of five
(5) years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in
which the original appointments are made. Continued absence of any member
from meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the mayor, render such
member subject to immediate removal from the board. (1985 Code, § 4-1007)
2-108. Quorum. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
In varying the application of any provisions of the adopted standards or in
modifying an order of the city official, affirmative votes of the majority present,
but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required. A board member
shall not act in a case in which he/she might have a personal interest. (1985
Code, § 4-1008)
2-109. Secretary of the board. The city engineer or his designated
representative shall act as secretary of the board and shall keep a record of its
proceedings. (1985 Code, § 4-1009)
2-110. Procedures. The board may establish guidelines and procedures
consistent with the provisions of the adopted standards. The board shall meet
on an "as called" basis, with said meeting being called by the secretary of the
board upon receipt of an appeal. (1985 Code, § 4-1010)
2-3
CHAPTER 2
[DELETED]
(1985 Code, §§ 1-901--1-913, as deleted by Ord. #2009-10, March 2009)
3-1
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER
1. CITY COURT.
2. COURT ADMINISTRATION.
3. ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.
CHAPTER 1
CITY COURT1
SECTION
3-101. Schedule of costs.
3-102. Alternative sentencing.
3-101. Schedule of costs. The city judge is hereby authorized to impose
upon persons convicted of violating the ordinances of the City of Maryville the
following court costs:
(1) For violating any of the provisions to title 15 of Maryville
Municipal Code, "Motor Vehicles, Traffic and Parking," or any other ordinance
or regulation of the City of Maryville regulating motor vehicles and traffic, the
sum of forty-six dollars ($46.00). Provided, however, such court costs shall not
be imposed upon persons answering parking citations unless the clerk of the city
court has issued a summons in accordance with § 15-704(c) of Maryville
Municipal Code.
(2) For violating any other provision of Maryville Municipal Code or
any other ordinance, regulation or common law offense of the City of Maryville,
the sum of fifty-six dollars ($56.00).
(3) For certain violations, as provided for by the municipal judge, an
administrative fee may be attached in lieu of fine and cost. The purpose of the
"First Offender Program" being a diversion from adjudication for a period
defined by the municipal judge, the "First Offenders Fee" being the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00).
(4) Contempt of court in municipal court shall be punishable by a fine
in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less to be determined in the discretion
of the court. (1985 Code, § 1-1201, as amended by Ord. #2004-42, Nov. 2004,
and Ord. #2005-12, April 2005)
3-102. Alternative sentencing. The city judge is hereby authorized to
impose upon persons convicted of violating the ordinances of the City of
1Charter references: art. XI and art. VII, § 7.
3-2
Maryville, and who have shown proof of indigency by way of affidavit, an
alternative to cash payment of fines, penalties, and costs.
(1) Upon conviction, a person may make application to the court for
alternative sentencing by way of community service projects or other means of
relief as may be deemed appropriate by the city judge.
(2) Such persons shall provide pertinent information to the court by
way of an affidavit of indigency upon oath or affirmation.
(3) Upon approval by the municipal court, referral is made to the chief
of police who schedules community service work to the extent that the
individual's physical condition shall permit.
(4) The chief of police shall file with the court a report stating that the
number of hours worked has satisfied the court's order based on an hourly rate
equivalent to the prevailing minimum wage as prescribed by the Fair Labor
Standards Act. (1985 Code, § 1-1202)
3-3
CHAPTER 2
COURT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
3-201. Failure to appear.
3-202. Disturbance of any proceedings.
3-201. Failure to appear. Any person who fails to appear in city court
to answer to a summons or citation for the violation of any ordinance or
provision of this code shall be guilty of a civil offense punishable under the
general penalty clause of this code. (As added by Ord. #99-45, Dec. 1999)
3-202. Disturbance of any proceedings. It shall be unlawful for any
person to create any improper disturbance of any trial before the city court by
making loud or unusual noises, by using profane or blasphemous language, or
by any unduly distracting conduct whatsoever and such offense shall be
punishable under the general penalty clause of this code. (As added by Ord.
#99-46, Dec. 1999)
3-4
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
SECTION
3-301. Municipal administrative hearing officer.
3-302. Jurisdiction and procedure before the administrative hearing officer.
3-303. Judicial review of final order.
3-301. Municipal administrative hearing officer. (1) In accordance
with Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6, chapter 54, part 10, there is hereby
created the office of administrative hearing officer to hear violations of any of
the provisions codified in the Municipal Code of the City of Maryville relating
to building and property maintenance, including:
(a) Locally adopted building codes - Maryville Municipal Code
title 12, chapter 1;
(b) Locally adopted residential codes - Maryville Municipal Code
title 12, chapter 11;
(c) Locally adopted residential codes - Maryville Municipal Code
title 12, chapter 2;
(d) Locally adopted electrical codes - Maryville Municipal Code
title 12, chapter 3;
(e) Locally adopted energy codes - Maryville Municipal Code
title 12, chapter 5;
(f) Locally adopted property maintenance codes - Maryville
Municipal Code title 12, chapter 12;
(g) Ordinances regulating any subject matter commonly found
in the codes mentioned.
(2) There is hereby created the position of administrative hearing
officer to be appointed pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6,
chapter 54, section 1006.
(3) The amount of compensation for the administrative hearing officer
shall be approved by the city council.
(4) Clerical and administrative support for the office of administrative
hearing officer shall be provided as determined by the city manager.
(5) The administrative hearing officer shall perform all of the duties
and abide by all of the requirements provided in Tennessee Code Annotated,
title 6, chapter 54, sections 1001, et seq. (as added by Ord. #2011-30, Nov. 2011)
3-302. Jurisdiction and procedure before the administrative
hearing officer. The administrative hearing officer's jurisdiction shall be as
set out in Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6, section 54, section 1002, and all
matters before the administrative hearing officer shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6, section 54,
3-5
sections 1001, et seq., which provisions are adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. (as added by Ord. #2011-30, Nov. 2011)
3-303. Judicial review of final order. A person who is aggrieved by
a final decision in a contested case is entitled to judicial review pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 6, chapter 54, part 10, which shall be the only
available method of judicial review. (as added by Ord. #2011-30, Nov. 2011)
4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
CHAPTER
1. SOCIAL SECURITY.
2. PERSONNEL REGULATIONS.
3. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM.
4. WORKERS' COMPENSATION.
5. INFECTIOUS DISEASE CONTROL POLICY.
CHAPTER 1
SOCIAL SECURITY
SECTION
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage.
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed.
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages.
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions.
4-105. Records and reports.
4-106. Exclusion of coverage due to another retirement system.
4-107. Exclusion of coverage due to lack of authorization.
4-101. Policy and purpose as to coverage. It is hereby declared to
be the policy and purpose of this municipality to extend, at the earliest date, to
employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or this chapter, and
whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function,
the benefits of the System of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as
authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto,
including Public Law 734, 81st Congress. In pursuance of said policy, and for
that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable
state and federal laws or regulations. (1985 Code, § 1-501)
4-102. Necessary agreements to be executed. The mayor is hereby
authorized and directed to execute all the necessary agreements and
amendments thereto with the state executive director of old age insurance, as
agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in the
preceding section. (1985 Code, § 1-502)
4-103. Withholdings from salaries or wages. Withholdings from the
salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in the first
section of this chapter are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at
such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations,
4-2
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or
regulations. (1985 Code, § 1-503)
4-104. Appropriations for employer's contributions. There shall be
appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's
contributions, and the same shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by said laws or regulations. (1985 Code, § 1-504)
4-105. Records and reports. The city shall keep such records and
make such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations. (1985 Code, § 1-505)
4-106. Exclusion of coverage due to another retirement system.
There is excluded from this chapter any authority to make any agreement with
respect to any position or any employee or official now covered or authorized to
be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any
employee or official of the city. (1985 Code, § 1-506)
4-107. Exclusion of coverage due to lack of authorization. There
is excluded from this chapter any authority to make any agreement with respect
to any position, or any employee or official, compensation for which is on a fee
basis, or any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered
by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
There is hereby excluded from this chapter any authority to make any
agreement with respect to employees rendering services of an emergency nature,
employees and officials engaged in rendering services in part-time positions, and
elective officials rendering services in legislative, executive, and judicial
positions. Acting under § 4-102 of this chapter, the mayor is directed to make
and enter into an amendment to said agreement so as to include under the
benefits of Federal Old Age, Survivors, Disability, Health Insurance employees
rendering services in part-time positions effective January 1, 1983, i.e. to the
barred period under the federal statute of limitations, to employees and officials
rendering services in executive, legislative and judicial positions as of October
1, 1986, and to include under coverage in the federal system all employees and
officials performing services in a position under the Tennessee Consolidated
Retirement System, but who are ineligible to become a member of such system,
effective September 1, 1986. The coverage of ineligibles will continue in the
event an ineligible later becomes eligible for membership in the retirement
system. (1985 Code, § 1-507)
4-3
CHAPTER 2
PERSONNEL REGULATIONS1
SECTION
4-201. Personnel rules and procedures.
4-202. [Deleted.]
4-203. [Deleted.]
4-204. [Deleted.]
4-205. [Deleted.]
4-206. [Deleted.]
4-207. [Deleted.]
4-208. [Deleted.]
4-209. [Deleted.]
4-210. [Deleted.]
4-211. [Deleted.]
4-201. Personnel rules and procedures.2 The city manager shall have
the responsibility for the establishment and administration of personnel rules
and procedures. The city council shall adopt said personnel rules and procedures
and subsequent amendments by resolution. The rules shall have the force and
effect of law. (1985 Code, § 1-201, as replaced by Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
4-202. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-202, as deleted by Ord. #2010-36,
Nov. 2010)
4-203. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-203, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
4-204. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-204, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
4-205. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-205, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
4-206. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-206, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
1Charter reference: art. VIII.
2A copy of the City of Maryville personnel rules and procedures is
available in the office of the city recorder.
4-4
4-207. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-207, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
4-208. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-208, modified, as deleted by
Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
4-209. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-209, as deleted by Ord. #2010-36, Nov.
2010)
4-210. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 1-210, as deleted by Ord. #2010-36, Nov.
2010)
4-211. [Deleted.] (as deleted by Ord. #2010-36, Nov. 2010)
4-5
CHAPTER 3
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM1
SECTION
4-301. Program created.
4-302. Purpose.
4-303. Coverage.
4-304. Standards authorized.
4-305. Variance from standards authorized.
4-306. Administration.
4-307. Funding the program.
4-301. Program created. The section shall provide authority for
establishing and administering the occupational safety and health program plan
for the employees of the City of Maryville. (as added by Ord. #2003-47, Oct.
2003)
4-302. Purpose. The City of Maryville, in electing to update their
established program plan will maintain an effective occupational safety and
health program for its employees and shall:
(1) Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment
that includes:
(a) Top management commitment and employee involvement;
(b) Continually analyze the worksite to identify all hazards and
potential hazards;
(c) Develop and maintain methods for preventing or controlling
existing or potential hazards; and
(d) Train managers, supervisors, and employees to understand
and deal with worksite hazards.
(2) Acquire, maintain and require the use of safety equipment,
personal protective equipment and devices reasonably necessary to protect
employees.
(3) Make, keep, preserve and make available to the Commissioner of
Labor and Workforce Development of the State of Tennessee, his designated
representatives, or persons within the Tennessee Department of Labor and
Workforce Development to whom such responsibilities have been delegated,
adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and personal
injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as required.
1The original occupational safety and health program was repealed by
Ord. #2003-46, Oct. 2003.
4-6
(4) Consult with the State Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development with regard to the adequacy of the form and content of records.
(5) Consult with the State Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development, as appropriate, regarding safety and health problems which are
considered to be unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot be achieved
under a standard promulgated by the state.
(6) Provide reasonable opportunity for the participation of employees
in the effectuation of the objectives of this program, including the opportunity
to make anonymous complaints concerning conditions or practices injurious to
employee safety and health.
(7) Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and
efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards, and
provide for education and notification of all employees of the existence of this
program. (as added by Ord. #2003-47, Oct. 2003)
4-303. Coverage. The provisions of the occupational safety and health
program plan for the employees of the City of Maryville shall apply to all
employees of each administrative department, commission, board, division, or
other agency of the City of Maryville whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or
permanent. (as added by Ord. #2003-47, Oct. 2003)
4-304. Standards authorized. The occupational safety and health
standards adopted by the City of Maryville are the same as, but not limited to,
the State of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Standards promulgated,
or which may be promulgated, in accordance with Section 6 of the Tennessee
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 (Tennessee Code Annotated, title
50, chapter 3). (as added by Ord. #2003-47, Oct. 2003)
4-305. Variances from standards authorized. The City of Maryville
may, upon written application to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce
Development of the State of Tennessee, request an order granting a temporary
variance from any approved standards. Applications for variances shall be in
accordance with Rules of Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce
Development, Occupational Safety, Chapter 0800-1-2, as authorized by
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 50. Prior to requesting such temporary
variance, the City of Maryville shall notify or serve notice to employees, their
designated representatives, or interested parties and present them with an
opportunity for a hearing. The posting of notice on the main bulletin board as
designated by the risk manager shall be deemed sufficient notice to employees.
(as added by Ord. #2003-47, Oct. 2003)
4-306. Administration. For the purposes of this chapter, the risk
manager is designated as the director of occupational safety and health to
perform duties and to exercise powers assigned so as to plan, develop, and
4-7
administer. The risk manager shall develop a plan of operation for the program
and said plan shall become a part of this chapter when it satisfies all applicable
sections of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 and Part
IV of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Plan. (as added by
Ord. #2003-47, Oct. 2003)
4-307. Funding the program. Sufficient funds for administering and
staffing the program pursuant to this chapter shall be made available as
authorized by the annual budget of the City of Maryville. (as added by
Ord. #2003-47, Oct. 2003)
4-8
CHAPTER 4
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
SECTION
4-401. State law applicable.
4-402. Employees covered.
4-403. Budget and appropriation.
4-401. State law applicable. The city is authorized to accept, and does
accept, the provisions of the "Workers' Compensation Law" of the State of
Tennessee, pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 50-6-101
through 50-6-410. (1985 Code, § 1-401)
4-402. Employees covered. The acceptance of the provisions of the
"Workers' Compensation Law" of the State of Tennessee by the city shall apply
to all full-time employees of the municipality. (1985 Code, § 1-402)
4-403. Budget and appropriation. When the municipal budget is
prepared and appropriations are made to cover the costs of operating the
municipal government for each subsequent fiscal year, there shall be included
in the budget and appropriations the cost of continuing in force the workers'
compensation coverage. (1985 Code, § 1-403)
4-9
CHAPTER 5
INFECTIOUS DISEASE CONTROL POLICY
SECTION
4-501. Purpose.
4-502. Coverage.
4-503. Administration.
4-504. Definitions.
4-505. Policy statement.
4-506. General guidelines.
4-507. Hepatitis B vaccinations.
4-508. Reporting potential exposure.
4-509. Hepatitis B virus post-exposure management.
4-510. Human immunodeficiency virus post-exposure management.
4-511. Disability benefits.
4-512. Training regular employees.
4-513. Training high risk employees.
4-514. Training new employees.
4-515. Records and reports.
4-516. Legal rights of victims of communicable diseases.
4-517. Amendments.
4-501. Purpose. It is the responsibility of the city council of the City of
Maryville to provide employees a place of employment which is free from
recognized hazards that may cause death or serious physical harm. In providing
services to the citizens of the City of Maryville, employees may come in contact
with life-threatening infectious diseases which can be transmitted through job
related activities. It is important that both citizens and employees are protected
from the transmission of diseases just as it is equally important that neither is
discriminated against because of basic misconceptions about various diseases
and illnesses.
The purpose of this policy is to establish a comprehensive set of rules and
regulations governing the prevention of discrimination and potential
occupational exposure to Hepatitis B Virus (HBV), the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), and Tuberculosis (TB). (1985 Code, § 1-1301(1))
4-502. Coverage. Occupational exposures may occur in many ways,
including needle sticks, cut injuries or blood spills. Several classes of employees
are assumed to be at high risk for blood borne infections due to their routinely
increased exposure to body fluids from potentially infected individuals. Those
high risk occupations include but are not limited to:
(1) Police and security personnel;
(2) Firefighters;
4-10
(3) Sanitation and landfill workers; and
(4) Any other employee deemed to be at high risk per this policy and
an exposure determination. (1985 Code, § 1-1301(2))
4-503. Administration. This infection control policy shall be
administered by the city administrator or a designated representative who shall
have the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Exercise leadership in implementation and maintenance of an
effective infection control policy subject to the provisions of this chapter, other
ordinances, the city charter, and federal and state law relating to OSHA
regulations;
(2) Make an exposure determination for all employee positions to
determine a possible exposure to blood or body fluids;
(3) Maintain records of all employees and incidents subject to the
provisions of this chapter;
(4) Conduct periodic inspections to determine compliance with the
infection control policy by municipal employees;
(5) Coordinate and document all relevant training activities in support
of the infection control policy;
(6) Prepare and recommend to the mayor and council any amendments
or changes to the infection control policy;
(7) Identify any and all housekeeping operations involving substantial
risk of direct exposure to body fluids and shall address the proper precautions
to be taken while cleaning rooms and blood spills; and
(8) Perform such other duties and exercise such other authority as may
be prescribed by the city administrator. (1985 Code, § 1-1301(3))
4-504. Definitions. (1) "Body fluid" - fluids that have been recognized
by the Center for Disease Control as directly linked to the transmission of HIV
and/or HBV and/or to which universal precautions apply: blood, semen, blood
products, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pericardial fluid,
amniotic fluid, and concentrated HIV or HBV viruses.
(2) "Exposure" - the contact with blood or other body fluids to which
universal precautions apply through contact with open wounds, non-intact skin,
or mucous membranes during the performance of an individual's normal job
duties.
(3) "Hepatitis B Virus (HBV)" - a serious blood-borne virus with
potential for life-threatening complications. Possible complications include:
massive hepatic necrosis, cirrhosis of the liver, chronic active hepatitis, and
hepatocellular carcinoma.
(4) "Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)" - the virus that causes
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). HIV is transmitted through
sexual contact and exposure to infected blood or blood components and
perinatally from mother to neonate.
4-11
(5) "Tuberculosis (TB)" - an acute or chronic communicable disease
that usually affects the respiratory system, but may involve any system in the
body.
(6) "Universal precautions" - refers to a system of infectious disease
control which assumes that every direct contact with body fluid is infectious and
requires every employee exposed to direct contact with body fluids to be
protected as though such body fluids were HBV or HIV infected. (1985 Code,
§ 1-1301(4))
4-505. Policy statement. All blood and body fluids are potentially
infectious for several blood-borne pathogens and some body fluids can transmit
infections. For this reason, the Center for Disease Control developed the
strategy that everyone should always take particular care when there is a
potential exposure. These precautions have been termed "universal
precautions."
Universal precautions stress that all persons should be assumed to be
infectious for HIV and/or other blood-borne pathogens. Universal precautions
apply to blood, tissues, and other body fluids which contain visible blood.
Universal precautions also apply to semen, (although occupational risk or
exposure is quite limited), vaginal secretions, and to cerebrospinal, synovial,
pleural, peritoneal, pericardial and amniotic fluids. Universal precautions do
not apply to feces, nasal secretions, human breast milk, sputum, saliva, sweat,
tears, urine, and vomitus unless these substances contain visible blood. (1985
Code, § 1-1302(1))
4-506. General guidelines. General guidelines which shall be used by
everyone include:
(1) Think when responding to emergency calls and exercise common
sense when there is potential exposure to blood or body fluids which require
universal precautions.
(2) Keep all open cuts and abrasions covered with adhesive bandages
which repel liquids.
(3) Soap and water kill many bacteria and viruses on contact. If hands
are contaminated with blood or body fluids to which universal precautions
apply, then wash immediately and thoroughly. Hands shall also be washed after
gloves are removed even if the gloves appear to be intact. When soap and water
or handwashing facilities are not available, then use a waterless antiseptic hand
cleaner according to the manufacturers recommendation for the product.
(4) All workers shall take precautions to prevent injuries caused by
needles, scalpel blades, and other sharp instruments. To prevent needle stick
injuries, needles shall not be recapped, purposely bent or broken by hand,
removed from disposable syringes, or otherwise manipulated by hand. After
they are used, disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades and other sharp
items shall be placed in puncture resistant containers for disposal. The
4-12
puncture resistant container shall be located as close as practical to the use
area.
(5) The city will provide gloves of appropriate material, quality and
size for each affected employee. The gloves are to be worn when there is contact
(or when there is a potential contact) with blood or body fluids to which
universal precautions apply:
(a) While handling an individual where exposure is possible;
(b) While cleaning or handling contaminated items or
equipment;
(c) While cleaning up an area that has been contaminated with
one of the above;
Gloves shall not be used if they are peeling, cracked, or discolored, or if
they have punctures, tears, or other evidence of deterioration. Employees shall
not wash or disinfect surgical or examination gloves for reuse.
(6) Resuscitation equipment shall be used when necessary. (No
transmission of HBV or HIV infection during mouth-to-mouth resuscitation has
been documented.) However, because of the risk of salivary transmission of
other infectious diseases and the theoretical risk of HIV or HBV transmission
during artificial resuscitation, bags shall be used. Pocket mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation masks designed to isolate emergency response personnel from
contact with a victims' blood and blood contaminated saliva, respiratory
secretion, and vomitus, are available to all personnel to provide or potentially
provide emergency treatment.
(7) Masks or protective eyewear or face shields shall be worn during
procedures that are likely to generate droplets of blood or other body fluids to
prevent exposure to mucous membranes of the mouth, nose, and eyes. They are
not required for routine care.
(8) Gowns, aprons, or lab coats shall be worn during procedures that
are likely to generate splashes of blood or other body fluids.
(9) Areas and equipment contaminated with blood shall be cleaned as
soon as possible. A household (chlorine) bleach solution (1 part chlorine to 10
parts water) shall be applied to the contaminated surface as a disinfectant
leaving it on for a least 30 seconds. A solution must be changed and re-mixed
every 24 hours to be effective.
(10) Contaminated clothing (or other articles) shall be handled carefully
and washed as soon as possible. Laundry and dish washing cycles at 120E are
adequate for decontamination.
(11) Place all disposable equipment (gloves, masks, gowns, etc...) in a
clearly marked plastic bag. Place the bag in a second clearly marked bag
(double bag). Seal and dispose of by placing in a designated "hazardous"
dumpster. NOTE: Sharp objects must be placed in an impervious container and
then taken to a hospital for disposal.
(12) Tags shall be used as a means of preventing accidental injury or
illness to employees who are exposed to hazardous or potentially hazardous
4-13
conditions, equipment or operations which are out of the ordinary, unexpected
or not readily apparent. Tags shall be used until such time as the identified
hazard is eliminated or the hazardous operation is completed.
All required tags shall meet the following criteria:
(a) Tags shall contain a signal word and a major message. The
signal word shall be "BIOHAZARD", or the biological hazard symbol. The
major message shall indicate the specific hazardous condition or the
instruction to be communicated to employees.
(b) The signal word shall be readable at a minimum distance of
five (5) feet or such greater distance as warranted by the hazard.
(c) All employees shall be informed of the meaning of the
various tags used throughout the workplace and what special precautions
are necessary.
(13) Linen soiled with body fluids shall be handled as little as possible
and with minimum agitation to prevent contamination of the person handling
the linen. All soiled linen shall be bagged at the location where it was used. It
shall not be sorted or rinsed in the area. Soiled linen shall be placed and
transported in bags that prevent leakage.
The employee responsible for transported soiled linen should always wear
protective gloves to prevent possible contamination. After removing the gloves,
hands or other skin surfaces shall be washed thoroughly and immediately after
contact with body fluids.
(14) Whenever possible, disposable equipment shall be used to minimize
and contain clean-up. (1985 Code, § 1-1302(2))
4-507. Hepatitis B vaccinations. The City of Maryville shall offer the
appropriate Hepatitis B vaccination to employees at risk of exposure free of
charge and in amounts and at times prescribed by standard medical practices.
The vaccination shall be voluntarily administered. High risk employees who
wish to take the HBV vaccination should notify their department head who shall
make the appropriate arrangements through the Infectious Disease Control
Coordinator. (1985 Code, § 1-1303(1))
4-508. Reporting potential exposure. City employees shall observe
the following procedures for reporting a job exposure incident that may put them
at risk for HIV or HBV infections (i.e., needle sticks, blood contact on broken
skin, body fluid contact with eyes or mouth, etc...):
(1) Notify the Infectious Disease Control Coordinator of the contact
incident and details thereof.
(2) Complete the appropriate accident reports and any other specific
forms required.
(3) Arrangements will be made for the person to be seen by a physician
as with any job-related injury.
4-14
Once an exposure has occurred, a blood sample should be drawn after
consent is obtained from the individual from whom exposure occurred and tested
for Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and/or antibody to human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV antibody). Testing of the source individual should
be done at a location where appropriate pretest counseling is available. Post-test
counseling and referral for treatment should also be provided. (1985 Code,
§ 1-1303(2))
4-509. Hepatitis B virus post-exposure management. For an
exposure to a source individual found to be positive for HBsAg, the worker who
has not previously been given the hepatitis B vaccine should receive the vaccine
series. A single dose of hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) is also
recommended, if it can be given within seven (7) days of exposure.
For exposure from an HBsAg-positive source to workers who have
previously received the vaccine, the exposed worker should be tested for
antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs), and given one dose of
vaccine and one dose of HBIG if the antibody level in the worker's blood sample
is inadequate (ie., 10 SRU by RIA, negative by EIA).
If the source individual is negative for HBsAg and the worker has not
been vaccinated, this opportunity should be taken to provide the hepatitis B
vaccine series. HBIG administration should be considered on an individual
basis when the source individual is known or suspected to be at high risk of
HBV infection. Management and treatment, if any, of previously vaccinated
workers who receive an exposure from a source who refuses testing or is not
identifiable should be individualized. (1985 Code, § 1-1303(3))
4-510. Human immunodeficiency virus post-exposure
management. For any exposure to a source individual who has AIDS, who is
found to be positive for HIV infection, or who refuses testing, the worker should
be counseled regarding the risk of infection and evaluated clinically and
serologically for evidence of HIV infection as soon as possible after the exposure.
The worker should be advised to report and seek medical evaluation for any
acute febrile illness that occurs within 12 weeks after the exposure. Such an
illness, particularly one characterized by fever, rash, or lymphadenopathy, may
be indicative of recent HIV infection.
Following the initial test at the time of exposure, seronegative workers
should be retested 6 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months after exposure to determine
whether transmission has occurred. During this follow-up period (especially the
first 6 - 12 weeks after exposure) exposed workers should follow the U.S. Public
Health service recommendation for preventing transmission of HIV. These
include refraining from blood donations and using appropriate protection during
sexual intercourse. During all phases of follow-up, it is vital that worker
confidentiality be protected.
4-15
If the source individual was tested and found to be seronegative, baseline
testing of the exposed worker with follow-up testing 12 weeks later may be
performed if desired by the worker or recommended by the health care provider.
If the source individual cannot be identified, decisions regarding appropriate
follow-up should be individualized. Serologic testing should be made available
by the city to all workers who may be concerned they have been infected with
HIV through an occupational exposure. (1985 Code, § 1-1303(4))
4-511. Disability benefits. Entitlement to disability benefits and any
other benefits available for employees who suffer from on-the-job injuries will
be determined by the Tennessee Worker's Compensations Bureau in accordance
with the provisions of T.C.A., § 50-6-303. (1985 Code, § 1-1303(5))
4-512. Training regular employees. On an annual basis all employees
shall receive training and education on precautionary measures, epidemiology,
modes of transmission and prevention of HIV/HBV infection and procedures to
be used if they are exposed to needle sticks or body fluids. They shall also be
counseled regarding possible risks to the fetus from HIV/HBV and other
associated infectious agents. (1985 Code, § 1-1304(1))
4-513. Training high risk employees. In addition to the above, high
risk employees shall also receive training regarding the location and proper use
of personal protective equipment. They shall be trained concerning proper work
practices and understand the concept of "universal precautions" as it applies to
their work situation. They shall also be trained about the meaning of color
coding and other methods used to designate contaminated material. Where tags
are used, training shall cover precautions to be used in handling contaminated
material as per this policy. (1985 Code, § 1-1304(2))
4-514. Training new employees. During the new employee's
orientation to his/her job, all new employee will be trained on the effects of
infectious disease prior to putting them to work. (1985 Code, § 1-1304(3))
4-515. Records and reports. (1) Reports. Occupational injury and
illness records shall be maintained by the city. Statistics shall be maintained
on the OSHA-200 report. Only those work-related injuries that involve loss of
consciousness, transfer to another job, restriction of work or motion, or medical
treatment are required to be put on the OSHA-200 report.
(2) Needle sticks. Needle sticks, like any other puncture wound, are
considered injuries for recordkeeping purposes due to the instantaneous nature
of the event. Therefore, any needle stick requiring medical treatment (i.e.
gamma globulin, hepatitis B immune globulin, hepatitis B vaccine, etc...) shall
be recorded.
4-16
(3) Prescription medication. Likewise, the use of prescription
medication (beyond a single dose for minor injury or discomfort) is considered
medical treatment. Since these types of treatment are considered necessary,
and must be administered by physician or licensed medical personnel, such
injuries cannot be considered minor and must be reported.
(4) Employee interviews. Should the city be inspected by the U.S.
Department of Labor Office of Health Compliance, the compliance safety and
health officer may wish to interview employees. Employees are expected to
cooperate fully with the compliance officers. (1985 Code, § 1-1305)
4-516. Legal rights of victims of communicable diseases. Victims
of communicable diseases have the legal right to expect, and municipal
employees, including police and emergency service officers are duty bound to
provide, the same level of service and enforcement as any other individual would
receive.
(1) Officers assume that a certain degree of risk exists in law
enforcement and emergency service work and accept those risks with their
individual appointments. This holds true with any potential risks of contacting
a communicable disease as surely as it does with the risks of confronting an
armed criminal.
(2) Any officer who refuses to take proper action in regard to victims
of a communicable disease, when appropriate protective equipment is available,
shall the subject to disciplinary measures along with civil and/or criminal
prosecution.
(3) Whenever an officer mentions in a report that an individual has or
may have a communicable disease, he shall write "contains confidential medical
information" across the top margin of the first page of the report.
(4) The officer's supervisor shall ensure that the above statement is on
all reports requiring that statement.
(5) The supervisor disseminating newspaper releases shall make
certain the confidential information is not given out to the news media.
(6) All requests (including subpoenas) for copies of reports marked
"contains confidential medical information" shall be referred to the city attorney
when the incident involves an indictable or juvenile offense.
(7) Prior approval shall be obtained from the city attorney before
advising a victim of sexual assault that the suspect has, or is suspected of
having a communicable disease.
(8) All circumstance, not covered in this policy, that may arise
concerning releasing confidential information regarding a victim, or suspected
victim, of a communicable disease shall be referred directly to the appropriate
department head or city attorney.
(9) Victims of a communicable disease and their families have a right
to conduct their lives without fear of discrimination. An employee shall not
4-17
make public, directly or indirectly, the identity of a victim or suspected victim
of a communicable disease.
(10) Whenever an employee finds it necessary to notify another
employee, police officer, firefighter, emergency service officer, or health care
provider that a victim has or is suspected of having a communicable disease,
that information shall be conveyed in a dignified, discrete and confidential
manner. The person to whom the information is being conveyed should be
reminded that the information is confidential and that it should not be treated
as public information.
(11) Any employee who disseminates confidential information in regard
to a victim, or suspected victim of a communicable disease in violation of this
policy shall be subject to serious disciplinary action and/or civil and/or criminal
prosecution. (1985 Code, § 1-1306)
4-517. Amendments. Amendments or revisions of these rules may be
recommended for adoption by any elected official or by department heads. Such
amendments or revisions of these rules shall be by ordinance and shall become
effective after public hearing and approval by the governing body. (1985 Code,
§ 1-1307)
5-1
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION1
CHAPTER
1. PRIVILEGE TAXES.
2. PURCHASING REGULATIONS.
3. INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT POLICY.
CHAPTER 1
PRIVILEGE TAXES2
SECTION
5-101. Tax levied.
5-102. License required.
5-101. Tax levied. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code
or in the annual ordinance which adopt's the city's budget, appropriates funds,
and provides revenues, there is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations, and
businesses declared by the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by
municipalities, an annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by
state laws. (1985 Code, § 6-101)
5-102. License required. No person shall exercise any such privilege
within the municipality without a currently effective privilege license, which
shall be issued by the recorder to each applicant therefor upon the applicant's
compliance with all regulatory provisions in this code and payment of the
appropriate privilege tax. (1985 Code, § 6-102)
1Charter references: art. II, art. V, art. VII, art. IX, and art. X.
2Charter reference
Imposition of tax: art. II, § 1(17).
State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 67, chapter 4.
See also the city's annual budget, appropriation, and revenue ordinances.
5-2
CHAPTER 2
PURCHASING REGULATIONS
SECTION
5-201. Purchasing agent.
5-202. Competitive bids.
5-203. Emergency purchases.
5-204. Sealed bids.
5-205. Waiver of competitive bids.
5-206. Purchase prices.
5-207. Conflicts of interest.
5-208. Rejection of bids.
5-209. Records.
5-210. Rules and regulations.
5-201. Purchasing agent. A purchasing agent shall be appointed by
the city manager to contract for and purchase all supplies, materials,
equipment, and contractual services required by any department of the City of
Maryville.
The duties of the purchasing agent shall be outlined by appropriate
classification description. (1985 Code, § 1-601, modified)
5-202. Competitive bids. All purchases of and contracts for supplies,
materials, equipment and services of $1,000.00 or more shall be based on
competitive bids whenever practicable. The purchase or contract shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, price and other factors considered.
The City of Maryville shall have the right to reject any or all bids. (1985 Code,
§ 1-602)
5-203. Emergency purchases. In the case of an apparent emergency
which requires the immediate purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or
services, the city manager shall be empowered to authorize the purchasing
agent to secure, at the lowest obtainable price, any item or service required
regardless of the amount of the expenditure. In the case of actual emergency,
and with the approval of the city manager, any department head may purchase
directly any supplies, materials, equipment or services whose immediate
procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using department
which may vitally affect the life, health, or convenience of citizens. If such a
purchase amounts to $1,000 or more, a full report of the emergency purchase
shall be filed by the city manager with the city council at the next council
meeting for its approval. (1985 Code, § 1-603)
5-3
5-204. Sealed bids. Formal sealed bids shall be obtained for all
supplies, materials, equipment, improvements, and services which involve an
expenditure of $10,000 or more. All capital expenditures which:
(1) Exceed the amount appropriated by council; or
(2) Were not budgeted and exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for
general government; or
(3) Were not budgeted and exceed twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) for utilities; or
(4) Result in the low bid being rejected, shall require approval by
council motion. (1985 Code, § 1-604, as replaced by Ord. #99-37, Oct. 1999, and
Ord. #2008-53, Dec. 2008)
5-205. Waiver of competitive bids. The city council by resolution or
motion duly passed, upon written recommendation of the city manager that it
is clearly to the advantage of the city not to contract by competitive bidding, may
waive the requirements of competitive bidding. (1985 Code, § 1-605)
5-206. Purchase prices. In determining the amount of a purchase or
contract for the purpose of this chapter, the entire purchase price for the goods
bought and the total amount of charges for work done under a contract shall be
considered. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the
requirements of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 1-606)
5-207. Conflicts of interest. No purchase shall be made from nor any
contract for purchase of services made with any person, firm, or corporation in
which any officer or employee of the city is financially interested except when
such person, firm, or corporation is the sole source for such goods or services in
Blount County, Tennessee, and then in such instance all purchases shall be
subject to prior approval by the city council. No officer or employee of the city
shall accept directly or indirectly any fee, rebate, money, or other thing of value
from any person, firm, or corporation employed by or doing business with the
city, except on behalf of and for the use of the city, or in accordance with the
exception hereinabove set forth. (1985 Code, § 1-607)
5-208. Rejection of bids. The purchasing agent shall have the
authority to reject any and all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or
more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when
the public interest will be served thereby. The purchasing agent shall not accept
the bid of a vendor or contractor who is in default on the payment of any taxes,
licenses, fees, or other monies of whatever nature that may be due the city by
said vendor or contractor. (1985 Code, § 1-608)
5-209. Records. The purchasing agent shall keep accurate records of all
transactions as purchasing agent of the municipality. (1985 Code, § 1-609)
5-4
5-210. Rules and regulations. Purchasing rules and regulations shall
be developed by the purchasing agent, approved by the city manager, and
adopted by the city council. (1985 Code, § 1-610)
5-5
CHAPTER 3
INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT POLICY
SECTION
5-301. Authorized investments by the City of Maryville.
5-302. Final maturity of investments.
5-303. Sufficient liquidity.
5-304. Non applicability.
5-301. Authorized investments by the City of Maryville. The city
is permitted in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-56-106 to invest
monies of the city in the following financial instruments:
(1) Bonds, Notes or Treasury Bills of the United States.
(2) Nonconvertible debt securities of the following government
sponsored enterprises that are chartered by the Congress of the United States;
provided, that such securities are rated in the highest category by at least two
(2) nationally recognized rating services:
(a) The Federal Home Loan Bank;
(b) The Federal National Mortgage Association;
(c) The Federal Farm Credit Bank; or
(d) The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
(3) Any other obligations not listed in subsections (1) or (2) above that
are guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States or any of its
agencies.
(4) Certificates of deposit and other evidences of deposit at state and
federally chartered banks and savings and loan associations.
(5) The local government investment pool created by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 9, chapter 4, part 7.
(6) Bonds or notes issued by or on behalf of the City of Maryville in
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, title 9, chapter 21.
(7) Bonds or notes backed by the direct general obligation of a state of
the United States, or a political subdivision or instrumentality thereof, having
general taxing powers; and are rated in either of the two (2) highest rated
categories by a nationally recognized rating agency. (as added by Ord. #2009-39,
Sept. 2009)
5-302. Final maturity of investments. All investments shall have a
final maturity not to exceed twenty-four (24) months from the date of the
investments. Alternatively, the investments may be tendered by the holder to
the issuer thereof, or an agent of the issuer, at no less than twenty-four (24)
month intervals. (as added by Ord. #2009-39, Sept. 2009)
5-6
5-303. Sufficient liquidity. In order to ensure sufficient liquidity of
funds, all investments in variable rate mode must carry a "put" option to be
accessed in the case of a failed remarketing effort. (as added by Ord. #2009-39,
Sept. 2009)
5-304. Non applicability. This chapter does not apply to any funds the
city may hold in an irrevocable trust, such as for separate pension or retiree
medical programs. Such trusts, if established, will have separate investment
policies. (as added by Ord. #2009-39, Sept. 2009)
6-1
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER
1. POLICE AND ARREST.
2. [DELETED.]
CHAPTER 1
POLICE AND ARREST1
SECTION
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders.
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc.
6-103. Policemen to wear uniforms and be armed.
6-104. When policemen to make arrests.
6-105. Policemen may require assistance in making arrests.
6-106. Disposition of persons arrested.
6-107. Police department records.
6-108. "Drug Enforcement Program Special Account."
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders. All policemen shall obey
and comply with such orders and administrative rules and regulations as the
police chief may officially issue. (1985 Code, § 1-1001)
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc. Policemen shall
preserve law and order within the municipality. They shall patrol the
municipality and shall assist the city court during the trail of cases. Policemen
shall also promptly serve any legal process issued by the city court. (1985 Code,
§ 1-1002)
6-103. Policemen to wear uniforms and be armed. All policemen
shall wear such uniform and badge as the city council shall authorize and shall
carry a service pistol and billy club at all times while on duty unless otherwise
expressly directed by the chief for a special assignment. (1985 Code, § 1-1003)
6-104. When policemen to make arrests1. Unless otherwise
authorized or directed in this code or other applicable law, an arrest of the
person shall be made by a policeman in the following cases:
1Municipal code reference
Traffic citations, etc.: title 15, chapter 7.
6-2
(1) Whenever he is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person.
(2) Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer's presence by the person.
(3) Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has
reasonable cause to believe the person has committed it. (1985 Code, § 1-1004)
6-105. Policemen may require assistance in making arrests. It
shall be unlawful for any male person to willfully refuse to aid a policeman in
making a lawful arrest when such a person's assistance is requested by the
policeman and is reasonably necessary. (1985 Code, § 1-1005)
6-106. Disposition of persons arrested. Unless otherwise authorized
by law, when a person is arrested for any offense other than one involving
drunkenness he shall be brought before the city court for immediate trial or
allowed to post bond. When the arrested person is drunk or when the city judge
is not immediately available and the alleged offender is not able to post the
required bond, he shall be confined. (1985 Code, § 1-1006)
6-107. Police department records. The police department shall keep
a comprehensive and detailed daily record in permanent form, showing:
(1) All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within the
corporate limits.
(2) All arrests made by policemen.
(3) All police investigations made, funerals convoyed, fire calls
answered, and other miscellaneous activities of the police department. (1985
Code, § 1-1007)
6-108. "Drug Enforcement Program Special Account." In
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 53-11-415, there is hereby created
the "Drug Enforcement Program Special Account" and the city recorder is
hereby authorized and directed to deposit all funds received under the
provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-6-420, in said account.
All funds received by the City of Maryville under the provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-6-420, be and the same are hereby
appropriated to be used exclusively in the local drug enforcement program.
Upon written demand of the chief of police submitted to the city recorder
and the city manager, the city recorder shall pay to the police department from
said special account such demanded funds for use in the drug enforcement
program.
The chief of police shall periodically, but not less often than annually,
make written accounting of all expenditures from such demanded funds to the
city recorder and the city manager. (1985 Code, § 1-1008)
6-3
CHAPTER 2
[DELETED]1
(This chapter was deleted in its entirety by Ord. #2008-32, Sept. 2008)
1§§ 6-201--6-203 (formerly 1985 Code, §§ 1-1101--1-1103).
7-1
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIREWORKS1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
2. FIRE CODE.
3. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
4. FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
5. SMOKE DETECTORS.
6. NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION ONE UNIFORM FIRE
CODE.
7. FIREWORKS REGULATED.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION
7-101. Repealed.
7-102. Repealed.
7-103. Repealed.
7-104. Fire lanes.
7-105. Deleted.
7-101. Repealed. (Ord. #97-26, April 1997, as amended by Ord. #99-31,
Sept. 1999; and repealed by Ord. #2006-12, Feb. 7, 2006)
7-102. Repealed. (Ord. #97-26, April 1997; repealed by Ord. #2006-12,
Feb. 7, 2006)
7-103. Repealed. (Ord. #97-26, April 1997; repealed by Ord. #2006-12,
Feb. 7, 2006)
7-104. Fire lanes. (1) All premises within the City of Maryville which
the fire department may be called upon to protect in case of fire and which are
not readily accessible from public roads shall be provided with suitable gates,
access roads, and fire lanes so that all buildings on the premises are accessible
to fire apparatus. Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings which are set
back more than 150 feet from a public road or exceed 30 feet in height and are
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
7-2
set back over 50 feet from a public road. Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in
width with the road edge closest to the building at least 10 feet from the
building. Any dead-end road more than 300 feet long shall be provided with a
turn-around at the closed end at least 80 feet in diameter.
(2) The designation and maintenance of fire lanes on private property
shall be accomplished as specified by the fire chief. It shall be the responsibility
of the property owner or owners to properly mark fire lanes(s) as specified by the
fire chief including signs and curb and parking lot striping.
(3) A written document, agreeable to the fire chief and for the benefit
of the City of Maryville, may be required for emergency access over all fire lanes.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked
a motor vehicle on, or otherwise, obstruct, in any manner, any marked fire lane
in the City of Maryville. No vehicle shall be left unattended at any time in any
marked fire lane within the City of Maryville.
(5) Loading and unloading on or across any marked fire lane shall be
limited to only the time necessary for said purpose and the operator of such
vehicle shall always be within reasonable distance of said vehicle for the purpose
of removing said vehicle which is preventing complete access to the fire lane by
the fire department.
(6) Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or
stopped in any marked fire lane in the City of Maryville in violation of this
section, the officer finding such vehicle may affix to such vehicle a citation for
the driver and/or owner to answer for such violation in accordance with § 15-703
of this municipal code, and any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
parking restrictions imposed by this section shall be subject to all of the
provisions of said § 15-703, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined
as provided in said § 15-703.
(7) Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in any
marked fire lane in the City of Maryville, or obstructing the same, the officer
finding such vehicle may cause the same to be removed by towing or otherwise
and the owner of such vehicle shall be liable for the cost of such removal.
(8) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction of any such violation other than as provided in subsection (6)
hereof shall be fined under the general penalty clause for this municipal code.
(1985 Code, § 7-102, as amended by Ord. #96-27, Nov. 1996)
7-105. Deleted. (as added by Ord. #2009-21, May 2009, and deleted by
Ord. #2018-43, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-3
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE1
SECTION
7-201. Fire code adopted with local modifications.
7-202. Enforcement.
7-203. Available in recorder's office.
7-204. Violations and penalties.
7-205.--7-210. Deleted.
7-201. Fire code adopted with local modifications. Pursuant to
authority granted by § 6-54-501 et seq. of the Tennessee Code Annotated and for
the purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, use and occupancy,
location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure
or any appurtenance connected or attached to any building or structure, the
International Fire Code, 2018 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code except as otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, and is
hereinafter referred to as the "fire code." The fire code shall not apply to oneand
two-family residential dwellings. The fire code shall further be subject to
the following local modifications:
(1) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.1 Title. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(2) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 105 PERMITS. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the following
addition:
"105.2.5 Fire Prevention Committee and Issuance of Permits. The City
Manager, the Fire Chief, and the Fire Inspector shall act as a committee
to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to
be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall
require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire code. The
Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and
distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(3) Section 109 - Board of Appeals is deleted locally and instead the
following is adopted in its place:
1Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
National Fire Protection Association One Uniform Fire Code: title 7,
chapter 6.
7-4
"Fire Code Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established to rule on matters related to
this Code and its enforcement. This Board shall be comprised of the Fire
Chief and the City Manager as those persons may change from time to
time. Their terms shall be indefinite. No member of the Board of Appeals
shall sit in judgment on any case in which the member holds a direct or
indirect property or financial interest in the case. The Board of Appeals
shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for conducting
its business that are consistent with the provisions of this Code. The
Board of Appeals shall provide for the reasonable interpretation of the
provisions of this Code and issue rulings on appeals of decisions involving
the enforcement of this Code. The ruling of the Board of Appeals shall be
consistent with the letter of the Code or when involving issues of clarity,
insuring that the intent of the Code is met with due consideration for
public safety and firefighter safety. The Board of Appeals shall have
authority to grant alternatives or modifications to procedures outlined in
Section 1.4 of the Code. The Board of Appeals shall not have authority to
waive requirements of the Code. Any person with standing shall be
permitted to appeal a decision involving the Fire Code to the Board of
Appeals when it is claimed that one of the following conditions exists:
(1) The true intent of the Code has been incorrect interpreted.
(2) The provisions of the Code do not fully apply.
(3) A decision is unreasonable or arbitrary as it applies to alternatives
or new materials.
An appeal shall be submitted to the Fire Chief in writing within 30
calendar days of a notification of a violation or a ruling about an issue
relating to this Code. The appeal shall outline the nature of the appeal
and the requested remedy. Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held
at the time the Board of Appeals determines, and within 30 calendar
days, of the filing of the notice of appeal. All hearings before the Board of
Appeals shall be open to the public. The Board of Appeals shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member and any of
its actions. A quorum shall consist of not less than two members. Every
decision of the Board of Appeals shall be entered in the minutes of the
Board meeting. A decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final subject
to such remedy as the aggrieved party might have through legal,
equitable or other avenues of appeal under state law of final decisions of
administrative bodies."
(4) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 110.4 Violation
penalties. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and insert in its place:
"110.4, Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, owner
or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect,
7-5
construct, alter, demolish, or move any structure, or has erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, moved, or demolished a building or
structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and
permitted thereunder, or directive of the fire code official and/or the
building code official, or of the permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law."
(5) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Is hereby amended locally
in the City of Maryville by adding this section in its entirety:
"114 VARIANCES
114. l Application. The Fire Chief shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the fire prevention codes upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes,
provided that the sprit of the codes shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Chief
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed
copy shall be furnished the applicant.
114.2 Rejected Variances. Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief lo the city
council within 30 days from the date of the decision."
(6) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration. Section 112.4 Failure to
comply. The International Fire Code 2012 Edition shall be augmented in Section
111.4 to add $50.00 per day per offense as the amount of the applicable fine.
(7) Chapter 5, Fire Service Features. Section 506.1 Where required is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the following
exception at the end of the paragraph:
Exception: Residential units without security gates, fire sprinkler system,
fire alarm and not more than three stories in height are exempted from
this requirement.
(8) Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems. Section 903.2.8 Group R is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the following
exception at the end of the paragraph:
Exception: This section shall not apply to detached one and two-family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three stories in height where each dwelling extends from the
foundation to the roof, is open on at least two sides with each dwelling
have a separate means of egress and their accessory structures as
regulated by the International Residential Code 2018 Edition.
(9) Chapter 57, Flammable and Combustible Liquids. Section
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited. is hereby
7-6
amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the following geographical
limits.
1. Residential District
2. Business and Transportation District
3. Environmental Conservation District
4. Central Community District
5. Single Family District
6. Office District
7. Neighborhood District
8. Central Business District
9. Washington Street Commercial Corridor
10. Office Transition Zone
11. Heritage Development Zone
12. Central Business District Support Zone
13. College Hill Historic District
14. High Intensity Commercial District
15. Oak Park Historic District
16. Estate Zone
17. High Density Residential
18. Institutional
19. High Intensity Retail District
(10) Chapter 57, Flammable and Combustible Liquids. Section
5706.2.4.4 Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the following geographical
limits.
1. Residential District
2. Business and Transportation District
3. Environmental Conservation District
4. Central Community District
5. Single Family District
6. Office District
7. Neighborhood District
8. Central Business District
9. Washington Street Commercial Corridor
10. Office Transition Zone
11. Heritage Development Zone
12. Central Business District Support Zone
13. College Hill Historic District
14. High Intensity Commercial District
15. Oak Park Historic District
16. Estate Zone
17. High Density Residential
18. Institutional
19. High Intensity Retail District
7-7
(11) Chapter 58, Flammable Gasses and Flammable Cryogenic Fluids.
Section 5806.2 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the following geographical
limits.
1. Residential District
2. Business and Transportation District
3. Environmental Conservation District
4. Central Community District
5. Single Family District
6. Office District
7. Neighborhood District
8. Central Business District
9. Washington Street Commercial Corridor
10. Office Transition Zone
11. Heritage Development Zone
12. Central Business District Support Zone
13. College Hill Historic District
14. High Intensity Commercial District
15. Oak Park Historic District
16. Estate Zone
17. High Density Residential
18. Institutional
19. High Intensity Retail District
(12) Chapter 61, Liquefied Petroleum Gases. Section 6104.2 Locations
where above-ground tanks are prohibited. is hereby amended locally in the City
of Maryville by adding the following geographical limits.
1. Residential District
2. Business and Transportation District
3. Environmental Conservation District
4. Central Community District
5. Single Family District
6. Office District
7. Neighborhood District
8. Central Business District
9. Washington Street Commercial Corridor
10. Office Transition Zone
11. Heritage Development Zone
12. Central Business District Support Zone
13. College Hill Historic District
14. High Intensity Commercial District
15. Oak Park Historic District
16. Estate Zone
17. High Density Residential
18. Institutional
7-8
19. High Intensity Retail District. (Ord. #98-28, Aug. 1998, as replaced
by Ord. #2003-41, Oct. 2003, Ord. #2008-05, Feb. 2008, Ord. #2013-28, Dec.
2013, and Ord. #2018-31, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-202. Enforcement. The Fire Code shall be enforced by the fire chief
or his designee who shall have the same powers as the state fire marshal.(1985
Code, § 7-202, as replaced by Ord. #2013-28, Dec. 2013, and Ord. #2018-31, Sept.
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-203. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
as modified, has been filed with the recorder of the city for a period of fifteen
(15) days prior to the passage of this ordinance and that all notice and public
hearing requirements in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501 et seq. have
been or will be met by the time of the final passage of this ordinance. The fire
code shall further be maintained and kept available in the city recorder's office
for public use, inspection and examination throughout the time when it is in
effect. (1985 Code, § 7-203, as replaced by Ord. #2013-28, Dec. 2013, and Ord.
#2018-31, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-204. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant,
occupant or agent who shall violate a provision of the fire code or fail to comply
therewith or with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be
taken in violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally
adopted as modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation is committed or
continued. Upon being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be
punished according to the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or
through injunctive remedies in state or federal court as appropriate. In the
event court action is taken, the city shall be entitled to recover from any person
adjudicated to have violated this chapter the city's reasonable attorney fees and
litigation costs incurred in bring the action(s) to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Further, a permit issued to a violator may be revoked. (1985 Code,
§ 7-204, as replaced by Ord. #2003-41, Oct. 2003, Ord. #2013-28, Dec. 2013, and
Ord. #2018-31, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-205.--7-210. [Deleted.] (as deleted by Ord. #2013-28, Dec. 2013
Ch17_2-5-19)
7-9
CHAPTER 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership.
7-302. Objectives.
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations.
7-304. Records.
7-305. Chief responsible for training.
7-306. Chief to be assistant to state officer.
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership. There is
hereby established a fire department to be supported and equipped from
appropriations by the city council of the municipality. All apparatus,
equipment, and supplies shall be purchased by or through the municipality and
shall be and remain the property of the municipality. The fire department shall
be composed of a chief appointed by the city manager and such number of
physically-fit subordinate officers and firemen as the chief shall appoint. (1985
Code, § 7-301)
7-302. Objectives. The fire department shall have as its objectives:
(1) To prevent uncontrolled fires from starting.
(2) To prevent the loss of life and property because of fires.
(3) To confine fires to their places of origin.
(4) To extinguish uncontrolled fires.
(5) To prevent loss of life from asphyxiation or drowning.
(6) To perform such rescue work as its equipment and/or the training
of its personnel makes practicable. (1985 Code, § 7-302)
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations. The chief of the fire
department shall set up the organization of the department, make definite
assignments to individuals, and shall formulate and enforce such rules and
regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the
fire department. (1985 Code, § 7-303)
7-304. Records. The chief of the fire department shall keep adequate
records of all fires, inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel, and work of
the department. (1985 Code, § 7-304)
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges with respect to traffic: title 15, chapter 2.
7-10
7-305. Chief responsible for training. The chief of the fire
department, shall be fully responsible for the training of the firemen. (1985
Code, § 7-305)
7-306. Chief to be assistant to state officer. Pursuant to
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-102-108, the chief of the fire
department is designated as an assistant to the state commissioner of commerce
and insurance and is subject to all the duties and obligations imposed by
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 68, chapter 102, and shall be subject to the
directions of the commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof. (1985
Code, § 7-307)
7-11
CHAPTER 4
FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
SECTION
7-401. Equipment use.
7-401. Equipment use. No equipment of the fire department shall be
used for fire fighting outside the corporate limits with the exception of use
permitted under mutual aid agreements1 or use authorized in the discretion of
the fire chief. Equipment of the fire department may further be used:
(1) If a fire is on city property; or
(2) If, in the opinion of the fire chief, a fire is in proximity to property
owned by or located within the city so as to endanger city property or property
within the city; or
(3) If expressly authorized by city council. (1985 Code, § 7-306, as
replaced by Ord. #2009-22, May 2009)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 58-8-101 et seq.
7-12
CHAPTER 5
SMOKE DETECTORS
SECTION
7-501. Definitions.
7-502. Application to residential buildings.
7-503. Installation and operation.
7-504. Penalties.
7-505. Compliance.
7-501. Definitions. (1) "Approved smoke detector" means a device
which senses visible or invisible particles of combustion and has been
investigated and listed in accordance with standards prescribed by:
(a) A nationally recognized and approved independent testing
agency or laboratory, such as Underwriters' Laboratories' Standard for
Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors (UL 217); or
(b) An agency authorized to make independent inspections by
the state fire marshal.
(2) "Hotel" means any building providing sleeping accommodations for
guests, travelers, or semi-permanent residents. The term includes motels, inns,
boarding homes, lodging homes, rooming houses, tourist homes, hotels,
dormitories, and so-called apartment hotels.
(3) "Apartment building" means any building containing three (3) or
more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether
designated as apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, or by any other
name. The term does not include condominium projects.
(4) "Mobile home" means a movable self-contained living unit designed
for year-round occupancy, designed for transportation such as a trailer with
axles and wheels attached, whether or not such axles and wheels remain
attached when in place, moved or towed by another vehicle. (1985 Code,
§ 7-401)
7-502. Application to residential buildings. (1) It shall be unlawful
to own or operate a hotel without installing an approved smoke detector in every
room of the building which is ordinarily used for sleeping purposes.
(2) It shall be unlawful to own or operate an apartment building
without installing an approved smoke detector in every living unit within the
apartment building. When activated, the detector shall initiate an alarm which
is audible in the sleeping rooms of the unit.
(3) It shall be unlawful to offer for rent, sale, or lease any mobile home
without installing an approved smoke detector in the living unit which is
audible in the sleeping rooms of the unit. (1985 Code, § 7-402)
7-13
7-503. Installation and operation. (1) All smoke detectors required
by this chapter shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
direction unless they conflict with applicable law.
(2) All smoke detectors required by this chapter may be wired directly
("hard wired") to the building's power supply, powered by a self-monitored
battery, or operated with a plug-in outlet fitted with a plug restrainer device
(provided the outlet is not controlled by any switch other than the main power
supply).
(3) Any smoke detector required in an apartment building by this act
shall be maintained by the tenant of the living unit where the smoke detector
is located in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. However, upon
termination of a tenancy in a unit, the owner of the apartment building shall
ensure that any required smoke detector is operational prior to reoccupancy of
the unit.
(4) The owner or manager of a hotel shall be responsible for
performance of such maintenance, repairs, and tests as are necessary to ensure
that every smoke detector required in such hotel is operational at all times.
(5) The owner or manager of a mobile home shall be responsible for
maintenance, repair, and tests to ensure that all smoke detectors in the units
are operational at time unit is rented, leased, or sold.
(6) No alarm silencing switch or audible trouble silencing switch shall
be provided unless its silenced position is indicated by a readily apparent signal.
(1985 Code, § 7-403)
7-504. Penalties. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with
or remove any smoke detector required by this chapter, or a component thereof.
(2) Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation, and upon conviction in city court, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $500. Each occurrence constitutes a separate offense and shall
be heard in city court as such. (1985 Code, § 7-404, modified)
7-505. Compliance. (1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply only
to existing buildings and mobile homes as herein defined. Smoke detectors shall
be installed and maintained in new buildings in accordance with applicable
building construction safety standards.
(2) Compliance with this chapter shall not relieve any person from the
requirements of any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation. (1985
Code, § 7-405)
7-14
CHAPTER 6
NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION ONE UNIFORM
FIRE CODE
SECTION
7-601. National Fire Protection Association One Uniform Fire Code
adopted.
7-602. Penalties.
7-603. Available in recorder's office.
7-601. National Fire Protection Association One Uniform Fire
Code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by § 6-54-501 et seq. of the
Tennessee Code Annotated, and for the purpose of regulating the construction,
alteration, repair, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and
demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenance connected or
attached to any building or structure, the National Fire Protection Association
One Fire Code, 2018 edition, ("code") as prepared and adopted by the National
Fire Protection Association is hereby adopted by reference in the corporate
limits of the City of Maryville except as stated below:
Local Modifications:
(1) Chapter 1, Referenced Publications NFPA 5000, Building
Construction and Safety Code, 2018 edition shall be deleted in its entirety
without replacement.
(2) National Fire Protection Association 101 Life Safety Code
Chapter 1, Administration Section 1.2 Purpose At the end of the section add:
"Exception: This Code shall not apply to detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three stories in height where each dwelling extends from the
foundation to the roof, is open on at least two sides with each dwelling
having a separate means of egress and their accessory structures as
regulated by the International Residential Code for One- and Two-family
Dwellings, 2018 edition."
(3) National Fire Protection Association 101 Life Safety Code Chapter
24 One and Two-Family Dwellings shall be deleted in its entirety without
replacement.
(4) 1.10 - Fire Code Board of Appeals shall be deleted in its entirety
and replaced as follows:
"Fire Code Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals is hereby established to rule on matters related to
this Code and its enforcement. This Board shall be comprised of the Fire
Chief and the City Manager as those persons may change from time to
time. Their terms shall be indefinite. No member of the Board of Appeals
shall sit in judgment on any case in which the member holds a direct or
7-15
indirect property or financial interest in the case. The Board of Appeals
shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations for conducting
its business that are consistent with the provisions of this Code. The
Board of Appeals shall provide for the reasonable interpretation of the
provisions of this Code and issue rulings on appeals of decisions involving
the enforcement of this Code. The ruling of the Board of Appeals shall be
consistent with the letter of the Code or when involving issues of clarity,
insuring that the intent of the Code is met with due consideration for
public safety and firefighter safety. The Board of Appeals shall have
authority to grant alternatives or modifications to procedures outlined in
Section 1.4 of the Code. The Board of Appeals shall not have authority to
waive requirements of the Code. Any person with standing shall be
permitted to appeal a decision involving the Fire Code to the Board of
Appeals when it is claimed that one of the following conditions exists:
(1) The true intent of the Code has been incorrect interpreted.
(2) The provisions of the Code do not fully apply.
(3) A decision is unreasonable or arbitrary as it applies to alternatives
or new materials.
An appeal shall be submitted to the Fire Chief in writing within 30
calendar days of a notification of a violation or a ruling about an issue
relating to this Code. The appeal shall outline the nature of the appeal
and the requested remedy. Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held
at the time the Board of Appeals determines, and within 30 calendar
days, of the filing of the notice of appeal. All hearings before the Board of
Appeals shall be open to the public. The Board of Appeals shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member and any of
its actions. A quorum shall consist of not less than two members. Every
decision of the Board of Appeals shall be entered in the minutes of the
Board meeting. A decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final subject
to such remedy as the aggrieved party might have through legal,
equitable or other avenues of appeal under state law of final decisions of
administrative bodies." (Ord. #99-28, Aug, 1998, as replaced by
Ord. #2003-43, Oct. 2003, Ord. #2008-06, Feb. 2008, Ord. #2013-29, Dec.
2013, and Ord. #2018-32, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-602. Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official or of the permit or certificate used
under provisions of this code shall be guilty of a civil offense and misdemeanor
punishable pursuant to the general penalty clause of the city and as allowed
under state and federal law. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense regardless of whether
a separate citation has been issued for each day of the violation. If the city
7-16
pursues legal action to enforce this code, any person or entity found in violation
thereof shall pay the city's reasonable attorney fees and litigation costs in
pursuing the action. Permits shall further be subject to revocation in the event
of violation of this code. Permits shall further be subject to revocation in the
event of violation of this code. (as added by Ord. #2003-43, Oct. 2003, and
amended by Ord. #2013-29, Dec. 2013, and Ord. #2018-32, Sept 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
7-603. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
as modified, has been filed with the recorder of the city for a period of fifteen
(15) days prior to the passage of this ordinance and that all public hearing and
notice requirements in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501, et seq. have been
or will be met by the time of the final passage of this ordinance. A copy of this
code shall be maintained and kept available for public use, inspection and
examination in the city recorder's office throughout the term when it is in effect.
(as added by Ord. #2013-29, Dec. 2013, and replaced by Ord. #2018-32, Sept.
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-17
CHAPTER 7
FIREWORKS REGULATED
SECTION
7-701. Manufacture prohibited.
7-702. Storage, sale and use restricted.
7-703. Use of fireworks restricted.
7-704. Special displays; permit required.
7-705. Penalty for violation.
7-706. Exceptions.
7-701. Manufacture prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, partnership, or corporation to manufacture within the corporate limits of
Maryville, Tennessee, pyrotechnics, commonly known as fireworks, of any kind
or description. (as added by Ord. #2018-43, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-702. Storage, sale and use restricted. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, partnership, or corporation to store for resale or sell in the
corporate limits of Maryville, Tennessee, any pyrotechnics, commonly known as
fireworks, except those fireworks classified as permissible fireworks in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-104-108. The storage for resale and retail sale
of fireworks shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) The storage for resale and retail sale of fireworks is permitted only
on lots zoned to allow retail sales located adjoining U.S. Highway 321 or U.S.
Highway 411 in the City of Maryville.
(2) Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to store and
sell at retail fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville shall
make application for a permit to do so on forms provided for that purpose by the
city recorder. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). No permit shall be issued for any person
under eighteen (18) years of age. All permits shall be for the calendar year and
any fraction thereof except permits will not expire until January 2nd of the
following year. The application shall include the name of the person making the
application; the firm, partnership or corporation he represents; the business
address of both the applicant and the partnership, firm or corporation he
represents; the address and description of the premises where the storage and
sale of fireworks is contemplated; sales tax numbers and any other information
the city recorder deems pertinent to aid in the investigation of the application.
The city recorder shall refer the applicant to the fire chief or his designee who
shall interview the applicant if desired and inspect the premises on which the
storage and sale of fireworks is contemplated and make whatever additional
investigation of the applicant or premises he deems appropriate to ensure that
the premises and its operation by the applicant will not constitute a fire,
7-18
explosion, or similar safety hazard. If the fire chief approves the application, the
city recorder shall issue a permit. The permit shall not be transferable to any
other person, firm, partnership, corporation or premise.
(3) No fireworks shall be sold from an automobile or any other vehicle.
No fireworks shall be sold through a drive-thru window. Fireworks must not be
thrown into any vehicle when lit nor thrown from any vehicle at any time.
(4) Placing, storing, locating or displaying fireworks in any window
where the sun may shine through glass onto to the fireworks is prohibited.
(5) The presence of lighted cigars, cigarettes or pipes within ten feet
(10') of where fireworks are offered for sale or are stored is declared unlawful
and prohibited.
(6) All places where fireworks are stored or sold, there must be posted
the words "Fireworks. No smoking" in letters not less than four inches (4") high.
(7) No fireworks shall be sold at retail at any location where paints,
oils or varnishes are for sale or use unless kept in the original unbroken
containers. Fireworks may not be sold anywhere where any resin, turpentine,
gasoline or other flammable substance is used, stored or sold.
(8) It shall be unlawful to offer for retail sale or to sell any fireworks
to children under sixteen (16) years of age or to any intoxicated person.
(9) It shall be unlawful to explode or ignite fireworks within six
hundred feet (600') of any church, hospital, or public school. It shall be unlawful
to explode or ignite fireworks within two hundred feet (200') of where fireworks
are stored, sold or offered for sale.
(10) Fireworks may be sold each year exclusively from June 20--July 5
and from December 10--January 2. (as added by Ord. #2018-43, Dec. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19, and amended by Ord. #2019-02, Feb. 2019 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-703. Use of fireworks restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person
to fire, set off, shoot, discharge or otherwise explode any fireworks within the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville except as follows:
(1) Fireworks may be fired, set off, shot, discharged or exploded on a
seasonal basis from June 20--July 5 and from December 10--January 2 and at
no other time.
(2) Fireworks may only be fired, set off, shot, discharged or exploded
on those dates listed above from 11:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M. except that fireworks
may be fired up until 1:00 A.M. on New Year's Day.
(3) Igniting and firing or exploding fireworks must be done entirely on
private property unless otherwise permitted herein.
(4) Use of fireworks on all public streets, roadways, alleys, sidewalks,
parks, parking lots, and public property within the City of Maryville is
prohibited. (as added by Ord. #2018-43, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-704. Special displays: permit required. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed as applying to the shipping, sale, possession and use of
7-19
fireworks for public displays by holder of a permit for a public display to be
conducted in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the
state fire marshal. Public displays shall be performed only under competent
supervision and after the persons or organizations making such displays have
applied for and received a permit first for such display issued by the state fire
marshal. Applications to the city recorder for a permit for such public displays
shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of the proposed
display. The application shall show that proposed display is to be located and
supervised so it is not to be hazardous to property and shall not endanger
human lives. The application must be approved by both the fire chief and police
chief of the City of Maryville before being issued by the city recorder. Permits
shall be for a time and location limited on the permit and are not transferable.
Such public display permits shall cost two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (as
added by Ord. #2018-43, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-705. Penalty for violation. An individual violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant
to the general penalty clause of this code. Further, the fire chief or any police
officer may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the
owner all stocks of fireworks offered for sale, stored, held or used in violation of
this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2018-43, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
7-706. Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
applying to the manufacture, storage, sale or use of signals necessary for the
safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or private transportation.
This chapter shall further not apply to the military of the United States or any
peace officers. Further, this chapter shall not be read to prohibit the sale or use
of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical or athletic events. Sale or use of
fireworks solely for agricultural purposes is permitted where approved by the
state fire marshal. (as added by Ord. #2018-43, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES1
CHAPTER
1. INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
2. BEER.
3. LIQUOR STORES.
4. PROOF OF AGE.
5. CERTAIN SPECIAL EVENTS ALLOWING FOR CONSUMPTION AND
POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND/OR BEER
ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
6. SALE OF WINE IN RETAIL FOOD STORES.
CHAPTER 1
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION
8-101. Definition of "alcoholic beverages."
8-102. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises.
8-103. Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises.
8-104. Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city clerk.
8-105. Public consumption of intoxicating liquors or alcoholic beverages
prohibited.
8-106. Manufacture of intoxicating liquors, intoxicating drinks, and high
alcohol content beer.
8-107. Municipal inspection fee imposed.
8-101. Definition of "alcoholic beverages." As used in this chapter,
unless the context dictates otherwise: "Alcoholic beverages" means and includes
alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, wine
and capable of being consumed by a human being other than patent medicine
or beer, as the same is defined in City Code § 8-201. (Ord. #97-07, Feb. 1997, as
replaced by Ord. #2017-03, March 2017)
8-102. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises.
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 4, inclusive, is hereby adopted so
as to be applicable to all sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption which are regulated by the said code when such sales are
conducted within the corporate limits of Maryville, Tennessee. It is the intent
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57.
8-2
of the city council that the said Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, chapter 4,
inclusive, shall be effective in Maryville, Tennessee, the same as if said code
sections were copied herein verbatim. (Ord. #97-07, Feb. 1997)
8-103. Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises. Pursuant to the authority contained in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-301, there is hereby levied a privilege tax (in
the same amounts levied by T.C.A., title 57, chapter 4, section 301, for the City
of Maryville General Fund to be paid annually as provided in this chapter) upon
any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association
engaging in the business of selling at retail in the City of Maryville alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises where sold. (Ord. #97-07, Feb. 1997)
8-104. Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city clerk. Any
person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association
exercising the privilege of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises in the City of Maryville shall remit annually to the city clerk the
appropriate tax described in § 8-103. Such payment shall be remitted not less
than thirty (30) days following the end of each twelve (12) month period from the
original date of the license. Upon the transfer of ownership of such business or
the discontinuance of such business, said tax shall be filed within thirty (30)
days following such event. Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company,
syndicate, or association failing to make payment of the appropriate tax when
due shall be subject to the penalty provided by law. (Ord. #97-07, Feb. 1997)
8-105. Public consumption of intoxicating liquors or alcoholic
beverages prohibited. None of the beverages regulated by this chapter shall
be consumed upon any public street, alley, boulevard, bridge, nor upon the
grounds of any cemetery or public school nor upon any park or public grounds
nor upon any vacant lot within two hundred (200) feet of any public street,
highway, avenue, or other public place.
Despite the provisions of this section, possession and consumption of
alcoholic beverages and beer as otherwise defined in this title is permitted
during certain city sponsored or co-sponsored special events within the physical
parameters of the special event zone during the time of the special event if
otherwise provided by resolution of the city council. (as added by Ord. #2008-16,
March 2008, and amended by Ord. #2013-05, Ord. #2013-05, March 2013, and
Ord. #2015-33, April 2015)
8-106. Manufacture of intoxicating liquors, intoxicating drinks,
and high alcohol content beer. Intoxicating liquors, intoxicating drinks and
high alcohol content beer as defined by state law may be manufactured within
the corporate limits upon:
(1) Payment of a privilege tax to the city as required by law;
8-3
(2) The issuance by the city of a license authorizing the manufacturing
facility to operate; and
(3) Proper licensure from the alcoholic beverage commission. Such
local license shall be considered and granted, if appropriate, by city council and
issued by the city recorder if all requirements under state law for the applicant
to manufacture intoxicating liquors, intoxicating drinks and/or high alcohol
content beer are met. The applicant shall provide all information for such license
applications required by the city recorder. (as added by Ord. #2014-21, June
2014)
8-107. Municipal inspection fee imposed. (1) An inspection fee for the
city to inspect the retail store of a manufacturer of high alcohol content beer
within the city limits is hereby imposed at a rate of fifteen percent (15%). A
manufacturer of high alcohol content beer shall obtain a retail license to sell its
products manufactured on the manufacturer's premises. Such inspection fee
shall be imposed at the wholesale price of the high alcohol content beer supplied
by the wholesaler for those products manufactured and sold by the manufacture
at its retail store.
(2) Further, an inspection fee is hereby levied on a manufacturer of
alcoholic beverages other than high alcohol content beer to the extent that such
manufacturer is licensed retailer of alcoholic beverages other than high alcohol
content beer within the municipality. The inspection fee is hereby set at eight
percent (8%) of the wholesale price of the alcoholic beverages other than high
alcohol content beer supplied by the wholesaler as provided by state law. (as
added by Ord. #2014-23, June 2014)
8-4
CHAPTER 2
BEER1
SECTION
8-201. Beer board.
8-202. Authorization of beer businesses.
8-203. Locations of beer businesses.
8-204. Hours and days of sale, etc., regulated.
8-205. Permits for the manufacture of beer.
8-206. Public consumption of beer prohibited.
8-207. Beer permits.
8-208. Permits for retail sales; types designated.
8-209. Restrictions upon issuance of on-premise beer permits.
8-210. Restrictions on financial interests of beer permit holders.
8-211. Restrictions upon issuance of off-premises beer permits.
8-212. Selling or otherwise dispensing beer to persons in motor vehicles.
8-213. Restrictions pertaining to minors.
8-214. [Deleted.]
8-215. Selling or otherwise dispensing beer to persons without valid permits
or to persons engaging in unlawful practices prohibited.
8-216. Revocation of beer permits.
8-217. Inspection of beer businesses.
8-218. Violations and fines.
8-219. Special events permits.
8-220. No permit required for certain private events.
8-221. Caterer permits.
8-222. Special event permits.
8-201. Beer board. There is hereby created a board to be known as the
Maryville Beer Board which shall be composed of the members of the city
council of the City of Maryville whose duty it shall be to regulate, supervise and
control the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to sell, store,
distribute, dispense, serve and/or manufacture beer as defined hereunder in the
City of Maryville. The mayor shall be the chairman and the city recorder shall
be the secretary of said board. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum
for any purpose.
The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all the proceedings of the
board, in the form of a minute book, and shall keep on file in his office all
original applications and a duplicate of each permit issued. The board shall be
1State law reference
For a leading case on a municipality's authority to regulate beer, see
the Tennessee Supreme Court decision in Watkins v. Naifeh, 635
S.W.2d 104 (1982).
8-5
empowered to employ a court reporter or person of equivalent ability whenever
necessary in any proceeding before it. The power, right, and authority are
hereby conferred upon said board to arrange for and prescribe the details and
form of the necessary applications, permits, and other matters incident to
carrying out the provisions of this chapter. The board shall meet upon call of
the chairman of the board to transact such business as may properly come
before it.
The board shall perform such other duties and have such other power and
authority provided by statute and this chapter.
In this title, chapter and code, "beer" means beer, ale or malt beverages,
or any other beverages having an alcohol content of not more than eight percent
(8%) by weight, except wine as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-3-101; provided, however, that no more than forty-nine percent (49%) of the
overall alcoholic content of such beverage may be derived from the addition of
flavors and other non-beverage ingredients containing alcohol. (1985 Code,
§ 2-201; as replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006, and amended by Ord. #2017-
03, March 2017)
8-202. Authorization of beer businesses. Pursuant to Tennessee
Code Annotated, §§ 57-5-101 et seq. it shall be unlawful in the City of Maryville
to transport, sell, distribute, possess, receive, or manufacture beer as defined in
this chapter except as provided in this chapter and subject to the privilege taxes
provided in this code. Provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, co-partnership, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, association,
or other group operating as a unit to sell, store, dispense, serve, distribute,
and/or manufacture any of the said beverages regulated by this chapter within
the City of Maryville without having first obtained a duly issued permit and
license to do so in the manner prescribed in this chapter. (1985 Code, § 2-202;
as replaced by Ord. #2006-06, Jan. 2006, and amended by Ord. #2017-03, March
2017)
8-203. Location of beer businesses. Beer businesses shall be located
where the applicable zoning is appropriate for the proposed use. No beer permit
shall be granted to a tavern or craft beer retailer as defined elsewhere in this
chapter located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any school (public, private
or church) as measured on a straight line from the nearest property line of said
school or church to nearest point of the building or structure where the beer is
stored, sold or manufactured except that this provision shall not be applicable
to permits located within the central business district, the central transition
zone, the Washington Street commercial corridor, and the high intensity
commercial zoning district of the City of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 2-203,
modified; as replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006, Ord. #2008-13, March 2008,
and Ord. #2014-22, June 2014)
8-6
8-204. Hours and days of sale, etc., regulated. It shall be unlawful
for any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, or association
to offer for sale or sell beer as defined in this chapter within the corporate limits
of Maryville, Tennessee, between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday and between the
hours of 3:00 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. on Sunday. No such beverages shall be
consumed or opened for consumption on or about any premises where beer as
defined in this chapter is sold within the corporate limits of Maryville,
Tennessee, in either bottle, glass or other container after 3:15 A.M. (Ord.
#97-07, Feb. 1997, as amended by Ord. #2002-32, Oct. 2002, replaced by
Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006, and amended by Ord. #2017-03, March 2017)
8-205. Permits for the manufacture of beer. Permits for the
manufacture of beer shall be issued in accordance with the general requirements
of this chapter. A manufacturer of beer can further apply for permits for retail
sale for on-premise and/or off premise consumption. "Manufacture" shall mean
producing beer at a rate of at least two hundred (200) barrels each calendar year
on the licensed premises. "Barrel" shall mean thirty-one (31) gallons.
Documentation by the manufacturer of the number of barrels each calendar year
may be required. (1985 Code, § 2-206, as deleted by Ord. #2002-32, Oct. 2002,
and replaced by Ord. #2012-24, Sept. 2012)
8-206. Public consumption of beer prohibited. None of the
beverages regulated by this chapter shall be consumed on any public street,
alley, boulevard, bridge, nor upon the grounds of any cemetery or public school,
nor upon any park or public grounds nor upon any vacant lot within two
hundred (200) feet of any public street, highway, avenue, or other public place.
Despite the provisions of this section, possession and consumption of beer
is permitted during certain city sponsored or co-sponsored special events within
the physical parameters of the special event zone during the time of the special
event if otherwise provided by resolution of the city council.(1985 Code, § 2-207,
as amended by Ord. #2000-01, Jan. 2000, and Ord. #2001-09, April 2001,
replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006, and Ord. #2008-17, March 2008, and
amended by Ord. #2013-05, March 2013)
8-207. Beer permits. (1) No permit shall be issued except on
application in writing of the owner or owners of the business made to the
Maryville Beer Board which application shall be sworn to by the applicant. All
applications shall be made on a form provided for that purpose and shall be filed
with the secretary of the beer board. In no event shall a permit be issued
without the written approval of the application by a majority of the beer board.
The business must operate in the same name as identified on the permit
application.
Prior to the consideration of an application the City of Maryville shall
collect an applicant fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in accordance with
8-7
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-104. For special event permits, the city may
in the discretion of the city manager provide an incentive payment of up to two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per approved application to the applicant with
such payment being made upon the conclusion of the special event if the permit
holder participates in the special event and complies with all of the
requirements of this title.
(2) Except for special event permits, permits shall be issued for an
indefinite period of time except that the Maryville Beer Board may issue a
permit for a shorter or probationary period if in its discretion it deems such
action proper and reasonable under the circumstances.
(3) Except for special events permits, there is hereby imposed on the
business of selling, distributing, storing or manufacturing beer an annual
privilege tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person, firm, corporation,
joint stock company, syndicate, or association engaged in the sale, distribution,
storage or manufacture of beer shall remit the tax on January 1, 1994, and on
each successive January 1, to the City of Maryville, Tennessee. At the time a
new permit is issued to any business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall
be required to pay the privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or
portion thereof remaining until the next
tax payment date, all as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-104.
(4) Except for catering permits, no permit now in force or hereinafter
issued shall be good or valid except at the location described in the application
upon which it is based nor shall any such permit be transferrable. If any permit
holder is a corporation or limited liability company, a change in ownership
requiring the issuance of a new permit shall occur when control of fifty percent
(50%) or more of the stock of the corporation or limited liability company is
transferred to a new owner.
(5) The applicant or a representative may be required to appear in
person before the board and subject himself to examination upon any and all
questions appertaining to his qualifications under this chapter and amendments
thereto.
(6) No permit may be granted hereunder to any establishment when
any person, firm or corporation having at lest a five percent (5%) ownership in
the establishment has been convicted within ten (10) years prior to the
application for a permit hereunder of a violation of the laws governing the
possession, sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages or of any felony or crime
involving moral turpitude or has had a beer permit revoked or suspended within
the past ten (10) years. No person employed by any beer business shall be a
person who has been convicted of any violation of the laws against possession,
sale, manufacture and transportation of alcoholic beverages or any felony or
crime involving moral turpitude within the last ten (10 ) years.
(7) Except for caterer's permits and special event permits, every
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
in the place of business owned and described in the permit.
8-8
For caterers, the permit shall be prominently displayed at a location of
the catered event.
For special events permits, the permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous
way at the location where the beer is sold.
Except for caterer's licenses, a permit shall be valid only for a single
location and cannot be transferred to another location except where an owner
operates two (2) or more restaurants or businesses within the same building
then the owner may in the owner's discretion operate some or all of such
businesses pursuant to this same permit. A permit shall be valid for all decks,
patios and other outdoor serving areas which are contiguous to the exterior of
the building in which the business is located and are operated by the business.
(8) No permit or license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter unless
the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the board that he has obtained all
permits and paid all required fees and privilege taxes and has met all of the
requirements of the laws of the State of Tennessee and the United States.
(9) The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter desiring to
voluntarily surrender the permit shall tender said permit to the beer board. The
beer board shall take such action upon the offer to surrender as it may
determine necessary and advisable under the circumstances, and it shall have
the absolute authority to refuse to accept the surrender of any permit.
(10) Upon notice by the Maryville Chief of Police or his agent that the
City has reasonable cause to conclude that a permit holder is ineligible to hold
a permit and/or falsified information in order to obtain a permit, the permit will
be immediately temporarily suspended. The permit holder may request a
hearing before the board within seven (7) working days of the suspension.
(11) If any false or misleading information is found in any material
submitted to the board by or on behalf of an applicant for a beer permit, the
application shall be cancelled and the applicant and any person who submitted
false or misleading information shall not be permitted to apply for a beer permit
for a period of ten (10) years from the date of the cancellation of the application.
(12) If any false or misleading information is found in any material
submitted to the beer board by or on behalf of a holder of a beer permit, the
permit shall be revoked immediately by the beer board and the permit holder
and any person who submitted false or misleading information shall not be
permitted to apply for a beer permit for a period of ten (10) years from the date
of the revocation of the permit.
(13) A permit holder must return to the beer board all permits issued
to the permit holder by the beer board within fifteen (15) days of termination of
the business, change in ownership, relocation of the business or change of the
business's name; provided, that notwithstanding the failure to return a beer
permit, the permit shall expire on the termination of the business, change in
ownership, relocation of the business or change in the business's name.
(14) Except for special events permits or caterer's permits, generally
there shall be one (1) permit holder per location with a beer permit. During a
period of time where a beer business is in the process of being sold or
8-9
transferred, there may be two (2) permits issued for the same location for a
period of up to sixty (60) days of overlap. If there is a violation of this chapter
during that overlapping period of time, the permit holder who had actual control
over the person or persons violating the chapter will be held responsible. In the
event that it cannot be reasonably determined which permit holder is in control
of such person or persons, then both permit holders shall be responsible for the
violation. If more than sixty (60) days passes from the date of issuance of the
second permit for the same location for a beer business and two (2) permits
remain in place for the same address, the newer permit shall become null and
void with no refund or compensation due to its holder. (1985 Code, § 2-208,
modified, as amended by Ord. #2002-32, Oct. 2002, replaced by Ord. #2006-05,
Jan. 2006, and amended by Ord. #2012-25, Sept. 2012, Ord. #2014-27, Sept.
2014, and Ord. #2015-31, April 2015)
8-208. Permits for retail sales; types designated. Permits for the
retail sale or giving away of beer shall be (1) caterer's permits, (2) special events
permits, or (3) permits of the following two (2) types:
(1) On-premise permits. On-premises permits shall be issued for the
consumption of beer on premises in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Off-premise permits. Off-premise permits shall be issued for the
sale of beer for consumption off the business premises in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
A business can sell beer both for on-premise and off-premises
consumption at the same location pursuant to one (1) permit if otherwise
permitted by law and this section. (1985 Code, § 2-209; as replaced by
Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006, and Ord. #2015-31, April 2015, and amended by Ord.
#2015-72, Nov. 2015)
8-209. Restrictions upon the issuance of on-premise beer permits.
Permits for the on-premise sale or giving away of beer shall be issued according
to the following classes and limitations except that this provision shall not be
applicable to the renewal of any permit existing and outstanding as of
September 18, 1980 (date this section was replaced):
(1) On-premise where beer is sold for consumption at a restaurant.
Restaurant shall mean a business establishment whose primary business is the
sale of prepared food to be consumed on the premises. A restaurant as so defined
shall be a public place where meals are actually and regularly served, and such
place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment, serving at least two (2) meals per day, five (5) days a week, and the
serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted. There shall be
no limitation on the number of beer permits issued to restaurants.
(2) On-premise where beer is sold for consumption at a tavern. Tavern
shall mean a business establishment whose primary business is or is to be the
sale of beer to be consumed on the premises. There shall not be more than a
8-10
total of twelve (12) taverns located within the corporate limits of the City of
Maryville.
(3) On-premise where beer is sold in the rooms of regularly conducted
hotels and motels as the same are defined under Tennessee state law regulating
beer permits. Beer sold under such permit shall be dispensed to adult guests
only through locked, in-room units. No person under the age of twenty-one (21)
shall be issued or supplied with a key by any hotel or motel for such units.
(4) On-premise where beer is sold by a manufacturer of beer. A
manufacturer shall mean a business establishment whose business is the
manufacture of beer to be consumed on-premise or off-premise.
(5) On-premise where beer is sold by a craft beer retailer. A "craft beer
retailer" is a business whose primary business is the retail sale of craft beer.
Craft beer means beer as otherwise defined in this chapter that is further
manufactured by breweries with an annual production of six million (6,000,000)
barrels or less.
(6) On-premise where craft beer is sold by a grocery store. Craft beer
may be sold or given away for on-premise consumption at a grocery store but
only as set forth herein. Craft beer means beer as defined in this chapter that
is further manufactured by breweries with an annual production of six million
(6,000,000) barrels or less. A grocery store shall mean a business establishment
whose primary business is the retail sale of food merchandise and household
items. Grocery stores can sell or give away four ounce (4 oz.) samples of craft
beer for tasting by customers to allow the customer to decide what type of craft
beer the customer might want to purchase. No more than four (4) of such four
ounce (4 oz.) samples of craft beer may be given to a customer per visit, with one
(1) visit per day allowed per customer for sampling purposes. Taps for such
craft beer must be manned when the taps are in operation for sales by a grocery
store employee. The beer tap must not be accessible to or used by a customer
directly at any time. (1985 Code, § 2-210, as replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan.
2006, and amended by Ord. #2008-28, Aug. 2008, Ord. #2012-24, September
2012, Ord. #2014-22, June 2014, Ord. #2015-72, Nov. 2015, and Ord. #2017-03,
March 2017)
8-210. Restrictions on financial interests of beer permit holders.
No brewer, wholesaler, or manufacturer of any of the beverages regulated by
this chapter, nor any agent or agents of such brewer, wholesaler, or
manufacturer shall be permitted to make any loan of money or furnish any
fixtures of any kind or have any interest either directly or indirectly in the
business of any retailer of such beverages, or in the premises occupied by any
such retailer. No person holding and/or exercising an unexpired permit or
license issued pursuant to this chapter shall while so doing convey or grant or
contract to convey or grant any interest in the business located at the place
named in said permit, or any interest in the premises or any property therein,
to any brewer, wholesaler, or manufacturer of the beverages regulated by this
chapter. No person holding and/or exercising an unexpired permit or license
8-11
issued pursuant to this chapter shall incur or contract any indebtedness or
financial obligation to any brewer, wholesaler, or manufacturer of the beverages
regulated by this chapter, except for the purchase of said beverages. No permit
or license shall be granted under this chapter to any applicant who, at the time
of making application, is indebted or financially obligated to any such brewer,
wholesaler, or manufacturer, except for the purchase of said beverages in the
case of applicants seeking renewal of permits. (1985 Code, § 2-211, as replaced
by Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006)
8-211. Restrictions upon issuance of off-premises beer permits.
Permits for the off-premise sale of beer shall be issued according to the following
classes and limitations, except that this provision shall not be applicable to the
renewal of any permit existing and outstanding as of October 6, 1987 (the date
this section was replaced).
(1) Off-premise where beer is sold at a grocery store. Grocery store
shall mean a business establishment whose primary business is the retail sale
of food merchandise and household items. There shall be no limitation on the
number of beer permits issued to grocery stores. Such a permit may include
permitting beer sold in growlers or containers purchased expressly by customers
to be filled for purchase of beer on tap to be taken from the grocery store for
consumption off-premise.
(2) Off-premise where beer is sold at a convenience store or market.
Convenience store or market shall mean a business establishment whose
business is the retail sale of gasoline and petroleum products and food
merchandise, household supplies and sundries. Beer shall not be sold for
consumption on the premises of convenient stores or markets. There shall be no
limitation on the number of beer permits issued to convenient stores or markets.
(3) Off-premise where beer is sold at a package store. Package store
shall mean a business establishment whose primary business is the sale of
sealed-packaged beer to be consumed off the premises. There shall be not more
than one (1) permit issued to package stores for every two thousand (2,000)
population, or fraction thereof, according to the latest official census of the City
of Maryville.
(4) Off-premise where beer is sold at a drug store. Drug store shall
mean a business establishment whose primary business is the retail sale of
pharmaceuticals, food merchandise, household items, and sundries. Beer shall
not be sold for consumption on the premises of drug stores. There shall be no
limitation on the number of beer permits issued to drug stores.
(5) Off-premise where beer is sold at the site of the manufacturer.
Manufacturer shall mean a business establishment whose business is the
manufacture of beer for on-premise or off-premise consumption. There shall be
no limit on the number of beer permits for manufacturers.
(6) Off-premise where craft beer is sold by a craft beer retailer. A craft
beer retailer shall mean a business whose primary business is the retail sale of
craft beer. There shall be no limit of permits for craft beer retailers. Craft beer
8-12
means beer as defined in this chapter that is further manufactured by breweries
with an annual production of six million (6,000,000) barrels of beer or less. (1985
Code, § 2-212, as amended by Ord. #99-32, Sept. 1999, replaced by Ord. #2006-
05, Jan. 2006, and amended by Ord. #2012-24, Sept. 2012, Ord. #2014-22, June
2014, Ord. #2015-72, Nov. 2015, and Ord. 2017-03, March 2017)
8-212. Selling or otherwise dispensing beer to persons in motor
vehicles. The beverages regulated by this chapter shall not be sold, given
away, served, or otherwise dispensed to persons in automobiles or other motor
vehicles except where (1) the beverages are sold in package form for
consumption off premises and (2) beer or intoxicating liquors in any form are not
consumed or sold for consumption on premises where the drive thru is located.
(1985 Code, § 2-213, as amended by Ord. #2002-32, Oct. 2002 and replaced by
Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006)
8-213. Restrictions pertaining to minors. No person under the age
of eighteen (l8) years shall be permitted to serve beer for on premises
consumption. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted
to sell, handle, key in to a cash register, or scan into a cash register beer or
intoxicating liquors for off premise consumption. No person under eighteen (18)
years of age shall check identification of those attempting to purchase beer or
intoxicating liquors for off premise consumption. (1985 code, § 2-214, deleted by
Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004, replaced by Ord. #2006-04, Jan. 2006, and amended
by Ord. #2015-16, Feb. 2015)
8-214. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 2-215, replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan.
2006, and deleted by Ord. #2015-16, Feb. 2015)
8-215. Selling or otherwise dispensing beer to persons without
valid permits or to persons engaging in unlawful practices prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, syndicate,
joint stock company, association or other group operating as a unit, who or
which holds and/or exercises a distributor's or wholesaler's permit under this
chapter, to sell, give away, deliver or distribute any of the beverages regulated
by this chapter to any person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, syndicate, club,
joint stock company, association, or other group operating as a unit, in the City
of Maryville, who or which does not hold a valid retailer's permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, or to permit or allow any agent or employee to do so.
Provided, further, that it shall also be unlawful for any such distributor or
wholesaler knowingly to sell, give away, deliver, or distribute such beverages to
any such retailer who has violated or is violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, or to permit or allow any agent or employee to do so. (1985 Code,
§ 2-216, as replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006)
8-13
8-216. Revocation of beer permits. The Maryville Beer Board is
hereby empowered and directed, whenever from facts and evidence presented
to it at a hearing hereinafter provided for it is of opinion that such action is
justified in the public interest, to revoke or suspend any permit or license issued
pursuant to this chapter to any person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, joint
stock company, syndicate, association or group operating as a unit, who:
(1) Makes any material misrepresentation or false statement in the
application upon which the permit is based, or fails to keep and maintain as true
any promise or fact set forth in said application; or
(2) Violates any of the provisions of this chapter; or
(3) Is convicted of any violation of the laws of the United States or of
the State of Tennessee or of the ordinances of any city prohibiting the
manufacture, sale, possession, storage or transportation of alcoholic beverages
as defined in this title; or
(4) Knowingly permits or allows, or negligently fails to prevent, the
violation of any of the aforesaid laws or ordinances against said intoxicating
liquors upon any premises occupied or owned by or under the control of the
licensee.
Upon any complaint being made to the said board by one or more
reputable citizens that any of the acts above-mentioned in this section has been
committed or any other provision of this chapter has been or is being violated
by a person holding and/or exercising a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
or when it shall appear that the premises of any permit holder are being
maintained and operated in such manner as to be detrimental to the public
health, safety or morals, or when said board has knowledge of any such act or
violation, the holder of said permit shall be notified in writing by the secretary
of the board and afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the board. Said
notice shall be mailed, at least five (5) days before the hearing, to the address
shown upon the application for a permit, shall state the nature of the complaint
or violation, and shall direct the holder of said permit to appear before the board
at a time and place specified and show cause, if any he has, why his permit
should not be revoked or suspended. The hearing shall be broad in character,
and evidence may be heard upon any facts or circumstances pertinent to or
applicable to the violation charged. The reputation or character of the place and
of the holder of the permit complained of shall be material and competent
evidence for the consideration of the board at such hearing.
Whenever complaint is made charging that false statements or
misrepresentations have been made in any application for a permit under this
chapter, the burden of proof shall be upon the holder of the permit to establish
the truth of the statement charged to be false. Provided that no formal
complaint shall be necessary or required whenever the falsity of such statement
or representation, or the commission of any of the acts above-mentioned in this
section, or the violation of any other provision of this chapter, may be made to
appear by the records of any court of competent jurisdiction; and in such case
8-14
such records or duly certified copies thereof shall be conclusive evidence of the
falsity or misrepresentation or of the commission of said act or of said violation.
The beer board may further fine a permit holder for any violation or may,
in its discretion, offer the permit holder the alternative of paying a civil penalty
as provided by state law.
Provided, further, that no person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, joint
stock company, syndicate, association, or other group operating as a unit, whose
permit and license are revoked by said board shall be eligible to make
application for or be granted another permit under this chapter for a period of
ten (10) years from the date said revocation becomes final.
Provided, further, that when a permit and license are revoked by said
board pursuant to this chapter no new permit or license shall be issued for the
same premises until the expiration of one (1) year from the date said revocation
becomes final and effective. The beer board, in its discretion, may determine
that the issuance of a license or permit before the expiration of one (1) year from
the date of the revocation becomes final is appropriate, if the individual applying
for such issuance is not the original holder of the license or any family member
who could inherit from such individual under the statutes of intestate
succession.
The secretary shall notify the Blount County Beer Committee of the
revocation of any permit under this chapter. (1985 Code, § 2-217, as replaced
by Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006, and amended by Ord. #2017-03, March 2017)
8-217. Inspection of beer businesses. The police officers of the City
of Maryville shall have the right to inspect at any and all times the entire
premises and property where or upon or in which the beverages regulated by
this chapter are sold, stored, transported or otherwise dispensed or distributed
or handled, whether at retail or wholesale, in the City of Maryville for any law
violations. (1985 Code, § 2-218, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan.
2006)
8-218. Violations and fines. Any violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punishable by the beer board against the applicable permit
holder to the full extent authorized by this ordinance and by state law and
against individual violators under the general penalty clause of this code. (1985
Code, § 2-219, as replaced by Ord. #2006-05, Jan. 2006)
8-219. Special events permits. (1) The Maryville Beer Board is
hereby authorized and empowered in its discretion to permit the retail sale or
free distribution of beer for consumption on public property within approved
special event zone within the city pursuant to a special event permit at such
times and as part of such events and under such terms and conditions, rules and
regulations as the Maryville Beer Board may establish which are not
inconsistent with state law regulating the sale of beer. No special event permit
shall exceed a duration of forty-eight (48) hours.
8-15
(2) Such sales or the distribution of beer shall be done in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter except for provisions relating to obtaining
a permit.
(3) Any bona fide charitable, non-profit or political organization
conducting a special event within the city in which beer is contemplated to be
sold or given away (but not under any other permit or exception issued under
this chapter) shall apply for a special event permit at least forty-five (45) days
in advance of such proposed special event in writing to the Maryville Beer Board
through the City Recorder. No more than two (2) applications will be considered
per year per organization. An application fee of $250.00 must be submitted with
the application.
The application required by this part shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(a) The applicant's name,
(b) The date and time of the proposed event,
(c) The address and telephone number of all individual
applicants with the name, address and telephone number of a contact for
corporate applicants,
(d) The identity of any persons, establishments or entities which
are contemplated to participate in dispensing beer at locations other than
their usual premises along with a copy of the current beer permit(s) for
such participant vendor(s). Vendors of beer for the purpose of special
events permits only must have a valid beer permit issued by a
governmental entity somewhere in the United States,
(e) The specific location where the beer is to be sold outside the
premises of an establishment for which a beer permit previously has been
issued,
(f) The specific parameters of the special event area,
(g) The anticipated number of persons attending such event,
(h) Applicant's Certificate of Insurance for the special event,
(i) A signed statement allowing the Maryville Beer Board to
run a background check on criminal records of applicant's CEO or
executive director or person in a similar position if such applicant is not
already in possession of a beer permit, and
(j) Any plans for proposed temporary closure of public
rights-of-way,
(k) Plans for security and policing the event, and
(l) Any other requirements deemed necessary by city staff.
(4) Upon receipt, the proposed application for a special event permit
shall be placed on the Maryville Beer Board agenda at its next regularly
scheduled meeting following the receipt of the notice. An applicant shall send
a representative to such Maryville Beer Board meeting to address any questions
or issues arising out of the proposed special event.
(5) A special event permit shall state on its face the name of the holder
of the permit, the specific location, times and date where such vendor(s) is
8-16
permitted to sell beer under the special event permit. A copy of the special event
permit and a copy of the participant vendor's regular beer permit(s) must be
displayed at each location where beer is sold by such vendor. (as added by
Ord. #2000-02, Jan. 2000, deleted by Ord. #2001-10, April 2001, replaced by
Ord. #2013-04, March 2013, and Ord. #2017-14, May 2017, and amended by
Ord. #2018-18, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
8-220. No permit required for certain private events. No permit
under this chapter shall be required for persons distributing, possessing or
receiving beer as defined in this chapter in their private home or business on
their private property when not open to the general public so long as no charge
is assessed to the person for receiving said beverage and no charge is assessed
for attending the event. (as added by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004, deleted by Ord.
#2006-05, Jan. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #2009-20, May 2009, and Ord.
#2017-03, March 2017)
8-221. Caterer permits. Beer may be sold, stored, dispensed and served
in the city limits pursuant to a validly issued caterer's license. "Caterer" shall
mean a business engaged in offering food and beverage service for a fee at
various locations and which:
(1) Operates a permanent catering hall;
(2) Has a complete and adequate commercial kitchen facility; and
(3) Is licensed as a caterer by the Tennessee Department of Health.
Each catered event must include food as at least fifty percent (50%) of the total
expenditures in addition to beer and alcoholic beverages. A caterer's permit may
be issued to any person, corporation, limited liability company or other business
that has obtained a caterer's license from the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage
Commission for the sale and consumption of wine and other alcoholic beverages
pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 4, title 57. The caterer must be
engaged in the sale or service of beer where beer is to be consumed by the
customer or his or her guests upon the premises of the catered event site. Should
the holder of a caterer's permit cease to hold a valid cater's license from the
state alcoholic beverage commission, such caterer's permit pertaining to beer
shall automatically be revoked. A caterer's permit holder shall be required to
give advance written notice to the beer board via facsimile, to a designated city
e-mail, U.S. Mail, or personal delivery received by the city not later than ten (10)
days prior to each catered event for which beer will be sold and/or consumed.
Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, the date, time and location of the
event and be on a form provided by the city. Any foreseen violation of this
chapter will entitle the beer board and/or its designee to prevent the use of the
caterer's permit for a certain event. No caterer's permit shall be valid for the
sale and consumption of beer on any premises for where an on-premise retail
permit has been revoked within the past twelve (12) month period. A caterer's
permit cannot be used to operate a "food truck" out of which sales of beer are
8-17
made. A caterer's permit shall only be valid for up to a three (3) consecutive day
period of time at any single location within a one (1) week period. No caterer's
permit shall be used for the sale and consumption of beer on any premises
owned or leased by a person, firm, corporation, limited liability company, or
association having at least a five percent (5%) ownership interest in the
establishment that has had an on-premise retail permit revoked within the past
twelve (12) month period. No caterer's permit shall be valid for the sale or
consumption of beer on any premises within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any
church or public school, as measured on a straight line from the nearest
property line of said church or public school to the nearest point of the premises
where beer is sold or consumed except that this provision shall not be applicable
to permits located within the central business district, the central transition
zone, the Washington Street commercial corridor, and the high intensity
commercial zoning district of the City of Maryville. (as added by Ord. #2014-27,
Sept. 2014)
8-222. Special event permits. The beer board is hereby authorized and
empowered in its discretion to issue a special event permit allowing for the sale
of beer within certain city sponsored or co-sponsored special events within the
physical parameters of the special event zone during the time of the special
event if otherwise provided by resolution of the city council pursuant to title 8,
chapter 5 of the city code. A special event permit shall issue for such sale
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The sale of beer under such special
event permit shall be under such terms, conditions, rules and regulations as the
beer board may establish which are not inconsistent with state law regulating
the sale of beer.
Any person applying for a special event permit shall provide in the
application for the permit a copy of its current valid permit to manufacture beer
and/or sell beer at another location in the United States. Such license or permit
shall be valid and in place at the time of application and at the time of the
special event where beer is contemplated to be sold pursuant to the special event
permit. Any persons selling beer pursuant to this part shall comply with this
chapter unless otherwise indicated as well as all other laws regarding the sale
of beer in effect in the State of Tennessee. The location and duration of the
permit shall be noted on the face of the permit as determined by the beer board.
The city recorder may require such additional releases, affidavits and
information as deemed appropriate as part of the application for a special event
permit. (as added by Ord. #2015-31, April 2015)
8-18
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR STORES
SECTION
8-301. Definitions.
8-302. Selling and distributing generally.
8-303. Licenses required for sale of alcoholic beverages at retail.
8-304. Licensee responsible for officers and agents.
8-305. Location of liquor store.
8-306. Limitations on building containing liquor store.
8-307. Restrictions generally.
8-308. Fees.
8-309. Records kept by licensee.
8-310. Inspections generally.
8-311. Enforcement.
8-312. Certificate of compliance.
8-313. Application.
8-314. Consideration.
8-315. Restrictions upon issuance.
8-316. License from city to operate liquor store.
8-317. Restrictions on local liquor retailer's licenses.
8-318. Restrictions upon licensees and employees.
8-319. Nature of license; suspension or revocation.
8-301. Definitions. Whenever used in this title, the following terms
shall have the following meanings unless the context necessarily requires
otherwise:
(1) "Alcoholic beverage." Alcoholic beverage means and includes
alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, and
wine capable of being consumed by a human being other than medicine or beer
where the latter contains an alcohol content of five percent by weight or less.
Products or beverages including beer containing less than one-half percent
alcohol by volume, other than wine as defined in this section, shall not be
considered alcoholic beverage and shall not be subject to regulation or taxation
pursuant to this chapter unless specifically provided.
(2) "Applicant." A person applying for a local liquor store privilege
license or a certificate of compliance, as the context provides.
(3) "Applicant group." More than one person joining together to apply
for a local liquor store privilege license or certificate of compliance, as the
context provides, to operate a single liquor store pursuant to the same
application.
(4) "Application." The form or forms or other information an applicant
or applicant group is required to file with the city in order to attempt to obtain
8-19
a local liquor store privilege license or certificate of compliance, as the context
provides.
(5) "Certificate of compliance." The certificate required in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 57-3-208, as the same may be amended, supplemented or
replaced, and subject to the provisions set forth in this chapter for issuance of
such a certificate.
(6) "City." The city is the City of Maryville, Tennessee.
(7) "Co-licensees." Persons who together hold a single local liquor store
privilege license for a single liquor store.
(8) "Federal statutes." The statutes of the United States now in effect
or as they may hereafter be changed.
(9) "Inspection fee." The monthly fee a licensee is required by this
chapter to pay, the amount of which is determined by a percentage of the gross
sales of a licensee at a liquor store. In the event of co-licensees holding a local
liquor store privilege license for a single liquor store, such inspection fee shall
be the same as if the local liquor store privilege license were held by a single
licensee.
(10) "Local liquor store privilege license." A local liquor store privilege
license issued under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of authorizing
the holder or holders thereof to engage in the business of selling alcoholic
beverages at retail in the city at a liquor store. Such a local liquor store
privilege license will only be granted to a person or persons who has or have a
valid state liquor retailer's license. One local liquor store privilege license is
necessary for each liquor store to be operated in the city.
(11) "License fee." The annual fee a licensee is required by this chapter
to pay prior to the time of the issuance or renewal of a local liquor store privilege
license. In the event of co-licensees holding a local liquor store privilege license
for a single liquor store, only one license fee is required.
(12) "Licensee." The holder or holders of a local liquor store privilege
license. In the event of co-licensees, each person who receives a certificate of
compliance and local liquor store privilege license shall be a licensee subject to
the rules and regulations herein.
(13) "Liquor store." The building or part of a building where a licensee
conducts any of the business authorized by the local liquor store privilege license
and state liquor license held by such licensee.
(14) "Manufactured." A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling with or without permanent foundation.
(15) "Person." Person means any natural person as well as any
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, firm or association or any
other legal entity recognized by the laws of the State of Tennessee.
(16) "Retail sale" or "sale at retail." The sale to a consumer or to any
person for any purpose other than for resale.
8-20
(17) "State law, rules and regulations." All applicable laws, rules and
regulations of the State of Tennessee applicable to alcoholic beverages as now
in effect or as they may hereafter be changed including, without limitation, the
Local Option Liquor Rules and Regulations of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage
Commission.
(18) "State liquor retailer's license." A license issued by the alcoholic
beverage commission of the State of Tennessee pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-3-201 et seq. permitting its holder to sell alcoholic beverages at
retail in Tennessee.
(19) "Wholesaler." Wholesaler means any person who sells at wholesale
any beverage for the sale of which a license is required under the provisions of
this chapter.
(20) "Wine." Wine means the product of normal alcoholic fermentation
of juice of fresh, sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and
necessary additions to correct defects due to climactic, saccharine, and seasonal
conditions, including champagne, sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic
content not to exceed 21 percent by volume. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug.
2001)
8-302. Selling and distributing generally. It shall be unlawful for
any person to engage in the business of selling or distributing alcoholic
beverages within the corporate limits of the city except as provided by
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57 and by the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder and as provided under this title. (as added by
Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-303. Licenses required for sale of alcoholic beverages at retail.
It shall be lawful for a licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at retail in a liquor
store provided that such sales are made in strict compliance with all federal
statutes, all state laws, rules and regulations, and all provisions of this chapter
and provided that such licensee has a valid and duly issued state liquor
retailer's license and a valid and duly issued local liquor store privilege license
from the city permitting him or her to sell alcoholic beverages at retail. Transfer
of ownership or possession of any alcoholic beverage by a licensee in any manner
other than by retail sale is prohibited. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-304. Licensee responsible for officers and agents. Each licensee
shall be responsible for all acts of such licensee as well as the acts of a
co-licensee, and acts of the licensee's officers, employees, agents and
representatives so that any violation of this chapter by any co-licensee, officer,
employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall constitute a violation of this
chapter by such licensee. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-21
8-305. Location of liquor store. It shall be unlawful for any licensee
to operate or maintain a liquor store in the city unless the liquor store is located
in a zone permitting such business. The zoning districts where liquor stores are
permitted to be located in the city are as follows: Business and Transportation
District, High Intensity District, Washington Street Commercial Corridor,
Central Business District, and Central Business Support Zone. Such liquor
store shall not be located within 150 feet of any church, school, public library or
public park as measured along a straight line from the nearest property line of
any such establishment to the front door of the liquor store. No liquor store
shall be located where the operation of a liquor store at the premises
contemplated by an application would unreasonably interfere with public
health, safety or morals. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-306. Limitations on building containing liquor store. All liquor
stores shall be a permanent type of construction in a material and design
approved by city council. No liquor store shall be located in a manufactured or
other movable or prefabricated type of building. All liquor stores shall have
night light surrounding the outside of the premises and shall be equipped with
a functioning burglar alarm system on the inside of the premises. The minimum
square footage of the liquor store display area shall be 1,800 square feet. Full,
free and unobstructed vision shall be afforded to and from the street and public
highway to the interior of the liquor store by way of large windows in the front
and to the extent practical to the sides of the building containing the liquor
store. All liquor stores shall be subject to applicable zoning, building, life safety
and city land development regulations unless specifically stated otherwise
herein. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-307. Restrictions generally. (1) Entertainment devices and seating
forbidden. No form of entertainment, including pinball machines, music
machines or similar devices shall be permitted in any liquor store. No seating
facilities, other than for employees of the liquor store, shall be permitted in any
liquor store.
(2) Time and days of operation. No liquor store shall be open and no
licensee shall sell, give away, or dispense alcoholic beverages except during the
hours of eight o'clock A.M. (8:00 A.M.) and eleven o'clock P.M. (11:00 P.M.) on
Monday through Saturday and between ten o'clock A.M. (10:00 A.M.) and eleven
o'clock P.M. (11 :00 P.M.) on Sunday. A liquor store shall not sell, give away or
dispense alcoholic beverages on Christmas, Thanksgiving or Easter.
(3) Deleted.
(4) Consumption on premises of liquor store. It shall be unlawful for
any licensee to sell any alcoholic beverage for consumption in such licensee's
liquor store or on the premises used by the licensee in connection therewith. It
shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in a liquor
store or in the immediate vicinity of a liquor store.
8-22
(5) Advertising. Advertising signage must be in conformance with all
applicable requirements of state law and the administrative regulations of the
Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. The size, height and placement of
signs for liquor stores shall be governed by the sign regulations set forth in
title 14 of the Maryville Municipal Code (Zoning and Land Use Control),
§ 14-218 Signs.
(6) Off premises business. All retail sales of alcoholic beverages shall
be confined to the premises of the liquor store. No curb service is permitted, nor
shall there be permitted drive-in windows. No licensee shall employee any
canvasser, agent, solicitor, or other representative for the purpose of receiving
an order from a consumer for any alcoholic beverages at the residence or place
of business of such consumer nor shall any licensee receive or accept any such
order which shall have been solicited and received at the residence or place of
business of such consumer. This paragraph shall not be construed as to prohibit
the solicitation by a state licensed wholesaler of any order from any licensed
retailer at the licensed premises. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001, and
amended by Ord. #2004-41, Nov. 2004, Ord. #2011-14, April 2011, and Ord.
#2018-26, Aug. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
8-308. Fees. (1) Amounts generally. There is hereby levied on each
licensee an inspection fee of up to eight percent (8%), with the exact amount of
such percentage to be determined from time to time by city council,1 on the gross
purchase price of all alcoholic beverages acquired by the licensee for retail sale
from any wholesaler or any other source.
(2) Collection. Collection of such inspection fee shall be made by the
wholesaler or other source vending to the licensee at the time the sale is made
to the licensee. Payment of the inspection fee by the collecting wholesaler or
other source shall be made to the city recorder on or before the twentieth day of
each calendar month for all collections in the preceding calendar month.
Nothing herein shall relieve the licensee of the obligation of payment of the
inspection fee, and it shall be the licensee's duty to see that the payment of the
inspection fee for his or her liquor store is made to the city recorder on or before
the twentieth day of each calendar month for the preceding month. Wholesalers
collecting and remitting the inspection fee to the city shall be entitled to
reimbursement for this collection service in a sum equal to five percent of the
total amount of inspection fees collected and remitted, such reimbursement to
be deducted and shown on the monthly report to the city.
(3) Reports. The city recorder shall prepare and make available to
each wholesaler and other source vending alcoholic beverages to licensees
sufficient forms for the monthly report of inspection fees payable by such
licensee making purchases from such wholesaler or other source. Such
wholesaler shall timely complete and return the forms and the required
information and inspection fees within the time specified above.
1Ordinances setting the inspection fees are of record in the office of the
city recorder.
8-23
(4) Failure to pay fees. The failure to pay the inspection fees and to
make the required reports accurately and within the time required by this
chapter shall, at the sole direction of the city manager, be cause for suspension
of the offending licensee's local liquor store privilege license for as much as
thirty (30) days and, at the sole discretion of the city council, be cause for
revocation of such local liquor store privilege license. Each such action may be
taken by giving written notice thereof to the licensee, no hearing with respect
to such an offense being required. If a licensee has his license revoked,
suspended or otherwise removed and owes the city inspection fees at the time
of such suspension, revocation, or removal the city attorney may timely file the
necessary action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction for recovery of such
inspection fees. Further, each licensee who fails to pay or have paid on his or
her behalf the inspection fees imposed hereunder shall be liable to the city for
a penalty on the delinquent amount due in an amount of 10% of the inspection
fee.
(5) Use of fees. All funds derived from inspection fees imposed herein
shall be used to defray expenses in connection with the enforcement of this title
including particularly the payment and compensation of officers, employees, and
other representatives of the city in investigating and inspecting licensees and
applicants and in seeing that all provisions of this title are observed. The city
council finds and declares that the amount of these inspection fees is reasonable,
and that the funds expected to be derived from these inspection fees will be
reasonably required for such purposes. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-309. Records kept by licensee. In addition to any records specified
in the state rules and regulations, each licensee shall keep on file, at such
licensee's liquor store, the following records:
(1) The original invoices of all alcoholic beverages bought by the
licensee;
(2) The original receipts for any alcoholic beverages returned by such
licensee to any wholesaler;
(3) A current daily record of the gross sales by such licensee with
evidence of cash register receipts for each day's sales; and
(4) An accurate record of all alcoholic beverages lost, damaged, or
disposed of other than by sale and showing for each such transaction the date
thereof, the quantity and brands of alcoholic beverages involved and the name
of the person or persons receiving the same.
All such records shall be preserved for a period of at least fifteen (15)
months unless the city recorder gives the licensee written permission to dispose
of such records at an earlier time. In the event of co-licensees holding a single
license, one set of records per liquor store satisfies the requirements of this part.
(as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-24
8-310. Inspections generally. The city manager, the city recorder, the
city finance director, the chief of police or the authorized representatives or
agents of any of them are authorized to examine the premises, books, papers
and records of any liquor store at any time the liquor store is open for business
for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being
observed. Refusal to permit such examination shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall constitute sufficient reason for revocation of the local liquor
store privilege license of the offending licensee or for the refusal to renew the
local liquor store privilege license of the offending license. (as added by
Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-311. Enforcement. Any violation of the terms of this chapter shall be
punishable under the city's general penalty clause and, in the discretion of the
city council, by any combination of a fine of up to $500.00 per violation, or
temporary suspension or permanent revocation of the local liquor store privilege
license where appropriate. Enforcement provisions are also applicable as found
under the state law. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-312. Certificate of compliance. As a condition precedent to the
issuance of a state liquor retailer's license by the state alcoholic beverage
commission, city council may authorize the issuance of certificates of compliance
by the city according to the terms contained herein. (as added by Ord. #2001-28,
Aug. 2001)
8-313. Application. (1) Filing--content. An applicant or applicant
group for a liquor store shall file with the city recorder a completed written
application on a form to be provided by the city recorder which shall contain all
of the following information and whatever additional information the city
council or city manager may require:
(a) The name and street address of each person to have an
interest, direct or indirect, in the liquor store as an owner, partner,
stockholder or otherwise. In the event that a corporation, partnership,
limited liability company or other legally recognized entity is an applicant
or member of an applicant group, each person with an interest therein
must be disclosed and must provide the information on the application
provided by the city;
(b) The name of the liquor store proposed;
(c) The address of the liquor store proposed and its zoning
designation,
(d) The statement that an individual applicant has been a
resident of Blount County, Tennessee for at least two (2) years
immediately prior to the time the application is filed, or in the case of an
applicant group, that at least one of the members of the applicant group
8-25
has been a resident of Blount County, Tennessee for at least two (2) years
prior to the time the application is filed.
(e) A statement that the persons receiving the requested license
to the best of their knowledge if awarded the certificate of compliance
could comply with all the requirements for obtaining the required licenses
under state law and the provisions of this chapter for the operation of a
liquor store in the city.
(f) The agreement of each applicant or each member of an
applicant group, as appropriate, to comply with all applicable laws and
ordinances and with the Rules and Regulations of the Tennessee
Alcoholic Beverage Commission with reference to the sale of alcoholic
beverages and the agreement of each applicant or each member of an
applicant group as to the validity and the reasonableness of these
regulations, inspection fees, and taxes provided in this title with
reference to the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(2) Further documentation. The application form shall be
accompanied by a copy of each questionnaire form and other material to be filled
out by the applicant or each member of the applicant group with the Tennessee
Alcoholic Beverage Commission in connection with the same application and
shall be accompanied by five (5) copies of a scale plan drawn to a scale of not less
than one inch equals twenty feet giving the following information:
(a) The shape, size and location of the lot which the liquor store
is to be operated under the license,
(b) The shape, size, height and location of all buildings whether
they are to be erected, altered, moved or existing upon the lot,
(c) The off-street parking space and off-street loading and
unloading space to be provided including the vehicular access to be
provided from these areas to a public street, and
(d) The identification of every parcel of land within 150 feet of
the lot upon which the liquor store is to be operated indicating ownership
thereof and the location of any structures thereon and the use being made
of every such parcel.
(3) Signature. The application form shall be signed and verified by
each person to have any interest in the liquor store either as an owner, partner,
stockholder or otherwise.
(4) Misrepresentation--concealment of fact--duty to amend. If any
applicant, member of an applicant group, or licensee misrepresents or conceals
any material fact in any application form or as to any other information required
to be disclosed by this chapter, such applicant, member of an applicant group,
or licensee shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter and
his or her application may be disregarded or his or her license restricted or
revoked as deemed appropriate by city council. Further, no sale, transfer or gift
of any interest of any nature, either financial or otherwise, in a liquor store shall
8-26
be made without first obtaining a replacement license from the city upon the
approval of the city council.
(5) Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a non refundable
$300.00 investigation fee. One application fee per applicant group is sufficient.
(as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-314. Consideration. In issuing certificates of compliance (which shall
total no more than three (3) in the corporate limits), the city council will
consider all applications filed before a closing date to be fixed by it and select
from such applications the persons deemed by it, in its sole discretion, to have
the qualifications required by law and the most suitable circumstances for the
lawful operation of the liquor store without regard to the order of time in which
the applications are filed. Such persons and only such persons shall receive
certificates of compliance issued by the city. Applications shall be retained by
the city until such time as all liquor stores for which certificates of compliance
have been issued by the city are open for business. At that time, all pending
applications which did not result in the granting of a certificate of compliance
after consideration by city council will expire and be disposed of by the city.
Applications can only be submitted to the city during the time frame the city
council has set for receipt of such applications. Applications and all matters
submitted with or as part of such applications at the time they are submitted
are the sole and exclusive property of the City of Maryville and constitute public
records open to public inspection. If an additional certificate of compliance is
made available by council adding to the number of liquor stores, the application
process for the additional certificate of compliance shall not affect adversely any
previous holder of a local liquor retailer's license and such previous holder's
license shall remain in full force and effect. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug.
2001, and amended by Ord. #2006-43, Nov. 2006, and Ord. #2016-21, Oct. 2016)
8-315. Restrictions upon issuance. (1) Additional certificates of
compliance. The city council shall refuse to issue a certificate of compliance
whenever the number of previously issued and outstanding certificates of
compliance when added to the number of outstanding licenses equals the
number of licenses authorized by this chapter.
(2) No violation of chapter. No certificate of compliance shall be issued
unless a license issued on the basis thereof can be exercised without violating
any provisions of this chapter.
(3) Prerequisites of issuance. The city manager upon approval of city
council shall not sign any certificate of compliance for any applicant or applicant
group until:
(a) Such application has been filed with the city recorder;
(b) The location stated in the certificate has been approved by
the city council as a suitable location for the operation of a liquor store;
and
8-27
(c) The application has been considered at a public meeting of
the city council and approved by a vote of at least three members thereof.
(4) Time period for action. Any applicant or applicant group who has
obtained a certificate of compliance as provided herein must, unless an
extension is granted by city council, within six months open a liquor store in the
city or said certificate will be revoked by the passage of this amount of time and
a certification thereof will be sent to the Alcoholic Beverage Commission of the
State of Tennessee and the local liquor license issued pursuant to such
application shall be considered canceled and revoked. (as added by
Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-316. License from city to operate liquor store. After an applicant
or applicant group receives a license from the State of Tennessee to operate a
retail liquor store pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 57-3-101 et seq.,
he or she shall apply to the city recorder for a local liquor retailer's license to
operate a retail liquor store pursuant to the following terms, conditions and
restrictions. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-317. Restrictions on local liquor retailer's licenses.
(1) Maximum number of licenses. No more than three (3) local liquor
store privilege licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages at liquor stores shall
be issued under this chapter representing no more than three (3) liquor stores
and no more than three (3) certificates of compliance issued in the city.
(2) Term renewal. Each license shall expire on December 31st of each
year. A license shall be subject to renewal each year by compliance with all
applicable federal statutes, state statutes, state rules and regulations and the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Display. A licensee shall display and post and keep displayed and
posted his or her license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's liquor store at
all times when any activity or business authorized thereunder is being done by
the licensee.
(4) Transfer. A licensee or co-licensee shall not sell, assign or transfer
his license or any interest therein to any other person. No license shall be
transferred from one location to another location without the express permission
of city council.
(5) Fees. A license fee of $500.00 is due at the time of application for
a license and annually prior to January 1 each year thereafter. The initial
license shall remain in effect for the remainder of the calendar year when it is
first issued so that the first year may not be a full year period. The license fee
shall be paid to the city recorder before any license shall issue. (as added by
Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001, and amended by Ord. #2006-43, Nov. 2006, and Ord.
#2016-21, Oct. 2016)
8-28
8-318. Restrictions upon licensees and employees. (1) Initial
qualifications. To be eligible to apply for or to receive a license, an applicant or
in the case of an applicant group, each member of the applicant group, must
satisfy all of the requirements of the state statutes and of the state rules and
regulations for the holder of a liquor retailer's license.
(2) Public officers and employees. No license shall be issued to a
person who is a holder of a public office either appointed or elected or who is a
public employee either national, state, city or county. It shall be unlawful or any
such person to have any interest in such liquor store either directly or indirectly,
either proprietary or by means of a loan or participation in the profits of any
such business. This prohibition shall not apply however to uncompensated,
appointed members of boards or commissions who have no duties covering the
regulation of alcoholic beverages or beer.
(3) Felons. No licensee shall be a person who has been convicted of a
felony within ten (10) years prior to the time he or she or the legal entity which
he or she is connected shall receive a license; provided that this provision shall
not apply to any person who has been so convicted but whose rights of
citizenship have been restored or judgment of infamy has been removed by a
court of competent jurisdiction. In case of such conviction occurring after a
license has been issued and received, the license shall immediately be revoked
if such convicted felon is an individual licensee and, if not, the partnership,
corporation, limited liability company or association with which he or she is
connected shall immediately discharge him or her and he or she shall have no
further interest therein or else such license shall be immediately revoked.
(4) Employee felons. No licensee shall employ in the storage, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic beverages any person who within ten (10) years prior
to the date of his or her employment shall have been convicted of a felony. In
the case that an employee is convicted of a felony while he is employed by a
licensee at a liquor store, he or she shall be immediately discharged after his or
her conviction provided that this provision shall not apply to any person who has
been so convicted but whose rights of citizenship have been restored or judgment
of infamy has been removed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(5) Liquor offenses. No license shall be issued to any person who
within ten (10) years preceding application for such license or permit shall have
been convicted of any offense under the laws of this state or any state or of the
United States regulating the sale, possession, transportation, storing,
manufacturing, or otherwise handling of intoxicating liquors or beer who has
during such period been engaged in business, alone or with others, in violation
of any such laws or rules and regulations.
(6) Disclosure of interest. It shall be unlawful for any person to have
ownership in or participate in, either directly or indirectly, the profits of any
liquor store unless his or her interest in such business and the nature, extent
and character thereof shall appear on the application or if the interest is
8-29
acquired after the issuance of a license unless it be fully disclosed to the city
manager and approved by him or her in a timely manner.
(7) Age. No licensee shall be a person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years for the physical storage, sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages or to permit any such person under such age in his place of
business to engage in the storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages.
(8) Interest in only one liquor store. A person shall have an interest,
either direct or indirect, in no more than one liquor store licensed under this
title in the City of Maryville. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-319. Nature of license; suspension or revocation. The issuance
of a license does not vest a property right in the licensee but is a privilege
subject to revocation or suspension. Any license shall be subject to suspension
or revocation by city council for any violation of this title by the licensee or by
any person whose acts the licensee is responsible. The licensee shall be given
reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the city council
suspends or revokes a license for any violation unless provided otherwise
specifically herein. If the licensee is convicted of a violation of this title by a
final judgment in any court and the operation of the judgment is not suspended
by an appeal, upon written notice to the licensee, the city manager may
immediately suspend the license for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, and
the city council may revoke the license on the basis of such conviction thereafter.
A license shall be subject to revocation or suspension without a hearing
whenever such action is expressly authorized by other provisions of this chapter
stating the effect of specific violations. (as added by Ord. #2001-28, Aug. 2001)
8-30
CHAPTER 4
PROOF OF AGE
SECTION
8-401. Identification required prior to the sale of beer or alcoholic beverages.
8-402. Signs required.
8-403. Exception; on premises consumption permit holders.
8-404. Exception; persons 60 years of age or greater.
8-405. Violation and penalty.
8-401. Identification required prior to the sale of beer or
alcoholic beverages. Any person selling beer or alcoholic beverages within the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville, Tennessee shall be required to have
produced to him or her a facially valid government issued identification showing
that the age of the prospective purchaser of the beer or alcoholic beverages is
twenty-one years of age or older. If such identification is not produced by the
prospective purchaser, the beer or alcohol beverages shall not be sold. Such
identification shall be required prior to the sale of beer or alcoholic beverages
regardless of the apparent age of the prospective purchaser. The identification
provided shall be a document issued by a state governmental agency. (as added
by Ord. #2002-29, Sept. 2002)
8-402. Signs required. Any establishment within the corporate limits
of the City of Maryville, Tennessee which sells beer or alcoholic beverages shall
prominently display on the premises a sign not less than 6 inches high and 10
inches wide reading: "A minor attempting to purchase alcoholic beverages will
be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law." Such establishment shall further
prominently display a sign not less than 6 inches high and 10 inches wide
reading: "Any person selling beer or alcoholic beverages within the corporate
limits of the City of Maryville, Tennessee shall be required to have produced to
him or her a facially valid government issued identification showing that the age
of the prospective purchaser of the beer or alcoholic beverages is twenty-one
years of age or older. If such identification is not produced by the prospective
purchaser, the beer or alcohol beverages shall not be sold. Such identification
shall be required prior to the sale of beer or alcoholic beverages regardless of the
apparent age of the prospective purchaser. The identification provided shall be
a document issued by a state governmental agency."
Signs required under this part shall be purchased by each license holder
of any beer, liquor or alcoholic beverage sales license in the City of Maryville at
a reasonable price from the City of Maryville. Signs must be posted within 90
8-31
days of the final passage of this chapter.1 It will not be a violation of this section
to fail to post such signs until 90 days thereafter. (as added by Ord. #2002-29,
Sept. 2002)
8-403. Exception; on premises consumption permit holders. Any
holder of a permit allowing on premises consumption of beer or alcoholic
beverages in the city limits shall be permitted to serve beer or alcoholic
beverages to a person without seeing identification provided in § 8-401 of this
chapter if in the discretion of a manager on the premises a person wishing to
purchase such beverages beyond a reasonable doubt is twenty one years of age
or older. (as added by Ord. #2002-29, Sept. 2002)
8-404. Exception; persons 60 years of age or greater. Any person
showing state issued identification proving that their age is sixty (60) years of
age or greater shall not be required to show a photo identification but instead
shall be allowed to purchase alcoholic beverages based on the state issued
identification which does not include a photograph. (as added by Ord. #2002-36,
Nov. 2002)
8-405. Violation and penalty. Violation of any part of this chapter
alone shall not subject a permit holder to revocation of his or her beer permit or
permit to sell liquor or alcoholic beverages as issued by the City of Maryville.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as follows:
First offense: Written warning to permit holder and person who
failed to require presentation of identification as set
forth herein, if appropriate.
Second offense: Up to $200 fine by beer board to permit holder and up
to $50 fine in city court for person who failed to
require presentation of identification as set forth
herein, as appropriate.
Third offense: Discretion of beer board and city court as
appropriate.
(as added by Ord. #2002-29, Sept. 2002)
1This chapter passed final reading September 3, 2002.
8-32
CHAPTER 5
CERTAIN SPECIAL EVENTS ALLOWING FOR CONSUMPTION AND
POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND/OR BEER
ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION
8-501. Public consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages and/or beer
permitted on public property in downtown area in the special event
zone in certain defined parameters during city sponsored or
co-sponsored special events.
8-502. Definitions.
8-503. Violation.
8-501. Public consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages
and/or beer permitted on public property in downtown area in the
special event zone in certain defined parameters during city sponsored
or co-sponsored special events. It shall be lawful for any person to consume
and possess alcoholic beverages and/or beer on public property in the downtown
area during special events within the special event zone if the person is
otherwise legally permitted to possess and consume alcoholic beverages and/or
beer if such consumption is expressly approved by city council for the special
event. Such person who consumes and possesses alcoholic beverages and/or beer
if permitted by city council on public property will not be considered in violation
of city code provisions that otherwise prohibit public possession and
consumption of alcoholic beverages and beer so long as such activity is within
the physical parameters of the special event zone during a permitted special
event. Alcoholic beverages and beer consumed or possessed during a special
event in a special event zone on public property shall be consumed in a plastic
container. There shall be no glass containers of alcoholic beverages or beer
permitted on public property during a special event in a special event zone. (as
added by Ord. #2013-06, March 2013, and replaced by Ord. #2015-32, April
2015)
8-502. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words shall have the meanings described:
(1) "Alcoholic beverages" is defined to include alcohol, spirits, liquor,
wine, high alcoholic content beer, and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits or
wine capable of being consumed by a human being other than patented medicine
or beer as defined below.
(2) "Beer" means beer, ale or malt beverages or any other beverage
having an alcohol content of not more than eight percent (8%) by weight, except
wine as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-101; provided, however,
that no more than forty-nine percent (49%) of the overall alcoholic content of
8-33
such beverage may be derived from the addition of flavors and other
non-beverage ingredients containing alcohol.
(3) "Downtown area." The boundaries of the designated downtown area
are as follows:
(a) Beginning at a point in the intersection of U.S. Highway 321
and Court Street and continuing along Court Street in a northwesterly
direction to the bridge over Pistol Creek.
(b) Then following the course of Pistol Creek downstream in a
northeasterly, northwesterly and southwesterly direction around the
Maryville central business district to a point below the dam for the
Greenbelt Lake where the creek abuts the right-of-way of McCammon
Avenue.
(c) Then following McCammon Avenue in a southeasterly
direction to its intersection with McGee Street.
(d) Then following McGee Street in a southwesterly direction to
the southwestern property line of Maryville Towers.
(e) Then in a southeasterly direction along the property line of
Maryville Towers, continuing in a southeasterly direction along Cates
Street, and the extension of the Cates Street right-of-way to U.S. 321.
(f) Then in a northeasterly direction along U.S. Highway 321
to Court Street, being the point of beginning.
(4) "Public property" shall mean any property owned or maintained by
the City of Maryville, Blount County, Tennessee, or any public utility within the
geographical boundaries of the special event zone.
(5) "Special events" shall be an event sponsored or co-sponsored
officially by the City of Maryville within certain times where possession and
consumption of alcohol is permitted by the resolution providing for sponsorship
or co-sponsorship of the special event within the special event zone in the
downtown area. It shall be entirely within the discretion of the city council to
approve or disapprove by resolution a special event to qualify as one that allows
the public consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages or beer as set forth
herein. All applications for such special event shall be made through the city
special events coordinator who will then present the resolution to city council if
the event meets the criteria for such city sponsored or co-sponsored special event
or promulgated by the special events coordinator.
(6) "Special event zone." The special event zone shall be a defined area
within the downtown area approved on a case by case basis and the resolution
allowing the city sponsored or co-sponsored special event to take place where
public consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages and/or beer is allowed
during a special event. The city police will reasonably mark the special event
zone with tape, sign age or otherwise to allow participants in the special event
to know the parameters of the special event zone. The special event zone will be
delineated by reference to the specific landmarks within the downtown area or
by metes and bounds description in the resolution providing for the special
8-34
event. (as added by Ord. #2013-06, March 2013, and amended by Ord. #2015-32,
April 2015, and Ord. #2017-03, March 2017)
8-503. Violation. Any person violating or interfering with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished under the general
penalty clause of the municipal code. (as added by Ord. #2013-06, March 2013)
8-35
CHAPTER 6
SALE OF WINE IN RETAIL FOOD STORES
SECTION
8-601. Definitions.
8-602. License required for sale of wine in retail food stores.
8-603. Certificate of compliance.
8-604. Application for certificate of compliance.
8-605. Issuance of certificate of compliance; appeal.
8-606. Full and accurate disclosure required.
8-607. Expiration of certificate of compliance; new application.
8-608. Licensee responsible for officers and agents.
8-609. Enforcement.
8-610. Chapter not applicable to beer.
8-601. Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the following meanings unless the context necessarily requires
otherwise:
(1) "Applicant" means a person applying for a certificate of compliance.
(2) "Application" means the form or forms or other information an
applicant is required to file with the city in order to attempt to obtain a
certificate of compliance.
(3) "Certificate" or "certificate of compliance" means the certificate
required pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-806, as the same may
be amended, supplemented or replaced, and subject to the provisions set forth
in this chapter for issuance of such a certificate.
(4) "City" means the City of Maryville, Tennessee.
(5) "License" means a license issued by the alcoholic beverage
commission of the State of Tennessee pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 57-3-803, as the same may be amended, supplemented or replaced.
(6) "Licensee" means any person holding a license, as that term is
defined in this chapter.
(7) "Person" means any natural person as well as any corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, firm or association or any other legal
entity recognized by the laws of the State of Tennessee.
(8) "Retail food store" means an establishment that is open to the
public and that derives at least twenty percent (20%) of its taxable sales from
the retail sale of food and food ingredients for human consumption taxed at the
rate provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-6-228(a) and that has retail
floor space of at least one thousand two hundred square feet (1,200 sq. ft.).
(9) "At retail" means a sale to any person for any purpose other than
for resale.
(10) "Wine" means the product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of
the juice of fresh, sound, ripe grapes, as further defined by Tennessee Code
8-36
Annotated, § 57-3-802(2), as the same may be amended, supplemented or
replaced. (as added by Ord. #2016-10, March 2016)
8-602. License required for sale of wine in retail food stores.
Beginning on January 1, 2019, wine may be sold in retail food stores but only
between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. (8:00 A.M.) and eleven o'clock P.M.
(11:00 P.M.) Monday through Saturday and between the hours of ten o'clock
A.M. (10:00 A.M.) and eleven o'clock P.M. (11:00 P.M.) on Sunday. (as added by
Ord. #2016-10, March 2016, and replaced by Ord. #2018-26, Aug. 2018
Ch17_2-5_19)
8-603. Certificate of compliance. As a condition precedent to the
issuance of a state license for the sale of wine in a retail food store, an applicant
for a license shall first obtain a certificate of compliance from the city, pursuant
to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-3-806. A certificate of compliance issued
under this chapter shall be valid only for the premises proposed in the
application, and any change of location of the business shall be cause for
immediate nullification of the certificate. No certificate of compliance shall be
issued for the sale of wine in a retail food store where such store would be a
prohibited use under the city's zoning ordinance. (as added by Ord. #2016-10,
March 2016)
8-604. Application for certificate of compliance. The application for
a certificate of compliance shall be submitted in writing on the form furnished
by the city recorder and shall contain the following information and whatever
additional information the city may require:
(1) The name and street address of each person who will be in charge
of or in control of the business, and a statement that the applicant or applicants
who are to be in actual charge of the business have not been convicted of a felony
within a ten (10) year period immediately preceding the date of the application
with the state alcoholic beverage commission and, if a corporation, that the
executive officers or those in control have not been convicted of a felony within
a ten (10) year period immediately preceding the date of the application;
(2) The name and address of the proposed retail food store applying for
a license, and a statement that the applicant or applicants have secured a
location for the business, which complies with all zoning laws of the city;
(3) That the applicant or applicants have complied with this chapter
and the applicable state laws on retail food store wine sales. (as added by Ord.
#2016-10, March 2016)
8-605. Issuance of certificate of compliance; appeal. Upon
verification that the applicant meets the requirements of Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-3-806(b), the city mayor may issue the certificate without action
by the city council. Alternatively, the city council may issue the certificate upon
signature by a majority of its members. A failure on the part of the issuing
authority to grant or deny the applicant's request for the certificate of
8-37
compliance within sixty (60) days of the written application shall be deemed a
granting of the certificate. If an applicant is denied a certificate of compliance,
the applicant may seek review of such denial by instituting an action in
chancery court within sixty (60) days of the denial. (as added by Ord. #2016-10,
March 2016)
8-606. Full and accurate disclosure required. Each application for
a certificate of compliance under this chapter shall identify each person who is
to be in actual charge of the business and, if a partnership, limited liability
company or corporation, each executive officer or manager of the partnership,
limited liability company or corporation and each individual in control of the
business. For the purposes of this section, an individual who owns or have an
ownership interest in at least fifty percent (50%) of the stock of a business is
considered to be in control of the business.
Misrepresentation of a material fact, or concealment of a material fact
required to be shown in the application for a certificate, shall be a violation of
this chapter. The city may refuse to issue a certificate if, upon investigation, the
city finds that the applicant for a certificate has concealed or misrepresented
any material fact or circumstance concerning the operation of the business, or
if the interest of any person in the operation of the business is not truly stated
in the application, or in case of any fraud or false statements by the applicant
pertaining to any matter relating to the operation of the business. All
information, written statements, affidavits, evidence or other documents
submitted in support of an application are a part of the application. (as added
by Ord. #2016-10, March 2016)
8-607. Expiration of certificate of compliance; new application.
A certificate for the sale of wine in a retail food store shall expire and become
void if the applicant to whom the certificate was granted fails to apply for a
license from the alcoholic beverage commission within six (6) months of the date
of the certificate, or if the retail food store for which a certificate was granted is
not in operation within twelve (12) months following the issuance of the
certificate; provided, however, that the mayor or a majority of the city council
may, upon written request of the applicant, extend the expiration date of a
certificate for up to three (3) additional months in the event of circumstances
beyond the applicant's control. If a certificate becomes void, no new certificate
may be issued to the same applicant unless a new application is submitted and
all applicable requirements of this chapter are met at the time the new
application is received. (as added by Ord. #2016-10, March 2016)
8-608. Licensee responsible for officers and agents. Each licensee
shall be responsible for all acts of such licensee as well as the acts of a
co-licensee, and acts of the licensee's officers, employees, agents and
representatives so that any violation of this chapter by any co-licensee, officer,
8-38
employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall constitute a violation of this
chapter by such licensee. (as added by Ord. #2016-10, March 2016)
8-609. Enforcement. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable under the city's general penalty clause and, in the discretion
of the city council, by a fine of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation or
revocation of the certificate of compliance. The mayor may revoke a certificate
of compliance, provided that the applicant or licensee may appeal the revocation
to the city council, which may reverse the mayor's action by majority vote.
Enforcement provisions are also applicable as found under the state law. (as
added by Ord. #2016-10, March 2016)
8-610. Chapter not applicable to beer. No provision of this chapter
shall be considered or construed as in any way modifying, changing or
restricting the rules and regulations governing the sale, storage, transportation,
etc. or tax upon beer as defined in City Code § 8-201. (as added by Ord.
#2016-10, March 2016, and amended by Ord. #2017-03, March 2017)
9-1
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.
3. TAXICABS.
4. [REPEALED.]
5. BEGGING.
6. HELICOPTERS.
7. CABLE TELEVISION.
8. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
9. CABLE TELEVISION.
10. CARNIVALS AND FAIRS.
11. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS AND FOOD TRUCKS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
9-101. "Going out of business" sales.
9-102. Garage sales.
9-103. Public rummage sales.
9-104. Flea markets.
9-105. Farmers' markets.
9-106. Consignment stores and thrift shops.
9-107. Private vehicle sales.
9-101. "Going out of business" sales. It shall be unlawful for any
person falsely to represent a sale as being a "going out of business" sale. A
"going out of business" sale, for the purposes of this section, shall be a "fire sale,"
"bankrupt sale," "loss of lease sale," or any other sale made in anticipation of the
termination of a business at its present location. When any person, after
advertising a "going out of business" sale, adds to his stock or fails to go out of
1Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, wiring and housing regulations: title 12.
Junkyards: title 13.
Liquor and beer regulations: title 8.
Noise reductions: title 11.
Zoning: title 14.
9-2
business within ninety (90) days he shall prima facie be deemed to have violated
this section. (1985 Code, § 5-101)
9-102. Garage sales. (1) For the purposes of this section the following
terms are defined and shall be construed as follows:
(a) "Garage sale" shall be the offering for sale or exchange, or
the sale or exchange, to the public of any personal property of any kind
or description at a sale held upon privately owned residential property.
(b) "Residential property" is any real estate, lot or tract in the
City of Maryville which is used primarily for residential purposes.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation
or association to advertise, promote, conduct or hold any garage sale within the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville except as herein provided.
(3) Not more than two (2) garage sales may be held during any
calendar year at any one (1) residential property, the duration of each sale not
to exceed three (3) days, and provided further that before any such sale may be
held application to hold said sale must be made by the occupant of said property
to the city inspection officer who shall issue a written permit without charge or
fee therefor, and provided further that all personal property offered for sale or
sold at said sale shall be owned at the time of sale by the occupant of said
residential property and shall not have been purchased by the occupant for the
purpose of resale. In the case of a coordinated neighborhood garage sale,
residents may apply for their permits individually, or a representative of the
neighborhood can apply on behalf of the various participants, so long as the
representative can identify the names and addresses of all the participants. In
either case, the sale shall count toward the two (2) permissible annual garage
sales for each participating residential location.
(4) Court-ordered sales and sales by executors or administrators in the
settlement of estates are excepted from the provisions of this section.
(5) Sales of personal property which are advertised by newspaper or
radio for private appointment only and are in addition not advertised by sign or
signs either on or off of the premises and are in addition not exhibited on the
premises in such manner as to indicate a public sale, are exempt from the
provisions of this section.
(6) As set forth in subsection (1)(a) above, the term "garage sale"
applies only to sales held by residents upon privately owned residential
property. Private individuals cannot hold garage sales off-site on non-residential
property, even with the property owner's permission.
(7) All businesses and all business establishments which are properly
licensed to conduct retail or wholesale sales are exempt from the provisions of
this section. Said businesses may display their goods out of doors and/or hold
"sidewalk sales" if allowed by the zoning and land use ordinance and; as long as
adequate parking is retained for customers; as long as such display activities
and/or outdoor sales areas do not create traffic congestion on adjoining streets
9-3
and rights-of-way; and as long as any designated fire lanes are adequately
protected and preserved from any encroachments. (1985 Code, § 5-102, as
amended by Ord. #2012-06, Feb. 2012)
9-103. Public rummage sales. (1) For the purposes of this section, the
term "public rummage sale" is defined as a sale that is organized or operated for
charitable, religious, community or educational purposes and which is conducted
by an organization, corporation, church, civic club, etc., where members of the
group donate or solicit items for the organization to sell from the organization's
location for the purpose of raising money for use by themselves or others. For
the purpose of this section, "sale" means either a cash transaction or the giving
away of items in return for a donation.
(2) Not more than two (2) outdoor public rummage sales may be held
during any calendar year at any one (1) location, the duration of the sale may
not exceed three (3) days, and provided further that before any such sale may
be held an application to hold said sale must be made by an officer or authorized
representative of said organization.
(3) Indoor public rummage sales may be held no more than once a
month for no more than two (2) consecutive days, as long as no goods are
displayed out of doors.
(4) A public rummage sale must be held on property that is used
primarily for non-residential purposes. Organizations that do not have their own
physical location may apply for a public rummage sale permit on an
independently owned site with the property owner's written permission as part
of the application.
(5) Any site proposed for a public rummage sale must have adequate
area to allow for the outdoor display of goods, if any, and enough parking to
accommodate customers without creating traffic congestion on adjoining streets
and rights-of-way. (as added by Ord. #2012-06, Feb. 2012)
9-104. Flea markets. For the purposes of this section, the term "flea
market" is defined as a building or portion of a building where individual
market stalls or spaces are rented or leased by persons on a daily or other basis,
to display, buy, sell, exchange or deal in new or used goods and services. Flea
markets are sometimes referred to as swap meets, and would also include
antique malls and similar uses. In the City of Maryville flea markets must be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building. Outdoor flea markets are not
permitted. Flea markets are regulated as retail businesses and must have a
current business license and shall be located and developed in accordance with
applicable zoning and building code regulations. (as added by Ord. #2012-06,
Feb. 2012)
9-105. Farmers' markets. For the purposes of this section, the term
"farmers' market" is defined as an occasional or periodic market, with goods
9-4
offered for sale to the general public by individual sellers from open-air or
semi-enclosed facilities or temporary structures. Food and agricultural products
that are primarily local in origin must comprise the majority of items for sale,
along with horticultural products and locally produced craft items. Secondhand
goods cannot be offered for sale. (as added by Ord. #2012-06, Feb. 2012)
9-106. Consignment stores and thrift shops. (1) For the purposes
of this section, the following terms are defined and shall be construed as follows:
(a) "Consignment store" is a retail business establishment in
which the proprietor primarily sells used items (generally clothing)
owned by third parties in return for a percentage of the sales proceeds.
(b) "Thrift shop" is a retail business establishment in which the
proprietor primarily sells used items (generally clothing, household goods
and children's items) that have been acquired through donation or
purchase, with the proprietor retaining the sales proceeds. Some thrift
shops are managed by non-profit organizations that use the proceeds to
support their charitable operations.
(2) Both consignment stores and thrift shops are retail business
operations that must conform to the city's zoning ordinance and its business
licensing requirements. (as added by Ord. #2012-06, Feb. 2012)
9-107. Private vehicle sales. (1) For the purpose of this section, the
following terms are defined and shall be construed as follows:
(a) "Private vehicle sale" shall be the offering for sale or
exchange or the sale of exchange to the public of any vehicle including a
car, truck or motorcycle (or any other type of vehicle that requires a
license for operation on public streets) at a sale held on privately owned
residential property.
(b) "Residential property" is any real estate, lot or tract located
in the City of Maryville which is used primarily for residential purposes.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation
or association to advertise, promote, conduct or hold any private vehicle sale
within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville except as provided herein.
(a) Not more than one (1) private vehicle sales may be held
during any one (1) calendar year at any one (1) residential property. The
vehicle offered for the private vehicle sale shall be owned at the time of
the sale by the occupant of the residential property and shall not have
been purchased by the occupant for the purpose of resale.
(b) Each such private vehicle sale may last no longer than sixty
(60) continuous days.
(c) Court ordered sales and sales by executors or administrators
in the settlement of estates are exempted from the provisions of this
section.
9-5
(d) Sales of vehicles which are advertised by newspaper or radio
for private appointment only and which are not advertised by signs either
on or off the premises or on the vehicle and are not exhibited on the
premises in such a manner to indicate public sale are exempt from the
provisions of this section. (as added by Ord. #2002-33, Oct. 2002, and
renumbered by Ord. #2012-06, Feb. 2012)
9-6
CHAPTER 2
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.1
SECTION
9-201. Permit required.
9-202. Definitions.
9-203. Exemptions.
9-204. Eligibility.
9-205. Permit procedure.
9-206. Business license required.
9-207. Restrictions on permit holders in general.
9-208. Additional restrictions on transient vendors.
9-209. Display of permit, business license, etc.
9-210. Revocation of permit.
9-211. Violation and penalty.
9-212. Suspension of permitting during Foothills Fall Festival.
9-201. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor,
solicitor for charitable or religious purposes, street barker, or transient vendor
to ply his trade within the corporate limits without first obtaining a permit
therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall be
used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. (1985
Code, § 5-201)
9-202. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used
in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning given to them in this
section:
(1) "Peddler" means any person who individually or as an agent or
employee of any firm, corporation, or organization, who has no permanent
regular place of business and who goes from dwelling to dwelling without an
invitation or request from the occupant, or from business to business, or from
place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, or offering personal
services for sale.
(2) "Solicitor" means any person, who individually or as an agent or
employee of any firm, corporation or organization, who goes from dwelling to
dwelling without an invitation or request from the occupant, or from business
to business, or from place to place, or from street to street, taking or attempting
to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, personal property of any
nature whatever for future delivery, or services of any kind or nature, except
1Municipal code reference
Privilege taxes: title 5.
9-7
that the term shall not include solicitors for charitable and religious purposes
as that term is defined below.
(3) "Solicitor for charitable or religious purposes" means any person
who individually or as an agent or employee of any firm, corporation or
organization who goes from dwelling to dwelling without an invitation or
request from the occupant, or from business to business, or from place to place,
or from street to street, soliciting contributions from the public for any
charitable or religious organization. No person, firm, corporation or
organization shall qualify as a solicitor for religious purposes unless it meets one
of the following conditions:
(a) Has a current exemption certificate from the Internal
Revenue Service issued under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Service Code of 1954, as amended.
(b) Is a member of United Way, Community Chest or a similar
"umbrella" organization for charitable or religious organizations
organized and operating in the Blount County area.
(c) Has been in continued existence as a charitable or religious
organization in Blount County for a period of two (2) years prior to the
date of its application for registration under this chapter.
(4) "Street barker" means any person who engages in the business or
conduct as a peddler individually or as an agent or employee of any firm,
corporation or organization during recognized festival or parade days in the city
and who limits his business to selling or offering to sell novelty items and
similar goods in the area of the festival or parade.
(5) "Transient vendor" means any person who individually or as an
agent or employee of any firm, corporation or organization who brings into
temporary premises and exhibits stocks of merchandise to the public, or offers
to perform services or entertainment. Transient vendor does not include any
person selling goods by sample, brochure, or sales catalog for future delivery; or
to sales resulting from the prior invitation to the seller by the owner or occupant
of a business or residence. For purposes of this definition, "merchandise" means
any consumer item that is or is represented to be new or not previously owned
by a consumer, and "temporary premises" means any public or quasi-public
place including a hotel, rooming house, storeroom, building or part of a building,
tent, vacant lot, railroad car, or motor vehicle, which is temporarily occupied for
the purpose of exhibiting stocks of merchandise to the public. Premises are not
temporary if the same person has conducted business at those premises for more
than six (6) consecutive months or has occupied the premises as his or her
permanent residence for more than six (6) consecutive months. (1985 Code,
§ 5-202)
9-203. Exemptions. The terms of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Persons selling at wholesale to dealers, newsboys, bona fide
merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business;
9-8
(2) Persons selling agricultural products, who themselves produced the
products being sold;
(3) Persons involved in fund raising activities or programs by any
public school, and
(4) Craft shows, antique shows, gun shows, auto shows and similar
temporary shows and exhibits which are not open or operating as public
facilities for such particular purpose for more than fourteen (14) days during
any calendar year, except that the owner, manager, operator or promoter of each
such facility shall be required to obtain a business license and shall prior to
opening and operating such facility pay a fee of $100.00 to the City of Maryville
which shall be valid at the particular location for up to fourteen (14) consecutive
days. This exemption does not apply to a carnival or fair as defined in this title.
Instead, a carnival or fair must expressly obtain a transient vendor license in
order to lawfully operate a carnival or fair within the city. (1985 Code, § 5-203,
as amended by Ord. #2003-12, May 2003)
9-204. Eligibility. It is the intent of this section to treat each person,
and each firm, corporation and organization, and each agent for same, and each
person who as an employee or who in any other capacity for such firm,
corporation or organization, is covered by this chapter, as a separate person for
the purposes of investigation and payment of the permit fee.
Individuals, firms, corporations and organizations are eligible for a permit
under this chapter. Persons applying for an individual permit under this
chapter shall complete an application on forms provided by the city, and pay the
permit fee. Agents applying for a permit for a firm, corporation, or organization
under this chapter shall complete a separate application, and pay a separate
permit fee for, the firm, corporation or organization, and the agent and for each
individual who as an employee of, or in any other capacity for, the firm,
corporation or organization, will engage in the business or conduct of a peddler,
solicitor, transient vendor, or street barker. (1985 Code, § 5-204)
9-205. Permit procedure. (1) Application form. The application shall
be sworn to by the applicant, and shall contain:
(a) Name, date of birth, social security number or other
identification number of the applicant, his or her physical description,
and a copy of his or her drivers license.
(b) The following complete addresses and telephone numbers of
the applicant:
(i) Permanent.
(ii) Permanent business.
(iii) Local residential.
(iv) Local business.
(c) If the applicant is an agent or employee of a firm,
corporation or organization, the written credentials establishing the
applicant's employee or any other agency relationship with the firm,
corporation or organization.
9-9
(d) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any felony within the past ten (10) years, or any
misdemeanor other than a minor traffic violation within the past three
(3) years, the date and place of any conviction, the nature of the offense,
and the punishment or penalty imposed.
(e) The last three (3) cities, towns, or other political subdivisions
(if that many) the applicant engaged in the business or conduct as a
peddler, solicitor, solicitor for religions or charitable purposes, transient
vendor, or street barker immediately prior to making application for a
permit under this chapter, and the complete addresses, if any, of the
applicant listed under (b) above in those cities, towns or other political
subdivisions.
(f) Two photographs of the applicant, taken within sixty (60)
days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application,
measuring at least two inches by two inches, and showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(g) A brief description of the type of business and the goods to
be sold, or in the case of solicitors for charitable or religious purposes, the
function of the organization.
(h) The dates for which the applicant intends to do business or
make solicitations.
(i) The make, model, complete description, and license tag
number and state of issue, of each vehicle the applicant intends to use to
make sales or solicitations, whether or not such vehicle is owned by the
person making sales or solicitations, or by the firm, corporation or
organization itself, or rented or borrowed from another business or
person.
(j) Tennessee State sales tax number, if applicable.
(2) Permit fee. Each applicant for a permit as a peddler, solicitor, or
transient vendor shall submit with his application a nonrefundable fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Each applicant for a permit as a street barker shall
submit with his application a nonrefundable fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
There shall be no fee for an application for a permit as a solicitor for charitable
or religious purposes.
(3) Denial or approval of permit. (a) Investigation. Upon the receipt
of the application and the payment of the permit fee, the chief of police or
his authorized designee shall make an investigation of the applicant for
the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare of the
public. Each person applying for a permit shall be fingerprinted by the
chief of police or his designee, except that this requirement shall not
apply to persons soliciting or peddling for charitable or religious purposes.
The police chief shall make a good faith effort to complete the
investigation within three complete working days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays of the city. If the investigation is not complete
within that period, the reasons shall be noted on the application. In no
event shall the period of the investigation exceed ten (10) days.
9-10
(b) Denial of permit. The city recorder shall deny the applicant
permit if the investigation discloses that:
(i) The applicant has been convicted of a felony within
the past ten (10) years or has been convicted of a misdemeanor
other than a minor traffic violation within the past three (3) years;
or
(ii) Any information in the application that is materially
false or misleading; or
(iii) The business reputation of the applicant is such that
the applicant constitutes a threat to the public health, safety or
general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(iv) The information supplied in the application is
insufficient to permit the chief of police to make a determination
under (i), (ii) or (iii) above.
The application of a firm, corporation or organization may be
rejected if the investigation discloses no information that would disqualify
it for a permit where the investigation of the agent or a prospective
peddler, solicitor, solicitor for charitable purposes, street barker or
transient vendor for the firm, corporation or organization discloses
information that disqualifies any of them for a permit.
(c) Approval of permit. If the investigation discloses no grounds
for the denial of the permit, the city recorder shall issue a permit to the
applicant.
(d) Appeal of denial. The refusal of the police chief to issue a
permit may be appealed to the city manager. The aggrieved applicant,
may within ten (10) days following the date the notice of the refusal of the
police chief to issue a permit was mailed to the applicant, appeal the
refusal by giving the city manager written notice of appeal, stating the
grounds for the appeal. The city manager shall set a hearing on the
appeal for a date falling within ten (10) days following the date of the
receipt of the appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final.
(4) The permit. The permit shall show the name of the permittee and
(if the permittee is a firm, corporation or organization) the name of the solicitor,
solicitor for charitable purposes, street barker or transient vendor, the kind of
goods and/or services authorized to be sold, the amount of the permit fee paid,
the date of issuance of the permit, and the period of the permit, and shall have
attached a copy of a photograph of the permittee.
(5) Expiration and renewal of permit. The permit of peddlers,
solicitors, and peddlers and solicitors for religious and charitable purposes shall
expire sixty (60) days from the date of issuance. The permit of city transient
vendors shall expire six (6) months from the date of issuance. The permit of
street barkers shall for a period corresponding to the dates of the recognized
parade or festival days of the city. An application for renewal shall be made in
9-11
substantially the same form as an original application. However, only so much
of the application shall be completed as is necessary to reflect conditions that
have changed since the last application was filed. (1985 Code, § 5-205, as
amended by Ord. #2008-54, Dec. 2008, and Ord. #2010-34, Oct. 2010)
9-206. Business license required. Each person, or each firm,
corporation or organization issued a permit under this chapter as a peddler,
solicitor, street barker or transient merchant shall be required to obtain an
appropriate business license before soliciting or making sales. (1985 Code,
§ 5-206)
9-207. Restrictions on permit holders in general. No person while
conducting the business or activity of peddler, street barker, solicitor, solicitor
for charitable or religious purposes, transient vender, or street barker shall:
(1) Be permitted to set up and operate a booth or stand on any street
or sidewalk, or in any other public area within the city.
(2) Stand or sit in or near the entrance to any dwelling or place of
business, or in any other place which may disrupt or impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic; or
(3) Offer to sell goods or services or solicit in vehicular traffic lanes, or
operate a "road block" of any kind.
(4) Call attention to his or her business or merchandise or to his or her
solicitation efforts by crying out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell, or creating
other noise; except that the street barker shall be allowed to cry out to call
attention to his business or merchandise during recognized parade or festival
days of the city.
(5) Enter or attempt to enter in or upon any residential or business
premises wherein the authorized owner, occupant or person legally in charge of
the premises has in a conspicuous place posted, at the entry to the premises or
at the entry to the principal building of the premises, a sign or placard in letters
at least one inch high bearing the notice "Peddlers Prohibited," "Solicitors
Prohibited," "Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited," or similar language of the
same import, is located.
(6) Enter in or upon any residential premises without prior invitation
of the authorized owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises
between 7:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M. (1985 Code, § 5-207)
9-208. Additional restrictions on transient vendors. A transient
vendor shall not:
(1) Advertise, represent, or hold forth a sale of goods, wares or
merchandise as an insurance, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate,
executor, administrator, receiver's manufacturer's wholesale, cancelled order,
or misfit sale, or closing-out sale, or a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire,
water, or otherwise, unless such advertisement, representation or holding forth
is actually of the character it is advertised, represented or held forth is actually
of the character it is advertised, represented or held forth.
9-12
(2) Locate temporary premises as the term is defined in this chapter
on or in any public street, highway or any other public way or place, or on
private property without the written permission of the property owner or other
person in authorized control of the property. (1985 Code, § 5-208)
9-209. Display of permit, business license, etc. Each peddler,
solicitor, and street barker is required to have in his possession a valid permit
and business license, and each transient vendor is required to have in his
possession a valid permit, business license, and the written permission of any
private property owner, or other person in control of the property owned from
which he or she is conducting business, while making sales or solicitations, and
all shall be required to display the same to any police officer upon demand.
Solicitors for charitable and religious purposes shall be required to have in their
possession a valid permit. (1985 Code, § 5-209)
9-210. Revocation of permit. (1) Causes. The permit issued to any
person or to any firm, corporation or organization under this chapter may be
revoked by the city manager for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false or misleading statement
contained in the application for a permit.
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false or misleading statement
made by the permittee in the course of the business or conduct of a
peddler, solicitor, solicitor for charitable or religious purposes, transient
vendor or street barker.
(c) Any violation of this chapter.
(d) Any other conduct of the permittee that constitutes a threat
to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(2) The notice of revocation. (a) City manager's option. The city
manager shall have the option of revoking the permit effective,
immediately after notice, or effective after notice and hearing. However,
the city manager shall revoke the permit effective immediately only after
a written finding of the reasons that to delay the revocation of the permit
would represent an intolerable threat to the health, safety or general
welfare of the citizens of the city.
(b) Notice if the permit holder is a person. If the permit holder
is a person, the city shall make a reasonable effort to personally deliver
the notice of revocation effective to the permit holder. If the permit
holder cannot be found after such reasonable effort, the notice shall be
sent by registered or certified United States Mail to the local residential
or business address of the permit holder. If the permit holder has no local
residential or business address the notice shall be sent to the permit
holder's permanent address.
(c) Notice if the permit holder is a firm, corporation or
organization. The personal notice provided for above may be given to the
9-13
agent of the firm, corporation or organization, or to any employee or agent
of the firm, corporation, or organization; otherwise, the notice procedure
prescribed by (b) above shall apply where the permit holder is a firm,
corporation or organization.
(d) A transient vendor permit may be revoked if the property on
which such vending is occurring has inadequate parking retained on-site
for customers (either for an established business and/or for the transient
vending activities), as evidenced by the creation of traffic congestion on
adjoining streets and rights-of-way.
(e) Contents of notice and hearing. The notice shall set forth
the specific grounds for revocation of the permit and shall set a hearing
on the revocation on a date falling not less than five (5) nor more than
(10) days from the date of the notice.
(3) Hearing on the revocation. At the hearing on the revocation of the
permit, the permittee shall be entitled to respond to the charges against him or
her and to be represented by counsel at his or her expense. The city manager's
decision shall be final. (1985 Code, § 5-210, as amended by Ord. #2012-06, Feb.
2012)
9-211. Violation and penalty. In addition to any other action the city
may take against a permit holder in violation of this chapter, such violation
shall be punishable according to the general penalty provisions of this municipal
code of ordinances. (1985 Code, § 5-211)
9-212. Suspension of permitting during Foothills Fall Festival.1
Transient vendor and peddler permits shall be temporarily suspended during
the three (3) days of the annual city sponsored Foothills Fall Festival within the
designated Foothills Fall Festival area unless the permit for such purpose has
been issued by the Foothills Fall Festival Committee. Designated Fall Festival
area shall be as follows:
Designated festival area. The boundaries of the designated festival area
are as follows:
(1) Beginning at a point in the intersection of U.S. Hwy. 321 and Court
Street and continuing along Court Street in a northwesterly direction to the
bridge over Pistol Creek.
(2) Then following the course of Pistol Creek downstream in a
northeasterly, northwesterly and southwesterly direction around the Maryville
central business district to a point below the dam for the Greenbelt Lake where
the creek abuts the right-of-way of McCammon Avenue.
1Municipal code reference
Title 21: chapter 3.
9-14
(3) Then following McCammon Avenue in a southeasterly direction to
its intersection with McGhee Street.
(4) Then following McGhee Street in a southwesterly direction to the
southwestern property line of Maryville Towers.
(5) Then in a southeasterly direction along the property line of
Maryville Towers, continuing in a southeasterly direction along Cates Street,
and the extension of the Cates Street right-of-way to U.S. 321.
(6) Then in a northeasterly direction along U.S. Hwy. 321 to Court
Street, being the point of beginning. (as added by Ord. #2009-45, Oct. 2009, and
replaced by Ord. #2010-29, Sept. 2010)
9-15
CHAPTER 3
TAXICABS1
SECTION
9-301. Taxicab franchise permit required.
9-302. Requirements as to application and hearing.
9-303. Liability insurance required.
9-304. Revocation or suspension of franchise.
9-305. Mechanical condition of vehicles.
9-306. Cleanliness of vehicles.
9-307. Inspection of vehicles.
9-308. License and permit required for drivers.
9-309. Qualifications for driver's permit.
9-310. Revocation or suspension of driver's permit.
9-311. Drivers not to solicit business.
9-312. Parking restricted.
9-313. Drivers to use direct routes.
9-314. Taxicabs not to be used for illegal purposes.
9-315. Miscellaneous prohibited conduct by drivers.
9-316. Transportation of more than one passenger at the same time.
9-317. Designation of taxicabs.
9-301. Taxicab franchise permit required. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, or corporation to operate or permit a taxicab owned or
controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the City
of Maryville, without having first obtained a taxicab franchise permit from the
municipality. (1985 Code, § 5-401)
9-302. Requirements as to application and hearing. (1) No person
shall be eligible to apply for a taxicab franchise if he has been convicted of a
felony within the last ten (10) years. All applications for a taxicab franchise
shall be made upon a regular form provided for that purpose, which application
shall include the name and address of the applicant; the name and address of
the proposed place of business; the make, model, vehicle identification number
(VIN), and license number of all vehicles proposed to be used in the business;
method and style of marking of vehicles; experience of the applicant in the
transportation of passengers; certification of the mechanical reliability and
1Charter reference
Regulation of taxicabs: art. II, § 1(29).
Municipal code reference
Privilege taxes: title 5.
9-16
cleanliness of the vehicles; certification of liability insurance; and such other
pertinent information as may be required on said form, which application shall
be sworn to by the applicant and verified by the affidavits of two (2) reputable
citizens of the State of Tennessee who are acquainted with the applicant, and
said application shall be filed with the recorder.
The recorder shall present the application to the city council with the
recommendation of the city manager to either grant or refuse a franchise to the
applicant. The city council after notice thereof is published one (1) time in a
local newspaper at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing, shall thereupon
hold a public hearing at which time witnesses for and against the granting of
the franchise may be heard. In deciding whether or not to grant the franchise,
the city council shall consider the public need for additional service, the
increased traffic congestion, parking space requirements, and whether or not the
safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be
preserved by the granting of such taxicab franchise. Notice and a public hearing
shall not be required for a renewal application for a taxicab franchise.
(2) No taxicab franchise permits shall be issued for a longer period
than one (1) year. The city council may issue a permit for a shorter or
probationary period if, in its discretion, it deems proper.
(3) All franchises heretofore issued by the City of Maryville shall
expire on the 15th day of July, 1982; and in order to obtain a renewal taxicab
permit on or before the 30th day of June, 1982, a renewal application shall be
filed by the holder of each such taxicab permit; and thereafter such taxicab
permits and those hereafter issued shall upon timely and proper application be
renewed or other appropriate action taken on or before the 15th day of July in
each and every year.
(4) The chief of police shall have authority to issue administrative
regulations which are not in conflict with this chapter governing the use and
operations of taxicabs. (1985 Code, § 5-402)
9-303. Liability insurance required. No taxicab franchise shall be
issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability
insurance policy approved by the recorder for all vehicles authorized in the
amount of not less than $100,000.00 for injury to or death of any one person, and
$300,000.00 for injury to or death of any number of persons in one occurrence,
and property damage liability insurance in the amount of $50,000.00 in one
occurrence, and a copy of the policy to be on file with the recorder. The
insurance policy required by this section shall contain a provision that it shall
not be canceled except after at least twenty (20) days' written notice is given by
the insurer to both the insured and the recorder of the municipality. (1985
Code, § 5-403)
9-304. Revocation or suspension of franchise. The city council after
a public hearing may revoke or suspend any taxi cab franchise for
9-17
misrepresentations or false statements made in the application for a taxi cab
permit; for traffic violations; for violations of this chapter by the taxi cab owner
or any driver; or upon proof of reckless or negligent conduct by a driver in the
operation of a taxi cab regulated under this section. (1985 Code, § 5-404, as
replaced by Ord. #2009-14, April 2009)
9-305. Mechanical condition of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated
as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of Maryville unless such taxicab is
equipped with four (4) wheel brakes, front and rear lights, safe tires, horn,
muffler, windshield wipers, and rear vision mirror, all of which shall conform to
the requirements of the state motor vehicle law. Each taxicab shall be equipped
with a handle or latch or other opening device attached to each door of the
passenger compartment so that such doors may be operated by the passenger
from the inside of the taxicab without the intervention or assistance of the
driver. All applications for a taxicab permit shall contain a certificate by the
owner that the vehicles will be kept in a condition of repair as may be
reasonably necessary to provide for the safety of the public and the continuous
satisfactory operation of the taxicab. (1985 Code, § 5-405)
9-306. Cleanliness of vehicles. All taxicabs operated in the
municipality shall, at all times, be kept in a reasonably clean and sanitary
condition. (1985 Code, § 5-406)
9-307. Inspection of vehicles. (1) All taxicabs shall be inspected at
least annually to ensure that they comply with the requirements of this chapter.
The chief of police will designate the date, time, and by whom the inspections
shall be made. The cost of inspections shall be borne by the permit holders.
(2) A police officer is authorized by this chapter to stop a taxicab
operating on the streets of Maryville when the mechanical appearance of the
vehicle so warrants and to inspect said vehicle for compliance with this chapter.
If said officer finds the vehicle to be in noncompliance with this chapter, he shall
cite the owner and declare the taxicab inoperable, not to operate on streets of
Maryville until evidence of inspection as provided in § 9-307(1) is provided to the
chief of police and all defects have been corrected. (1985 Code, § 5-407)
9-308. License and permit required for drivers. (1) No person shall
drive a taxicab unless he is in possession of a state special chauffeur's license,
and a taxicab driver's permit issued by the city recorder.
(2) No driver's permit shall be issued for a longer period than one (1)
year. Said driver's permit will be renewable with the franchise date as provided
in § 9-302(3). (1985 Code, § 5-408)
9-18
9-309. Qualifications for driver's permit. No person shall be issued
a taxicab driver's permit unless he complies with the following qualifications:
(1) Makes written application to the recorder on forms provided for
that purpose, which are to be reviewed and recommended by the chief of police.
(2) Is at least eighteen (18) years of age and holds a state special
chauffeur's license.
(3) Certifies they are of sound physique, with good eyesight and
hearing and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, or any other infirmity
of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a public
vehicle.
(4) Is clean in dress and person and is not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquor or drugs.
(5) Produces affidavits of good character from two (2) reputable
citizens of the municipality who have known him personally and have observed
his conduct for at least two (2) years next preceding the date of his application.
(6) Has not been convicted or pled guilty to:
(a) A felony of any kind; or
(b) A misdemeanor involving drunk driving, driving under the
influence of an intoxicant or drug, or any other alcohol related offenses;
or
(c) Frequent minor traffic offenses (more than four (4) within
the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
(7) Is familiar with the state and local traffic laws.
(8) Have a police background investigation including, but not limited
to, a criminal record investigation including the taking and recording of
fingerprints of each driver and owner.
All credentials required are to be in possession of the driver while
operating a taxicab in the City of Maryville. Each permit that is issued shall be
charged a fee of eighty-three dollars ($83.00) which shall include reimbursement
for the cost of a police background investigation fee. (1985 Code, § 5-409, as
amended by Ord. #2009-14, April 2009)
9-310. Revocation or suspension of driver's permit. The city council
may revoke or suspend any taxicab driver's permit for violation of traffic
regulations, for violation of this chapter or when the driver ceases to possess the
qualifications as prescribed in § 9-309, or upon recommendation by the chief of
police. (1985 Code, § 5-410)
9-311. Drivers not to solicit business. All taxicab drivers are
expressly prohibited from indiscriminately soliciting passengers or from cruising
upon the streets of the municipality for the purpose of obtaining patronage for
their cabs. (1985 Code, § 5-411)
9-19
9-312. Parking restricted. It shall be unlawful to park any taxicab on
any street except in such places as have been specifically designated and
marked by the municipality for the use of taxicabs. It is provided, however, that
taxicabs may stop upon any street for the purpose of picking up or discharging
passengers if such stops are made in such manner as not to unreasonably
interfere with or obstruct other traffic and provided the passenger loading or
discharging is promptly accomplished. (1985 Code, § 5-412)
9-313. Drivers to use direct routes. Taxicab drivers shall always
deliver their passengers to their destinations by the most direct available route.
(1985 Code, § 5-413)
9-314. Taxicabs not to be used for illegal purposes. No taxicab shall
be used for or in the commission of any illegal act, business, or purpose. (1985
Code, § 5-414)
9-315. Miscellaneous prohibited conduct by drivers. It shall be
unlawful for any taxicab driver, while on duty, to be under the influence of, or
to drink any intoxicating beverage or beer; to use profane or obscene language;
to shout or call to prospective passengers; to unnecessarily blow the automobile
horn; or to otherwise disturb the peace, quiet and tranquility of the municipality
in any way. (1985 Code, § 5-415)
9-316. Transportation of more than one passenger at the same
time. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a passenger
without the consent of such other passenger. (1985 Code, § 5-416)
9-317. Designation of taxicabs. Each taxicab shall bear on the outside
of each front door an identifying company name, and the word "taxicab" if not
part of the company name. The marking shall be of sufficient size to be clearly
visible. (1985 Code, § 5-417)
9-20
CHAPTER 4
[REPEALED]
(Ord. #96-21, Sept. 1996, as repealed by Ord. #2008-58, Dec. 2008)
9-21
CHAPTER 5
BEGGING
SECTION
9-501. Permit required.
9-502. Application for permit.
9-503. Issuance of permit.
9-504. Purpose of permit.
9-505. Police background investigation.
9-501. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to beg or
solicit alms, money, or gifts of any kind upon the public streets, in public
buildings, or in other public places within the City of Maryville without first
having obtained a permit. (1985 Code, § 5-601)
9-502. Application for permit. Any person desiring to solicit alms or
beg in the public streets and public places within the city shall apply to the city
recorder for a permit. The application shall be made in writing, on a form
furnished by the city, and it shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. It
shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, age, and address of the applicant;
(2) Name, age, and address of persons dependent upon the applicant;
(3) Description of the physical disability, if any, which prevents the
applicant from earning a livelihood by gainful employment;
(4) The amount of relief in money or otherwise which the applicant has
received during the preceding twelve (12) month period or is receiving at the
time the application is made, and the name of the agency (governmental or
private) from which such aid was or is obtained;
(5) The names of the governmental and private social welfare agencies
to which the applicant has applied for aid or assistance; and
(6) The names and addresses of at least two (2) reputable citizens of
the city to whom reference can be made for information as to the character and
worthiness of the applicant. (1985 Code, § 5-602)
9-503. Issuance of permit. If the applicant is a worthy recipient of
charity who cannot properly be taken care of by any public relief or welfare
agency, a permit shall be issued to him by the city recorder free of charge.
The permit shall entitle the mendicant to solicit alms in the city for a
period of six (6) months and shall expire six (6) months from the date of
issuance. Each mendicant shall have his permit in his immediate possession at
all times when he is engaged in begging or soliciting alms in the city and shall
display same upon demand of any police officer of the city. No permit shall be
renewed, but the mendicant shall be allowed, upon the expiration of his permit,
9-22
to apply for a new permit in the manner prescribed by this chapter. (1985 Code,
§ 5-603)
9-504. Purpose of permit. The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to authorized agents of regularly constituted charitable organizations
soliciting funds or gifts for the benefit of such organizations, nor to the soliciting
of funds on behalf of any association, society, club or similar organization from
the members thereof or prospective members of such association, society, etc.,
it being the purpose of this chapter to license and regulate the practice of
begging for personal gain. (1985 Code, § 5-604)
9-505. Police background investigation. Prior to receiving a permit
from the City of Maryville under this section, an applicant must successfully
pass a police background investigation and must further pay an eighty dollar
($80.00) fee to the city in order to reimburse the city of the cost of such
investigation. (as added by Ord. #2008-55, Dec. 2008)
9-23
CHAPTER 6
HELICOPTERS
SECTION
9-601. Definitions.
9-602. Minimum altitude.
9-603. Prohibition against landing in unauthorized places; exceptions.
9-604. Designation of heliports or helistops.
9-605. Zoning ordinances not affected.
9-606. Violations.
9-601. Definitions. "Helicopter" shall mean any rotocraft which
depends principally for its support and motion in the air upon the lift generated
by one or more power driven rotors rotating on substantially vertical axis.
"Heliport" shall mean an area of land, water, or structural surface which
is designed, used or intended to be used for landing and takeoff of helicopters,
and any appurtenant areas, including buildings and other facilities such as
refueling, parking, maintenance, and repair facilities. The term "heliport"
applies to all such facilities whether said facility is public or private.
"Helistop" shall mean a minimum facility without the logistical support
provided at a heliport at which helicopters land and take-off, including the
touchdown area. Helistops may be at ground level or elevated on a structure.
The term "helistop" applies to all such minimum facilities whether said facility
is public or private. (1985 Code, § 5-701)
9-602. Minimum altitude. Except when necessary for take-off or
landing, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a helicopter over the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville, Tennessee under an altitude of one
thousand (1,000) feet above the highest obstacle within a horizontal radius of
two thousand (2,000) feet of the helicopter, except if the operation is conducted
without hazard to persons or property on the surface. In addition, each person
operating a helicopter shall comply with the routes or altitudes specifically
prescribed for helicopters seeking to land or travel to points within the city that
do not meet the requirements of this chapter, by the chief of police or his
designee. (1985 Code, § 5-702, as amended by Ord. #2008-60, Dec. 2008)
9-603. Prohibition against landing in unauthorized places;
exceptions. No person shall land a helicopter at any place within the city other
than at landing facilities duly licensed or approved as required by appropriate
statute or regulation by the state and federal aviation agencies, except: in a
medical or other emergency; in the conduct of official business of any law
enforcement agency; military unit of any branch of the armed forces of the
United States of America; or state national guard. (1985 Code, § 5-703)
9-24
9-604. Designation of heliports or helistops. All heliports or
helistops, shall comply with Chapters 4, 5, and 9 where applicable, of the
Helicopter Design Guide, dated August 22, 1977, published by the Federal
Aviation Administration of the United States Department of Transportation, or
any authorized amendment or supplement thereto, as well as any rules and
regulations promulgated by the bureau of aeronautics, department of
transportation of the state with respect to minimum standards for heliports or
helistops. If a heliport or helistop shall be located on a building or other
structure, it shall further comply with the building code of the city. (1985 Code,
§ 5-704)
9-605. Zoning ordinances not affected. No provisions of this chapter
shall be construed to alter or amend any provisions of the city's zoning ordinance
and no law prohibited by terms of said ordinance shall be deemed permitted by
the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 5-705)
9-606. Violations. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a penalty of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each occurrence shall constitute
a separate offense. (1985 Code, § 5-706, modified)
9-25
CHAPTER 7
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION
9-701. To be furnished under franchise.
9-701. To be furnished under franchise. Cable television service
shall be furnished to the City of Maryville and its inhabitants under franchise
as the city council shall grant. The rights, powers, duties and obligations of the
City of Maryville and its inhabitants and the grantee of the franchise shall be
clearly stated in the franchise agreement which shall be binding upon the
parties concerned.1
1For complete details relating to the cable television franchise agreement
see Ord. #1276, and any amendments, in the office of the city recorder.
9-26
CHAPTER 8
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION
9-801. Title.
9-802. Definitions.
9-803. Prevention of sexual activity.
9-804. Involvement of minors.
9-805. Specified criminal activity by operators, employees, entertainers and
others.
9-806. Prohibited hours of operation.
9-807. Duties and responsibilities of operators, entertainers and employees.
9-808. Prohibited activities.
9-809. Reports.
9-810. Inspections.
9-811. Applicability of state statutes.
9-812. Violations.
9-813. Permit requirements and fees.
9-801. Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The
Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance." (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-802. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
(2) "Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store" means
a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for
sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, computer software or other visual representations
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or
(b) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with "specified sexual activities."
9-27
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area" and still
be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of the principal business purposes is the
offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
(3) "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
establishment which regularly features:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
(b) Live performances which are characterized by "specified
sexual activities" or by the exposure of any of the "specified anatomical
areas," even if partially covered by opaque material or partially or
completely covered by translucent material, including swim suits,
lingerie, or latex covering; or
(c) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area."
(4) "Adult entertainment" means any exhibition of any adult-oriented
motion picture, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has a
significant or substantial portion of such exhibition any actual or simulated
performance of "specified sexual activities" or the viewing of "specified
anatomical areas."
(5) "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
(a) Offers sleeping room accommodations to the public for any
form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;"
and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(b) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten hours.
(6) "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment
where, as one of the principal purposes, and for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(7) "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
9-28
in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized
by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual
activities."
(8) "Codes department" means the department of division of the city
which is authorized to enforce building codes and other provisions of this code
of ordinances.
(9) "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. "Employee" does
not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.
(10) "Entertainer" means any person who provides entertainment
within a sexually oriented business as defined in this section, whether or not a
fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment
is provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
(11) "Escort" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to
act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(12) "Massage parlor" means an establishment or place primarily in the
business of providing massage or tanning services for the purposes of sexual
stimulation or where one or more of the employees exposes to public view of the
patrons within said establishment, at any time, "specified anatomical areas."
(13) "Nude model studio" means a commercial establishment where a
person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity, or displays "specified
anatomical areas" and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money
or any form of consideration. Nude model studio as defined herein shall not
include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Tennessee or a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a
private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or a structure:
(a) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is
available for viewing; and
(b) Where in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.
(14) "Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than
9-29
a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(15) "Operator" means a person operating, conducting or maintaining
a sexually oriented business or a person who is identified in any report filed
with the city as the operator of a sexually oriented business.
(16) "Sauna" means an establishment or place primarily in the business
of providing for the purposes of sexual stimulation:
(a) A steam bath or dry heat sauna; or
(b) Massage services.
(17) "Semi-nude" means the showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of
the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower
portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard,
bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part.
(18) "Sexual conduct" means the engaging in or the commission of an
act of sexual intercourse, oral-genital contact, or the touching of the sexual
organs, pubic region, buttocks or female breast of a person for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of that person or another person.
(19) "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
(a) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or
(b) For purpose of sexual stimulation, activities between male
and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of
the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
(20) "Sexually oriented business" includes, but is not limited to, an
adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model
studio, sexual encounter center, massage parlor, or sauna, and further means
any premises to which patrons or members of the public are invited or admitted
and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the
purpose of viewing adult entertainment, when such is held, conducted, operated
or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect.
(21) "Sexual stimulation" means to excite or arouse the prurient
interest or to offer to solicit acts of "sexual conduct" as defined in this chapter.
(22) "Specified anatomical areas" means:
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(i) Human genitals;
(ii) Pubic region;
9-30
(iii) Buttocks; and
(iv) Female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola, and
(b) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely opaquely covered.
(23) "Specified criminal activity" means any of the following offenses:
prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale,
distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by
a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness;
indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal
activity; rape; sexual assault; molestation; gambling; or distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code of this state or other states or countries; for which:
(a) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or plea of nolo contendere or the date of release from confinement
imposed, whichever is the later date, if the conviction or plea is for a
misdemeanor offense;
(b) Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or plea of nolo contendere or the date of release from confinement
imposed, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
(c) Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or plea of nolo contendere or the date of release from confinement
imposed for the last conviction or plea, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions or pleas are for two or more misdemeanor offenses or
combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month
period;
provided further that the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect whatsoever on the provisions of this article.
(24) "Specified services" means massage services, private dances,
private modeling, or acting as an "escort" as defined in this chapter.
(25) "Specified sexual activities" means:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal;
(b) Acts of human masturbation, oral copulation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy; or
(c) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts. (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-803. Prevention of sexual activity. (1) No person who owns,
operates or manages a sexually oriented business shall permit "specified sexual
activities," as defined in this chapter, to occur on the premises.
(2) No commercial building, structure, premises or portion thereof
shall be designed for or used to promote high-risk sexual conduct.
9-31
(3) No person who owns, operates, causes to be operated or manages
a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the
premises in any one or more viewing rooms or booths of less than 150 square
feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, other reproduction or live
entertainment which depicts "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas," shall cause or allow any deviation from the following
requirements:
(a) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video
reproduction equipment. No manager's station may exceed 32 square feet
of floor area. If the premises has two or more manager's stations, then
the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at
least one of the manager's stations. Each such area shall remain
unobstructed by doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display
racks or other materials. All viewing rooms and booths shall have at
least one side open so that the area inside is visible from a manager's
station. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.
(b) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the codes department.
(c) At least one employee shall be on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(d) No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one
person at any time.
(e) Each viewing room or booth shall be lighted in such a
manner that persons within are visible from a manager's station. The
illumination level of each viewing room or booth, when not in use, shall
be a minimum of ten foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor.
The illumination level of all other portions of the premises open to the
public shall be a minimum of ten foot candles at all times.
(f) No patron shall be permitted access to any area which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be allowed.
(g) Each viewing room or booth shall be totally separated from
adjacent viewing rooms and booths and any non-public areas by walls.
All such walls shall be solid and extended from the floor to a height of not
less than six feet and shall be of light colored, nonporous, non-absorbent,
smooth textured and easily cleanable material. No such wall may be
constructed of plywood or composition board. No opening or aperture of
any kind shall be allowed to exist between viewing rooms or booths. No
9-32
person shall make or attempt to make an opening or aperture of any kind
between viewing rooms or booths.
(h) All floor coverings in viewing rooms or booths shall be light
colored, nonporous, non-absorbent, smooth textured, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(i) Their premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
manner at all times.
(j) No occupant of a viewing room or booth shall be allowed to
damage or deface any portion therein or to engage in any type of sexual
activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while inside. (As added by
Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-804. Involvement of minors. An operator of a sexually oriented
business is in violation of this chapter if:
(1) The operator is less than 18 years of age.
(2) Any officer, director, partner, stockholder or other individual
having a direct or beneficial financial interest in the operator is less than 18
years of age, if the operator is a corporation, partnership or other form of
business organization.
(3) Any employee of the sexually oriented business is less than 18
years of age.
(4) Any entertainer at the sexually oriented business is less than 18
years of age. (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-805. Specified criminal activity by operators, employees,
entertainers and others. (1) No person may own or operate a sexually
oriented business within the city if:
(a) He has a record of "specified criminal activity," as defined in
this chapter, if the owner or operator is an individual.
(b) Any officer, director, partner or other individual having at
least a 10% direct or beneficial financial interest in the operator has a
record of "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, if the
owner or operator is a corporation, partnership or other form of business
organization.
(2) No operator of a sexually oriented business may allow any
employee who has a record of "specified criminal activity," as defined in this
chapter, to work on the premises of the business.
(3) No operator of a sexually oriented business may allow any
entertainer who has a record of "specified criminal activity," as defined in this
chapter, to perform on the premises of the business.
(4) No operator or employee of a sexually oriented business may
knowingly allow any "specified criminal activity" to occur on the premises of the
business.
9-33
(5) No operator or employee of a sexually oriented business may allow
any patron or customer who has carried out any "specified criminal activity" on
the premises of the business to reenter the premises.
(6) The police department shall investigate the criminal record of any
person identified pursuant to § 9-809(4) as well as any employee of a sexually
oriented business or any entertainer performing in a sexually oriented business.
No person shall have an interest as identified in § 9-809(4) unless such person
has satisfactorily completed such a criminal background investigation nor shall
any person be an employee or entertainer at a sexually oriented business unless
such person has submitted to and successfully passed a police background
investigation. Each police background investigation shall be subject to a charge
of eighty dollars ($80.00) which shall be paid by the owner/operator of the
sexually oriented business or by the employee or performer. The obligation is on
the permit holder to advise the city of any new person for whom a background
check is required under this section. (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999, and
amended by Ord. #2008-56, Dec. 2008)
9-806. Prohibited hours of operations. No sexually oriented
business, except for an adult motel, shall be open between the hours of 11:00
P.M. and 8:00 A.M. No adult motel may allow any guest to check into a room
between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M. (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept.
1999)
9-807. Duties and responsibilities of operators, entertainers and
employees. (1) The operator of each sexually oriented business shall maintain
a register of all employees, showing the name, all aliases, home address, age,
birth date, sex, weight, color of hair and eyes, telephone number, social security
numbers, driver license or their state identification number and date of
issuance, date of employment and termination, and duties of each employee.
The above information for each employee shall be maintained on the premises
during his or her employment and for a period of three years following
termination.
(2) The operator shall make such information available for inspection
immediately upon request by the city manager or his authorized representative
or by the police department or codes department. Alternatively, if the city
manager of his authorized representative, the police department or the codes
department request that copies of any such information be delivered to them,
the operator shall have such copies delivered within three days of the request.
(3) An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees
on the premises of the sexually oriented business and any act or omission of any
employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this part shall be deemed
the act of omission of the operator.
(4) There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common
areas of each sexually oriented business a list of any and all entertainment and
9-34
services provided on the premises. Viewing adult-oriented motion pictures shall
be considered as entertainment. The operator shall make the list available
immediately upon demand of the city manager or his authorized representative
or by the police department or codes department.
(5) No operator or employee of a sexually oriented business shall allow
any person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
(6) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area of the
premises of each sexually oriented business, and shall read as follows:
This sexually oriented business is regulated by the City of
Maryville, Tennessee. Employees, entertainers and customers are
not permitted to engage in any type of sexual contact.
(7) Operators of sexually oriented businesses that provide "specified
services," as defined in this chapter, for customers or patrons shall comply with
the following requirements:
(a) For each "specified service," such customers or patrons shall
be provided with written receipts. Operators shall keep copies of such
receipts for at least three years, showing:
(i) "Specified service" provided.
(ii) Cost of "specified service."
(iii) Date and time of service provided.
(iv) Name of person providing the "specified service."
(v) Method of payment for service.
(b) Copies of all published advertisements for the business shall
be kept for at least three years.
(c) Copies of the receipts and advertisements required under
this section shall be made available immediately upon request by the city
manager or his authorized representative or by the police department or
codes department.
(8) It shall be the duty of the operator and all employees on the
premises of a sexually oriented business to ensure that the line of sight between
the manager's station(s) and each viewing room or booth remains unobstructed
by doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials.
(9) It shall be the duty of the operator and all employees on the
premises of a sexually oriented business to ensure that the illumination
required by this article is maintained at all times during business hours.
(10) It shall be the duty of the operator and all employees on the
premises of a sexually oriented business to ensure that no openings of any kind
exist between viewing rooms or booths.
(11) The operator or his/her agent shall, during each business day,
regularly inspect the walls of all viewing rooms and booths to determine if any
openings or holes exist. If such openings exist, it is the duty of the operator to
immediately repair the damage. No patron shall be permitted access to a
9-35
viewing room or booth where such an opening exists. It shall be the duty of the
operator and all employees on the premises to ensure that such rooms or booths
are unoccupied by patrons until the opening is repaired and covered. (As added
by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-808. Prohibited activities. (1) No operator, entertainer or employee
of a sexually oriented business shall perform or offer to perform any specified
sexual activities on the premises of the business, or allow or encourage any
person on the premises to perform or participate in any specified sexual
activities.
(2) No entertainer, employee, or customer shall be permitted to have
any physical contact with any other person on the premises during any
performance and all performances shall only occur upon a stage at least 18
inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from the
nearest entertainer, employee, and/or customer.
(3) No business shall advertise that it offers or provides any
entertainment or service which would fall under the definitions of "sexual
conduct," "sexual stimulation" or "specified sexual activities" as defined in this
chapter.
(4) No operator or employee shall serve or allow to be served or
consumed any intoxicating liquor or malt beverage on the premises of a sexually
oriented business.
(5) No operator or employee shall knowingly allow possession, use of
sale of controlled substances on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
(6) The possession of weapons by any patron or customer on the
premises of a sexually oriented business shall be prohibited. Notice of such
prohibition shall be posted on the premises. No operator or employee shall
knowingly allow a patron or customer on the premises of a sexually oriented
business to have a weapon in his possession.
(7) No hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment may
knowingly allow a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than ten hours. (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept.
1999)
9-809. Reports. Any person operating or desiring to operate a sexually
oriented business shall file a report with the codes department at least 30 days
prior to the opening of the business and no later than November 1 of each year
thereafter. The report shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the codes
department upon receipt. One copy of the dated report shall be returned to the
operator and one copy shall be promptly provided to the police department. The
report shall be upon a form provided by the codes department and shall include
the following information, which shall be sworn by the operator to be true and
correct under oath:
9-36
(1) The name under which the sexually oriented business is or will be
operated.
(2) The location and all telephone numbers for the sexually oriented
business.
(3) The type of sexually oriented business which is being or will be
operated, using the terms included in the definition of "sexually oriented
business" provided in this chapter, if applicable, and a complete description of
all types of entertainment and services provided or to be provided by the
business.
(4) If the operator is an individual, or for any individual who owns or
will own at least a 10% direct or beneficial interest in the business:
(a) Legal name and any other names or aliases used by the
individual.
(b) Mailing address and residential address and telephone
number.
(c) Business address and telephone number.
(d) A recent photograph of the individual.
(e) Age, date and place of birth.
(f) Height, weight, and hair and eye color.
(g) Date, issuing state and number of the individual's driver's
license or other state identification card information.
(h) Social security number.
(i) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
(j) The business, occupation or employment of the individual for
five years immediately preceding the date of the report.
(5) If the operator is a partnership:
(a) The partnership's complete name
(b) The names of all partners and the information required
above for all individuals who own or will own at least 10% direct
beneficial interest in the business.
(c) Whether the partnership is general or limited.
(d) A copy of any printed partnership agreement.
(6) If the operator is a corporation:
(a) The corporation's complete name, address and telephone
number.
(b) The date and state of incorporation.
(c) The corporation's federal tax identification number.
(d) Evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the
laws of the state of incorporation.
(e) The names and capacity of all officers, directors and
principal stockholders and the information required above for all
individuals who own or will own at least a 10% direct or beneficial
interest in the business.
9-37
(f) The name and address of the registered corporate agent for
service of process.
(7) The sexually oriented business or similar business history of the
operator and of each individual listed under § 9-809(4) above, including:
(a) The name and location of each sexually oriented business or
similar business currently or previously owned or operated by such
operator or individual.
(b) If the operator or individual is or was a partner, officer, or
director or holds or held at least a 10% direct or beneficial interest in a
partnership, corporation or other business entity which operates or
operated or is or was majority owner of any sexually oriented business or
similar business, the name and location of each such business and the
owning or operating business entity.
(c) Whether such operator or individual, has had any license or
permit issued to a sexually oriented business or similar business denied,
suspended or revoked.
(d) The name and location of each sexually oriented business or
similar business for which the license or permit was denied, suspended
or revoked, and the dates and reasons for each such suspension or
revocation.
(8) Whether the operator or any of the operator's officers or directors
or any individual listed under § 9-809(4) above has a record of any "specified
criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the "specified criminal
activity" or activities involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
(9) If the premises are leased or being purchased under contract, a
copy of such lease or contract.
(10) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including the total amount of floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
of diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The codes department may
waive this requirement if the report adopts a sketch or diagram that was
previously submitted and the operator certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared. This requirement does not
excuse the operator from compliance with all other applicable requirements for
approval of building plans.
(11) For the initial report, a current certificate and straight-line
drawing prepared within 30 days prior to the filing of the report by a registered
land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
existing sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property of the
business filing the report; the boundary lines of any residential zoning district
within 1,000 feet of said property; and the property lines of any parcel which
includes an established religious facility, child care or educational facility, public
park or recreation area, family entertainment business, liquor store or residence
9-38
within 1,000 feet of said property. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time a report is
submitted.
(12) A signed statement by the operator that the operator is familiar
with the provisions of this chapter and is and will continue to be in compliance
therewith, provided that if the operator is not an individual, such statement
shall be signed by each individual who owns or will own at least a 10% direct or
beneficial interest in the operator.
(13) Any other reasonable available information determined by the city
manager, codes department or police department to be necessary in determining
whether the operator and the sexually oriented business meet the requirements
of this chapter. (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-810. Inspections. In order to effectuate the provisions of this chapter,
the police department, codes department, city manager and/or his authorized
representatives are empowered to:
(1) Conduct investigations of the premises of any sexually oriented
business or any business believed by any of them to be a sexually oriented
business at any time such business is occupied or open for business.
(2) Inspect all licenses and records of any sexually oriented business
and its operators and employees for compliance with this chapter at any time
such business is occupied or open for business.
(3) Conduct investigation of persons engaged or believed to be engaged
in the operation of any sexually oriented business. (As added by Ord. #99-30,
Sept. 1999)
9-811. Applicability of state statutes. The provisions of this chapter
are not intended to supersede any obligations or requirements, including
licensing requirements, imposed by state statute and shall be in addition
thereto. (As added by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-812. Violations. (1) Each of the following acts and omissions shall be
considered a civil offense against the city:
(a) Failure to file any report required under this chapter at the
time required or submittal of false or misleading information or omission
of any material facts in any report required under this chapter.
(b) Any operator, entertainer, or any employee of the operator,
violates any provision of this chapter.
(c) Any operator, employee or entertainer denies access to the
police department, codes department, fire department, city manager or
his authorized representatives to any portion of the premises of the
sexually oriented business at any time it is open for business.
(d) Any operator fails to maintain the premises of a sexually
oriented business in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
9-39
(2) Upon a second or subsequent violation by an operator, entertainer
or employee of a sexually oriented business, of any part of this chapter, or any
state statute regarding nudity, sexually oriented businesses or adult
entertainment, such business shall be deemed a nuisance and shall also be
subject to an order of closure, and/or to cease and desist, by chancery court
action seeking injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter, provided
that such second or subsequent violation occurs after a judgment or conviction
or plea of nolo contendere has been obtained for the previous such violation. (As
added by Ord. #99-30, Sept. 1999)
9-813. Permit requirements and fees. Any person wishing to operate
a sexually oriented business as defined in this section must first obtain a permit
from the City of Maryville. Such permit shall be provided only upon satisfactory
compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter. A permit fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be provided along with an application for
a permit. (as added by Ord. #2008-56, Dec. 2008)
9-40
CHAPTER 9
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION
9-901. Minimum depth of underground cable.
9-901. Minimum depth of underground cable. The minimum depth
of burial of underground television cable within the public right-of-way shall be
18 inches. (As added by Ord. #2000-22, June 2000)
9-41
CHAPTER 10
CARNIVALS AND FAIRS
SECTION
9-1001. Definitions
9-1002. Carnival or fair permit and certificate of use.
9-1003. Use of city property.
9-1004. Application for carnival or fair permit.
9-1005. Application fee.
9-1006. Permit fee.
9-1007. Transient vendor business license required.
9-1008. Posting of required permits etc.
9-1009. Review and consideration of applications and appeal process.
9-1010. Bond required.
9-1011. Inspections.
9-1012. Daily inspection reports required.
9-1013. Sanitation requirements.
9-1014. Water service for carnival or fair.
9-1015. Storm water inlet protection required.
9-1016. Utility deposit required; return of deposit.
9-1017. Proof of contact of health department where food is served.
9-1018. Police presence required at carnival or fair's expense.
9-1019. Cease operation.
9-1020. Duration of permit.
9-1021. Public liability insurance.
9-1022. Other permits.
9-1023. Exemptions.
9-1024. Penalty.
9-1001. Definitions. As used in this chapter the following terms shall
be defined as stated herein:
(1) "Amusement device." Any equipment or piece of equipment,
appliance or combination thereof designed or intended to entertain or amuse for
a fee.
(2) "Amusement ride." Any amusement device or combination of
devices, which carries passengers along, around or over a fixed or restricted
course for the purpose of amusement and for a fee.
(3) "Carnival." An enterprise offering amusement or entertainment
to the public in, upon, or by means of amusement devices or rides or concession
booths.
(4) "Concession booth." A building, structure, or enclosure located at
a fair or carnival from which amusements or games are offered to the public for
a fee.
9-42
(5) "Fair." An enterprise principally devoted to the exhibition of
products of agriculture or industry in connection with the operation of
amusement rides or devices or concession booths.
(6) "Operator." A person, or the agent of a person, who owns or
controls the operation of an amusement ride, device or concession booth.
(7) "Restraining device." A safety belt, harness, chain, bar or other
device, which affords actual physical support, retention or restraint of a
passenger of an amusement ride or device. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May
2003)
9-1002. Carnival or fair permit and certificate of use. No person
shall conduct or operate or allow to be conducted or operated in any place
owned, leased, managed or controlled by him, any carnival or fair in the city
without first obtaining and maintaining:
(1) A valid carnival or fair permit as provided for in this chapter; and
(2) A valid certificate of use regarding the carnival or fair which shall
issue from the building inspector after all the conditions, requirements and
inspections provided for in this chapter as prerequisites to the issuance of a
certificate of use have been met prior to the opening of the carnival or fair to the
public; and
(3) All other approvals, permits and licenses required by this chapter
and other applicable laws and regulations. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May
2003)
9-1003. Use of city property. No person shall conduct or allow to be
conducted on city streets, right of way, parks or other city property a carnival
or fair without first obtaining the written permission of the city manager or his
authorized representative. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1004. Application for carnival or fair permit. Applications for a
carnival or fair permit shall be made at least thirty (30) calendar days and no
more than ninety (90) calendar days prior to the proposed opening date of the
carnival or fair. Applications for a carnival or fair permit shall be made to the
city recorder by the person or entity, which will conduct or perform the carnival
or fair. Any limitations or representations set forth in the application including
but not limited to proposed hours of use, shall be binding on the applicant and
shall constitute a condition of the carnival or fair permit's issuance, the breach
of which may result in the nullification of the carnival or fair permit. Each
carnival or fair permit shall include:
(1) The name, complete permanent home address, and telephone
number of the person requesting permit.
(2) The name and address of the organization or group sponsoring the
event. A copy of the organization's articles of incorporation, partnership
9-43
agreement, charter, or other organizing documents, if applicable, shall be
attached to the application.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will
act as contact person for the event and be responsible for the conduct thereof.
(4) The purpose of the proposed carnival or fair.
(5) Location of event, including written permission of any private
property owner, or other person in control of the property owned at which the
applicant proposes to hold the carnival or fair.
(6) The date or dates the carnival or fair is proposed to be conducted
and the hours it will commence and terminate each day.
(7) The specific assembly and disbursal locations, and the specific
route plan to be used, if applicable, if any part of the carnival or fair will be
assembled in one place and then moved to another.
(8) A list of every amusement device or ride with descriptive name and
identification number and a certificate from the owner and/or manager in charge
of the carnival or fair that each operator of each such amusement device or ride
has appropriate and sufficient training and knowledge of how to properly and
safely operate each amusement device or ride he or she will operate at the fair
or carnival.
(9) A positive certification from an independent testing agency
certifying that each amusement ride or device has passed a load test in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications within one (1) year of the date of
the carnival or fair. Modifications to the original design (such as restraining
devices not found on the original design) must be reflected in the load test or
reviewed and approved by a licensed engineer. Such engineer's approval report
shall be in writing and in sufficient detail as to indicate the extent of the
modification(s), shall contain a written description and/or illustration of the
modification approved and shall set forth the engineer's seal and current contact
information.
(10) A list of names of all persons who will work at or be employed at
the carnival or fair when it is proposed to be in operation in the city including
each such person's driver's license number and state of issuance or social
security number;
(11) A State of Tennessee Business License if appropriate.
(12) Such other information as the city may deem reasonably necessary;
and
(13) A certification that the statements in the application are true,
accurate and complete.
(14) A copy of a valid government issued photo identification card shall
be provided for each person who is listed as working or being employed at a
carnival or fair. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003, and amended by
Ord. #2008-57, Dec. 2008)
9-44
9-1005. Application fee. A non-refundable application fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be submitted with the application for a carnival
or fair permit. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1006. Permit fee. There will be a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
issuance of the carnival or fair permit payable prior to the issuance of the
permit. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1007. Transient vendor business license required. Each
applicant who is issued a carnival or fair permit under this chapter shall further
be required to obtain prior to the opening of the carnival or fair a transient
vendor business license from both the City of Maryville and from the Blount
County Court Clerk. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1008. Posting of required permits, etc. The following valid and
current documents shall be posted in a prominent location easily visible to the
public at each carnival or fair operated in the city during all times when the fair
or carnival is open for business:
(1) Carnival or fair permit.
(2) City transient vendor business license.
(3) Blount County transient vendor business license.
(4) Certificate of use by appropriate city official. (as added by Ord.
#2003-11, May 2003)
9-1009. Review and consideration of applications and appeal
process. The city recorder or designated representative shall initially review
the application for a carnival or fair permit to ensure that all required
information has been included. The city recorder, with the advice of appropriate
affected city operating departments, will then consider the application based on
the following criteria:
(1) Appropriateness of the location of the proposed event to the
surrounding community.
(2) Date and time of proposed event.
(3) The length of the proposed event.
(4) The impact on residential and commercial neighbors.
(5) Other events previously scheduled in the city on the same dates.
(6) The amount and availability of city personnel necessary to regulate
and monitor the proposed event.
(7) The interference with peak transportation periods, movement of
emergency vehicles, or schedules of various construction projects.
(8) Concerns about problems with parking, sanitation and dispersal
routes at the proposed event at the time and location contemplated by the
application.
(9) Adequacy of the application and the information provided therein.
9-45
(10) Any other relevant information pertaining to the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of and visitors to the city.
(11) Past experience with the applicant or those associated with the
applicant.
Upon completion of this analysis, and within a reasonable time, the city
recorder will determine whether or not the carnival or fair permit shall be
issued to the applicant and shall advise the applicant of the decision. A permit
may be used with or without additional conditions imposed by the city recorder.
If the application for a carnival or fair permit is denied, the city recorder will
provide the applicant an explanation in writing as to the reasons for the denial.
The applicant has the right to appeal in writing the conditions placed on the
issuance of a permit or the denial of a permit to the city manager's office within
ten (10) business days of the issuance of the conditional permit or of the date of
the denial letter, as applicable. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1010. Bond required. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of use, a
cash bond shall be provided to the City of Maryville in the amount of $1,000.00
for each carnival or fair on the condition that the operators and owners of the
carnival or fair shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter and the
statutes of the State of Tennessee during the setting up, operation of, and
closing down of the applicable carnival or fair. If all conditions are met to the
satisfaction of the city, the bond will be refunded within thirty (30) days of the
expiration of the carnival or fair permit. If the city determines that all
conditions have not been met, it may retain all or part of the bond as
appropriate to compensate it for the costs incurred due to the lack of compliance.
If costs incurred exceed bond amount, the carnival or fair will be billed the
additional amount. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1011. Inspections. The following city employees must perform and
a carnival or fair must pass the following inspections before a certificate of use
may issue. Animals in any way connected to the carnival or fair must be
properly restrained to allow inspectors to perform their work.
(1) Electrical inspector. (a) Inspection of extension cords for wear and
splices. Cords are required to have locking-type receptacles and plugs.
(b) Emergency cut-offs on carnival rides.
(2) Building inspector. (a) Inspection of blocking and scotching of
wheels and leveling arms.
(b) Check for guards on belts and other moveable devices.
(c) Walk-through inspection for obvious safety violations (no
mechanical inspections).
(d) Any other matter which comes to the attention of the
building inspector which causes him concern for the health, safety, and
welfare of any person regarding the carnival or fair operation.
9-46
(3) Fire inspector. (a) Inspection for fire extinguishers in a number
to be determined by the Maryville Fire Department.
(b) Inspection for smoke detectors in sleeping quarters, in
generator trailers, and on all carnival rides.
(c) Inspection of location and accessibility of items for fire and
life safety.
(4) Water quality control inspector (as is set forth below if the sanitary
sewer of the city is used by or in connection with the carnival or fair). (as added
by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1012. Daily inspection reports required. Daily inspection reports
in a form provided by the building inspector shall be submitted each day a
carnival or fair is opened to the public. Such daily inspection reports shall state
that the owner or manager in charge of the carnival or fair has inspected each
amusement device or ride for safety concerns in advance of opening the carnival
or fair to the public that day and that each such ride passed such inspection. A
daily inspection report shall be provided to the building inspector and/or his
agents prior to the operation of the carnival or fair each day for that day. (as
added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1013. Sanitation requirements. Temporary restroom facilities must
be provided at a carnival or fair in a number to be determined by city code
enforcement with a minimum of four (4) separate facilities in addition to the
existing city sanitary system. No dumping of holding tanks into the city storm
sewer system is allowed. Any discharge of gray-water in connection with a
carnival or fair, including dumping, must flow directly to the city sanitary sewer
system and meet the following requirements:
(1) Connections as per Southern Building Code and the Rules,
Regulations, Rates and Policies of the City of Maryville Water Quality Control
Department, the Maryville Sewer Use Ordinance and any other applicable
regulations.
(2) All discharge must meet the standards of the pretreatment
ordinance and the sewer use ordinance, including but not limited to the
prohibition on the discharge of chemicals and cooking grease into the sanitary
sewer system.
(3) Connections must be such as to not allow rainwater inflow.
(4) If authorized, connections may be made at a sanitary sewer
manhole using a special manhole cover drilled to accept a 4-inch PVC elbow and
riser or standard dump station connection subject to inspection. A manhole may
be provided by WQC department upon request.
(5) Connections may be made at other approved locations subject to
review and inspection.
(6) The appropriate city personnel must inspect all connections prior
to use. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-47
9-1014. Water service for carnival or fair. If water is to be used at
carnival or fair, a responsible party for the carnival or fair must sign up for
temporary water service with the City of Maryville Water Department and must
pay for consumption billed at current City of Maryville Water Department rates
before leaving the city and must operate pursuant to the following regulations:
(1) Connections must be in compliance with the Southern Building
Code and the Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies of the City of Maryville
Water Quality Control Department, and any other applicable regulations:
(2) Connection must be through a meter;
(3) Connection must include a backflow prevention device at the
connection point;
(4) The appropriate city personnel must inspect all connections. (as
added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1015. Storm water inlet protection required. A responsible party
for a permitted carnival or fair is required to protect any storm water inlets from
pollution that may impair water quality or system function where such storm
water inlets are impacted or potentially impacted by carnival or fair operations.
No equipment known to leak or to deposit oil, grease, or any other pollutant may
be used without making adequate provision for total, weatherproof collection
and approved disposal of the pollutant. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1016. Utility deposit required; return of deposit. Use of the water
or sewer system of the city for or in connection with a carnival or fair, a
temporary utility deposit in the amount of $1,000.00 will be required. Upon
(1) Return of all meters and equipment to the city, and
(2) Passing a post-use inspection of the sanitary sewer system involved
with the carnival or fair's use, and
(3) Full payment of any outstanding water and sewer use billing, the
deposit will be refunded within 30 days of the last of these conditions to occur.
(as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1017. Proof of contact of health department where food is
served. Prior to receiving a certificate of use, a responsible person for the
carnival or fair must show in writing that the Blount County Health
Department has received notice if any food is contemplated to be prepared and
served at the carnival or fair so that appropriate inspections can be made. (as
added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1018. Police presence required at carnival or fair's expense. At
least one officer of the Maryville Police Department shall be on duty at the
carnival or fair during the operating hours of the carnival or fair. The cost of
such officer shall be borne in advance by the carnival or fair and proof of
9-48
compliance with this part shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate
of use. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1019. Cease operation. (1) The city manager or his designated
representative is authorized to revoke a carnival or fair permit and order such
carnival or fair to immediately cease its operation due to any violation of this
chapter or if the city manager deems the continuing operation of the carnival or
fair to be a hazard to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens of or
visitors to Maryville. The city manager or the building inspector further has the
authority to cease operation of a particular amusement device or ride if it is
found to be particularly unsafe or hazardous without shutting down the entire
carnival or fair.
(2) The city manager or the chief of police further has the authority to
cease the operation of the carnival or fair and revoke the carnival or fair permit
in the event that a person is found employed at or working at the carnival or fair
where such person has not been listed under the requirements of § 9-1004(10)
and where proper identification has not been provided for each such individual
under § 9-1004(14). (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003, and amended by
Ord. #2008-57, Dec. 2008)
9-1020. Duration of permit. A carnival or fair permit issued under the
authority of this chapter shall expire no more than fourteen (14) days from the
commencement of the carnival or fair and shall be non-transferable and
non-assignable. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1021. Public liability insurance. Before a certificate of use is
granted to allow the opening of the carnival or fair, the carnival or fair operators
shall furnish evidence that they have in force at the time such a carnival or fair
is to operate in the city the following coverages, which would apply to the
carnival or fair and its operations:
(1) Worker's compensation insurance sufficient to comply with the
State of Tennessee statutes;
(2) Comprehensive general liability insurance, by an insurance
company licensed to do business in this state, providing coverage of
$2,000,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence. Such coverage shall include
independent contractors, products liability and personal injury, and the city
shall be an additional named insured:
(3) Comprehensive automobile liability providing for a single limit for
$500,000.00 per occurrence and aggregate for owned, not owned, and hired
motor vehicles. The city shall be an additional named insured; and
(4) Certificates of insurance in a form and with insurance companies
acceptable to the city shall be filed with the city recorder prior to issuance of the
certificate of use. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-49
9-1022. Other permits. The carnival or fair permit shall be in addition
to any permits additional permits or licenses required by state and federal law
or local ordinance. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May 2003)
9-1023. Exemptions. Special events conducted solely by or in
conjunction with the City of Maryville, the City of Maryville Schools and the
Blount County, Maryville and Alcoa Parks and Recreation Commission shall be
exempt from requirements of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2003-11, May
2003)
9-1024. Penalty. In addition to the ceasing of operations of a carnival
or fair as set forth above, the violation of this chapter is punishable under the
general penalty clause of the City of Maryville. (as added by Ord. #2003-11,
May 2003)
9-50
CHAPTER 11
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS AND FOOD TRUCKS
SECTION
9-1101. Definitions.
9-1102. Requirements.
9-1103. Sales on streets and public property.
9-1104. Mobile food vendors on private property.
9-1105. Permit.
9-1106. Permit renewal.
9-1107. Permit and decal.
9-1108. General requirements of mobile food vendor vehicles.
9-1109. Inspections.
9-1110. Exemptions.
9-1111. Penalties.
9-1101. Definitions. (1) "Mobile food vendor" is defined as any person
selling food and/or drink from a mobile vehicle, including a food truck, food
trailer and ice cream truck.
(2) "Mobile food vendor vehicle" is defined as a vehicle that returns
daily to its base of operations and is used either in the preparation or sale of
food or drink products, or both.
(3) "Food truck" is defined as an enclosed motor vehicle equipped with
facilities for preparing, cooking and selling various types of food and/or drink
products other than exclusively ice cream and related frozen products.
(4) "Food trailer" is defined as a detached trailer that is equipped with
facilities for preparation, cooking and selling various types of food and/or drink
products.
(5) "Ice cream truck" is defined as a motor vehicle containing a
commercial freezer from which a vendor sells only frozen, pre-packaged food
products such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, flavored frozen water
and similar frozen items. (as added by Ord. #2016-13, June 2016)
9-1102. Requirements. (1) Licenses and permits. It shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in business as a mobile food vendor in the City of
Maryville without first obtaining a business license and a mobile food vendor's
license with a decal evidencing such license. Any permits, licenses, and
certifications required by the Blount County Department of Health and/or State
of Tennessee for operation of the business are also required. City of Maryville
transient vendor licenses will not be required for those business owners residing
in the State of Tennessee and/or businesses based in Tennessee. State transient
vendor licenses will be required for owners of businesses residing outside of
Tennessee and/or businesses based outside of Tennessee as required by the
9-51
State of Tennessee. Upon being granted a mobile food vendor license, a mobile
food vendor must comply with the rules and regulations herein.
(2) Insurance. At the time of the application for a mobile food vendor
license, the mobile food vendor must provide proof of valid automobile liability
insurance in an amount required by law for operation of the applicable mobile
food vendor vehicle(s). Failure to maintain this insurance when acting as a
mobile food vendor will result in immediate revocation of the mobile food vendor
license.
(3) Litter receptacles. Each licensed mobile food vendor must maintain
for customer use a litter receptacle of sufficient size to accept the litter being
generated by the sales from the vendor's mobile food vehicle at the point of sales.
The receptacle must be maintained in such a manner as to preclude an overflow
of refuse. Each mobile food vendor shall pick up litter which is associated with
the vendor's sale in the vicinity of the vendor's mobile food vehicle prior to
departing a sales location. A pattern of leaving excessive litter caused by product
packaging shall be basis for suspension or revocation of the mobile food vendor
license.
(4) What can be sold. Mobile food vendors shall be limited to selling
edibles and hot and cold beverages containing no alcohol. The sale of non-food
or drink items from the mobile food vendor vehicle shall be limited to hats, tshirts
and sweat shirts displaying the mobile food vendor logo and/or branding.
(5) No seating and tables. There shall be no benches, tables, chairs or
other furniture which may be used for eating or sitting provided by or associated
with a mobile food vendor vehicle.
(6) Fire extinguishers and fire suppression systems. All food trucks
and food trailers must be equipped with a fire extinguisher that is certified
annually by a licensed company. Additionally, food trucks and food trailers that
produce grease laden vapors (i.e. units with deep fat fryers or flat-top griddles)
must have a fire suppression system certified bi-annually by a licensed
company.
(7) Placement. Mobile food vendor vehicles shall not obstruct or
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic, access to driveways, and sight distance
for drivers.
(8) Pedestrian only. Mobile food vendor vehicles shall serve
pedestrians only; drive-through or drive-in services are hereby prohibited.
(9) Health regulations. All mobile food vendors and their mobile food
vendor vehicles must be in compliance with all applicable health regulations for
Blount County and the State of Tennessee relating to food safety and
preparation.
(10) Noises. Other than ice cream trucks being able to play a song
associated with its business at a reasonable level of sound, no mobile food
vendors shall sound any device which produces an offensive or loud noise to
attract customers, and mobile food vendors shall not use a public address system
on the vehicle to broadcast and advertise products.
9-52
(11) No parking in fire lanes. No mobile food vendors shall park in fire
lanes.
(12) Signs. Signs which are permanently affixed to the mobile food
vendor vehicle shall extend no more than six inches (6") from the vehicle. Except
as stated herein, all signs shall be attached or painted on the mobile food vendor
vehicle. Electronic signs are prohibited as are signs that flash, reflect motion
pictures, emit smoke or vapor, or produce any rotation, motion or movement.
Each food truck or food trailer is permitted one sandwich board type sign located
within ten feet (10') of the applicable food truck or food trailer for advertisement
purposes while the food truck or food trailer is open for business. Such sandwich
board sign shall be no more than forty-eight inches (48") high and contain no
more than seven (7) square feet.
(13) Electricity. Any mobile food vendor vehicle shall not be attached
to or use any temporary electrical pole and shall be ineligible for any permanent
electrical service from the City of Maryville Electric Department. (as added by
Ord. #2016-13, June 2016, and amended by Ord. #2016-19, Aug. 2016 and Ord.
#2017-28, July 2017)
9-1103. Sales on streets and public property. (1) Ice cream trucks.
The hours of operation for ice cream trucks are between 9:00 A.M. and sunset
as stated for that day for the Maryville area by the National Weather Service.
Ice cream trucks may vend on public streets so long as they remain mobile and
only make stops of ten (10) minutes or less at one (1) location.
(2) Food trucks and food trailers. Except as set forth herein, food
trucks and food trailers are prohibited from selling food on any public street,
sidewalk, alley, trail or right-of-way or any city owned or controlled property,
including, but not limited to, parks, unless approved by the city as part as a city
permitted special event. The above prohibition will not apply to the parking lot
and related areas at the Blount County Justice Center nor to the parking lot and
related areas surrounding the Blount County Courthouse if permission is
obtained by the County Mayor for placement of food trucks or food trailers on
such property. All mobile food vendors must comply with all rules, regulations
and requirements related to any city permitted special event, including, but not
limited to, provision as to where mobile food vendors will be located, how long
the mobile food vendors can be present at the location, and how many and which
food trucks can participate in the city permitted special event. (as added by
Ord. #2016-13, June 2016, and amended by Ord. #2017-28, July 2017)
9-1104. Mobile food vendors on private property. All mobile food
vendors shall be subject to the following regulations on private property:
(1) Existing restaurants. Other than an ice cream truck, no mobile food
vendor shall operate within fifty feet (50') of a door intended for regular public
use of a lawfully established eating establishment that is open for business
(other than another mobile food vendor vehicle) unless the mobile food vendor
9-53
provides documentation which is signed by the restaurant owner or operator
that the restaurant owner or operator has no objection to a closer proximity.
(2) Location. Mobile food vendors will be permitted on private
property in the city according to the terms and conditions herein. A mobile food
vendor under this section must have written permission from a private property
owner for setting up for each location. The mobile food vendor must provide a
copy of such written permission upon demand to city officials. No mobile food
vendor on private property shall do business or operate within fifty feet (50') of
any property line of any lot used for residential purposes.
(3) Hours of operation. No mobile food vendor shall operate outside the
hours of 8:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. At the end of each business day's operation, the
mobile food vendor shall remove from the property the mobile food vendor
vehicle and all materials associated with the business, unless participating in
a city permitted special event that allows the overnight parking of mobile food
vendor vehicles during the special event. (as added by Ord. #2016-13, June
2016, and amended by Ord. #2017-28, July 2017)
9-1105. Permit. Applicants for a permit under this section shall file
with the city recorder a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished
by the city recorder. Submission of false or misleading information will result
in revocation of the permit and a ban on receiving future permits. The
application shall provide the following:
(1) The name and contact information of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's permanent street address, mailing address and
email address.
(3) The applicant's telephone numbers including a cell phone number
if available.
(4) A brief description of the nature of the business and of the goods
to be sold.
(5) A copy of the vehicle registration for any mobile food vendor vehicle
and proof of automobile insurance for the mobile food vendor vehicle.
(6) A copy of the business license, proof of State of Tennessee sales tax
registration, and any health department license or certification required by
Blount County Department of Health or the State of Tennessee.
(7) State of Tennessee and City of Maryville transient vendor licenses
will be required for businesses based outside of the State of Tennessee and/or
for owners of businesses residing outside the State of Tennessee.
(8) Color photograph(s) of the mobile food vendor vehicle's interior and
exterior.
(9) Permission to obtain a background check of owner(s) of mobile food
vendor vehicles. The city reserves the right to reject an applicant if he or she (or
in the case of an LLC or corporation, its owner(s)),
(a) Is a registered sex offender;
(b) Has been convicted of a felony in the past ten years;
9-54
(c) Has a chronic history of an unreasonable number and kind
of moving vehicle violations as determined by the chief of police; or
(d) Presents an unreasonable public health and safety risk
based on past criminal history as determined by the chief of police.
The applicant owner must also acknowledge and affirm his, her or its
duty as hereby required by this code to perform background checks on each of
his employees or agents operating the mobile food vendor vehicle permitted
herein. The applicant must acknowledge and affirm that he, she or it will not
allow an employee or agent to work in the city as a mobile food vendor if such
employee or agent is a registered sex offender or if he or she has been convicted
of a felony within the past ten years.
(10) Payment of an application fee of one hundred twenty dollars
($120.00) which will be prorated by month for the first year of the permit at a
rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per month of operation. No refunds will be issued.
Any day in the month where the permit is in place will require payment for that
entire month.
(11) Such other relevant information as may be reasonably requested
by the city after review of submission of the material in order to assure full
review of the information needed to assess the impact of the proposed operation
on the health, safety and well-being of the public. (as added by Ord. #2016-13,
June 2016, and amended by Ord. #2016-19, Aug. 2016)
9-1106. Permit renewal. A permit issued under this section shall be
valid for the remainder of the calendar year from the date of issuance and shall
be renewed on an annual basis on or by January 1 of each year upon proper
application and payment of the permit fee of an additional one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.00) per year. A permit shall be valid for only one (1) mobile food
vendor vehicle. Each operator and/or applicant shall file additional application
and pay an additional permit fee for each additional mobile food vendor vehicle.
No refunds will be issued for renewed permits and no renewed permits for
partial years will be issued. (as added by Ord. #2016-13, June 2016)
9-1107. Permit and decal. Each applicant upon being issued a permit
under this section shall also be issued a decal which the mobile food vendor
must display on the right front windshield's lower corner on each mobile food
vendor vehicle or at such other location on the vehicle as the city in writing shall
approve. (as added by Ord. #2016-13, June 2016)
9-1108. General requirements of mobile food vendor vehicles. All
exterior bodywork and mechanical equipment of a mobile food vendor vehicle
shall be maintained in good condition, free of excessive wear, tear or damage.
All exterior paint work shall be maintained in good condition, free of substantial
scratches, chips, rust, dents and abrasions. All windshield and window glass of
mobile food vendor vehicles shall be maintained free of cracks, scratches, pitting,
9-55
abrasions and other conditions that may cause a hazard or reduce clarity of
vision. (as added by Ord. #2016-13, June 2016)
9-1109. Inspections. (1) Department of health primary. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as limiting or replacing the role of the Tennessee
Department of Health which has the primary task of inspecting mobile food
vendor vehicles.
(2) Entry. The city police and other officials shall have the right at any
time after displaying proper identification to enter into or upon any mobile food
vendor vehicle for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any provisions of
this section are being violated and for general inspection purposes.
(3) Shut down. Any mobile food vendor vehicle which is found after any
city inspection to be unsafe or not compliant with this section may be directed
to be out of operation until the deficiency is corrected. (as added by Ord.
#2016-13, June 2016)
9-1110. Exemptions. Mobile food vendors that are part of and
participating in a city permitted carnival will not be required to comply with the
requirements of this chapter as far as participation in such carnival is
concerned.
Mobile food vendors that are part of and participating in a city officially
approved special event will not be required to comply with the requirements of
this chapter as far as participation in such city officially approved special event
is concerned.
A mobile food vendor may participate in only one (1) city officially
approved special event per calendar year under this exemption without having
to obtain a permit and otherwise comply with this chapter. This section will not
apply to recurring events such as community events and farmers markets. The
exemption will apply, however, to events such as or similar to Summer on
Broadway, Smoky Mountain Scottish Festival and Games, and Taste of Blount.
(as added by Ord. #2016-13, June 2016, and amended by Ord. #2017-13, May
2017)
9-1111. Penalties. Violations of this chapter are subject to the general
penalty clause for the City of Maryville. The city may also suspend or revoke a
permit and decal issued hereunder for violation of this chapter. (as added by
Ord. #2016-13, June 2016)
10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL1
CHAPTER
1. DEFINITIONS.
2. DOGS AND CATS.
3. ANIMALS IN GENERAL.
4. CONTROLS AND ENFORCEMENT.
5. VICIOUS DOGS AND CATS.
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION
10-101. Enumerated.
10-101. Enumerated. As used in this title the following terms shall
mean:
(1) "Animal shelter." Any premises designated by action of the City
of Maryville for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found
running at large in violation of this title.
(2) "Animal control officer." The person or persons employed or
designated by the city manager as the municipality's enforcement officer.
(3) "At large." Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when he is
off the property of his owner and not under control of a competent person.
(4) "Exposed to rabies." An animal has been exposed to rabies within
the meaning of this title if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any animal
known to have been infected with rabies.
(5) "Kennel." Any person, group of persons, or corporations engaged
in breeding, buying, selling, or boarding dogs or cats.
(6) "Owner." Any person, group of persons, or corporation owning,
keeping, or harboring animals.
(7) "Restraint." A dog or cat is under restraint within the meaning of
this title if he is controlled by a leash, under control of a competent person and
obedient to that person's commands, on or within a vehicle being driven or
parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper.
(8) "Spayed female." Any bitch which has been operated upon to
prevent conception. (1985 Code, § 3-101)
1Charter reference: art. II, § 1(27).
10-2
CHAPTER 2
DOGS AND CATS
SECTION
10-201. Rabies vaccination and registration required.
10-202. Dogs or cats to wear collars, choke chains, or harness with tags.
10-203. Running at large prohibited.
10-204. [Deleted.]
10-205. Noisy dogs prohibited.
10-206. Nuisance defined; actions constituting a nuisance.
10-207. Ignorance of a dog's or cat's habits no defense.
10-208. Leash requirement in certain areas of city parks or property.
10-209. Dogs and cats in food service establishments.
10-210. Dogs killing waterfowl.
10-211. Pet shop inspections.
10-212. Confinement of dogs or cats suspected of being rabid.
10-213. Seizure or disposition of dogs and cats.
10-214. Court proceedings against dog or cat owners.
10-215. Injured or killed dogs or cats.
10-216. Inspections of premises.
10-217. Dead animals.
10-201. Rabies vaccination and registration required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor within the City of Maryville any
dog over three (3) months of age or any cat over three (3) months of age without
having the same duly vaccinated against rabies and registered in accordance
with the provisions of the "Tennessee Anti-Rabies Law" (Tennessee Code
Annotated, §§ 68-8-101 to 68-8-114) or other applicable law. (1985 Code,
§ 3-201)
10-202. Dogs or cats to wear collars, choke chains, or harness
with tags. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor within
the City of Maryville any dog or cat which does not wear a collar, choke chain,
or harness with a tag evidencing the vaccination and registration as required by
the preceding section. (1985 Code, § 3-202)
10-203. Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any dog or cat owned by him or under his control or which may
be found habitually on premises occupied by him to run at large within the
corporate limits. (1985 Code, § 3-203)
10-204. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 3-204, as deleted by Ord. #2008-37,
Sept. 2008)
10-3
10-205. Noisy dogs prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor any dog which, by loud and frequent barking, whining, or
howling disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood. (1985 Code, § 3-205)
10-206. Nuisance defined; actions constituting a nuisance. (1) The
actions of a dog or cat constitute a nuisance when a dog or cat disturbs the
rights of, threatens the safety of, or damages the property of or injures the
person of a member of the general public, or interferes with the ordinary use
and enjoyment of their property.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or
maintain a dog or cat in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. By
way of example and not a limitation, the following acts or actions by an owner
or possessor of an animal are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and,
therefore, unlawful:
(a) Failure to exercise sufficient restraint necessary to control
a dog or cat.
(b) Allowing or permitting a dog or cat to damage the property
of any one other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning
over garbage containers or damaging gardens, shrubs, lawns, flowers, or
vegetables.
(c) Maintaining a vicious dog or cat. (See § 10-204 of this code.)
(d) Maintaining dogs or cats in an unsanitary environment
which results in offensive odors or is dangerous to the animal or the
public health, welfare, or safety.
(e) Maintaining property in a manner that is offensive,
annoying, or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare because of
the number, type, variety, density, or location of the dogs or cats on the
property.
(f) Maintaining a dog or cat that is diseased or dangerous to the
public health.
(g) Maintaining a dog or cat that habitually or repeatedly
chases, snaps at, attacks, or barks at pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicles.
(h) Failure to confine a female dog while in heat for twenty-four
(24) days in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that she will
not be in contact with another dog, or create a nuisance by attracting
other dogs. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the
intentional breeding of dogs within an enclosed area on the premises of
the owner of the dog which is being bred.
(3) Any dog, cat or other animal which has been determined by the
animal control officer to be a public nuisance based on the criteria found in
sub-section (2) of this section, and which has been found at large and impounded
at the City of Maryville Animal Control Facility may not be redeemed by the
owners, unless such impoundment and boarding fees as established by
resolution of the city council are paid. However, if said dog, cat or other animal
10-4
is impounded for a third or subsequent offense, redemption must be authorized
by any court having jurisdiction. (1985 Code, § 3-206)
10-207. Ignorance of dog's or cat's habits no defense. It shall be the
duty of any person owning, maintaining, or harboring any dog or cat to maintain
close personal supervision of said animal and ignorance of the habits or
character of the dog or cat on the part of such person shall be no defense in
actions arising under this chapter. (1985 Code, § 3-207)
10-208. Leash requirement in certain areas of city parks or
property. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has possession,
charge, or custody of any dog to take the dog into or allow the dog to enter any
public park or public property in the city without having the dog at all times
under restraint of a leash in all areas of the parks or property where signs are
posted requiring a leash. Where signs are not posted requiring a leash, the dog
shall at all times be under control of the owner or other person having custody
of the dog. (1985 Code, § 3-208)
10-209. Dogs and cats in food service establishments. No dog or cat
shall be permitted or kept for any period of time in any room in which food is
prepared, processed, stored, or sold in any restaurant or other food service
establishment licensed by the city. This section shall not apply to guide dogs
accompanied by blind customers of such establishments nor to police patrol dogs
accompanied by a police officer in the course of his duties. (1985 Code, § 3-209)
10-210. Dogs killing waterfowl. Any dog found in the act of killing
waterfowl in the city may be summarily destroyed by the animal control officer
or any police officer if such animal cannot be apprehended after reasonable
effort. (1985 Code, § 3-210)
10-211. Pet shop inspections. The animal control officer or any police
officer of the city shall have the right to inspect any pet shop within the city to
determine whether the pet shop is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and other ordinances of the city.
The chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, shall have the
authority to set standards of cleanliness, humane treatment, and any other
reasonable factor regarding the operation of a pet shop. (1985 Code, § 3-211)
10-212. Confinement of dogs or cats suspected of being rabid. If
any dog or cat has bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten any person
or is for any reason suspected of being infected with rabies, the animal control
officer or chief of police may cause such dog or cat to be confined or isolated for
a period of ten (10) days. (1985 Code, § 3-212)
10-5
10-213. Seizure or disposition of dogs and cats. Any dog or cat found
running at large may be seized by the animal control officer or any police officer
and placed in an animal shelter provided or designated by the city council. If
said dog or cat is wearing a tag or if it is known that the dog or cat has an
owner, the dog or cat may be held at the animal shelter for ten (10) days, if not
claimed sooner. The owner, if known, shall be notified in person, by telephone,
or by a post card addressed to the last known mailing address to appear within
ten (10) days and redeem his or her dog or cat by paying the pound fee, in
accordance with a schedule approved by the city council, or the dog or cat will
be humanely destroyed or sold. If said dog or cat is not wearing a tag and it is
not known that the dog or cat has an owner, it may be humanely destroyed or
sold unless legally claimed by the owner within five (5) days. No dog or cat shall
be released in any event from the animal shelter unless or until such dog or cat
has been vaccinated against rabies and has a tag evidencing such vaccination
placed on its collar.
When, because of its viciousness or apparent infection with rabies, a dog
or cat running at large cannot be safely impounded, it may be summarily
destroyed by the animal control officer or any police officer. (1985 Code, § 3-213,
as replaced by Ord. #2008-36, Sept. 2008)
10-214. Court proceedings against dog or cat owners. If a dog or
cat is impounded, the animal control officer, or any police officer, may institute
proceedings in the city court on behalf of the city against the owner charging the
owner with a violation of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as preventing any person from instituting a proceeding in the city
court for violation of this chapter where there has been no impoundment. (1985
Code, § 3-214)
10-215. Injured or killed dogs or cats. Dogs or cats injured or killed
in the streets shall be considered as running at large, and the animal control
officer or any police officer may remove all such animals. The owner of any
injured dog or cat shall be liable for impoundment costs or veterinarian charges.
The public works department may remove dead animals from any right of way.
(1985 Code, § 3-215)
10-216. Inspections of premises. For the purpose of making
inspections to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the animal
control officer or any police officer shall be authorized to enter, at any
reasonable time, any pet shop, food handling service or restaurant, or any other
premises where he has reasonable cause to believe a dog or cat is being kept in
violation of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 3-216)
10-217. Dead animals. Any person owning or having possession of any
dead animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury the same or notify
10-6
the health officer and dispose of such animal in such manner as the health
officer shall direct. (as added by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
10-7
CHAPTER 3
ANIMALS IN GENERAL
SECTION
10-301. Running at large prohibited.
10-302. Vicious animals other than dogs and cats.
10-303. Improper care of animals prohibited.
10-304. Livestock and poultry prohibited from residing within corporate limits;
exceptions.
10-305. Cleanliness of pens or enclosures; adequate food, water and shelter, etc.
to be provided to animals and fowls; exceptions.
10-306. [Deleted.]
10-307. Seizure and disposition of animals.
10-308. Prohibition of horses in public parks and exceptions.
10-309. Abandonment.
10-301. Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
owner of any cows, swine, sheep, horses, donkeys, mules or goats, or other
livestock, or any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, or other domestic fowl to
knowingly or negligently permit any of them to run at large in any street, alley,
or unenclosed lot within the corporate limits. (1985 Code, § 3-301)
10-302. Vicious animals other than dogs and cats. No one shall
keep, possess, or harbor a vicious animal in the city. It shall be the duty of any
animal control officer or policeman to impound any such animal, and if
impoundment cannot be made with safety to the animal control officer, police
officer, or other citizens, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the
owner, keeper, or possessor. (1985 Code, § 3-302)
10-303. Improper care of animals prohibited. (1) No person owning
or keeping an animal or fowl shall fail to provide it with the minimum care, nor
shall such person keep an animal or fowl under unsanitary conditions or in an
enclosure that is overcrowded, unclean, or unhealthy.
(2) Except for emergencies or circumstances beyond the owner's
control, an animal or fowl is deprived of minimum care if it is not provided with
care sufficient to preserve the health and well being of the animal considering
the species, breed, and type of animal or fowl. Minimum care includes, but is not
limited to the following requirements:
(a) Food of sufficient quantity, quality, and nutrition to allow for
normal growth or maintenance of body weight and health.
(b) Open or adequate access to potable water in sufficient
quantities to satisfy the animal's needs. Snow or ice is not an adequate
10-8
water source. Fowl shall at all times be provided with receptacles kept
constantly with clean water.
(c) Access to a barn, doghouse, or other shelter sufficient to
protect the animal from the elements.
(d) Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent
person to relieve distress from injury, neglect, or disease.
(3) An enclosure is overcrowded unless its area is at least the square
of the length of the animal in inches (from tip of nose to base of tail) plus six
inches (6") for each animal confined therein, and the height must allow for each
animal to fully stand upright.
(4) An enclosure is unclean when it contains an excessive amount of
animal waste.
(5) An enclosure is unhealthy when its condition is likely to cause
illness or injury to the animal or fowl. (1985 Code, § 3-303, as replaced by
Ord. #2008-38, Sept. 2008)
10-304. Livestock and poultry prohibited from residing within
corporate limits; exceptions. As further set forth in title 14 of the Maryville
City Code, livestock and poultry are not permitted to reside within the corporate
limits except as legal pre-existing, non-conforming uses unless specifically
approved by the board of zoning appeals as a special exception use. Livestock
shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, cattle, horses, mules, swine,
goats, sheep, llamas and donkeys. Poultry is defined to include, but not be
limited to, chickens, hens, roosters or turkeys. (1985 Code, § 3-304, as deleted
by Ord. #2008-38, Sept. 2008, and replaced by Ord. #2014-08, Feb. 2014)
10-305. Cleanliness of pens or enclosures; adequate food, water
and shelter, etc. to be provided to animals and fowls. When animals or
fowls are kept within the corporate limits, the building, structure, corral, pen
or enclosure in which they are kept shall at all times be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, and it shall be unlawful for the owner thereof to keep
the same otherwise. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal or
fowl of any kind to be kept or confined in any place where the food, water,
shelter, and ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the preservation of
its health, safe condition, and wholesomeness. Only livestock or poultry that are
legal pre-existing, non-conforming uses may reside at a location within the
corporate limits unless approved by the board of zoning appeals as a special
exception use. (1985 Code, § 3-305, as replaced by Ord. #2014-08, Feb. 2014)
10-306. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 3-306, as deleted by Ord. #2015-16,
Feb. 2015)
10-307. Seizure and disposition of animals. Any animal or fowl
found running at large or otherwise being kept in violation of this chapter may
10-9
be seized by the animal control officer or by any police officer of the city and
confined in a pound provided or designated by the City of Maryville. If the
owner is known he shall be given notice in person, by telephone, or by a postcard
addressed to his last-known mailing address, and the animal or fowl will be
humanely destroyed or sold if not claimed within ten (10) days. If the owner is
not known, a notice describing the impounded animal or fowl will be posted at
the entrance to the animal shelter. The notice shall state that the impounded
animal or fowl must be claimed within ten (10) days by paying the pound costs
or the same will humanely be destroyed or sold. If not claimed by the owner
within the specified period, the animal or fowl shall be sold or humanely
destroyed. (1985 Code, § 3-307)
10-308. Prohibition of horses in public parks and exceptions. It
shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, charge, control or
custody of any horse or other mammal of the genus Equus to take the same into,
allow the same to enter, or to permit the same to be ridden in, any public park
in the city, except during special events occurring at any public park which
events have been approved by the city manager or chief of police, or their
designee, and which approval specifically authorizes the time and presence of
such animals in said park or parks. (Ord. #97-35, May 1997)
10-309. Abandonment. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon
an animal that is under his or her ownership or care. If an animal is found
abandoned, the animal may be impounded. Abandonment consists of:
(1) Leaving an animal for a period of in excess of twenty-four (24)
hours without providing for the feeding and watering of said animal and for
someone to check on the animal's condition.
(2) Leaving an animal by a roadside.
(3) Leaving an animal on either public or private property without the
property owner's consent.
Any person convicted of violating this section will be subject to a
maximum penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per animal, per violation. Each animal
abandoned is a separate violation. (as added by Ord. #2008-39, Sept. 2008)
10-10
CHAPTER 4
CONTROLS AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
10-401. Animal shelter.
10-402. Rabies control.
10-403. Reports of bite cases.
10-404. Responsibilities of veterinarians.
10-405. Exemptions.
10-406. Inspections of premises.
10-407. Interference with animal control officer.
10-408. Records of animal control officer.
10-401. Animal shelter. The word "shelter" as used in title 10 of the
Maryville Municipal Code shall refer to the Animal Control Facility operated by
the City of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 3-401)
10-402. Rabies control. (1) Every animal or rodent which bites a
person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer. It shall
thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer
for a period of ten (10) days and shall not be released from such quarantine
except by written permission of the animal control officer. At the discretion of
the animal control officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner,
at the shelter designated as the city animal shelter, or at the owner's option and
expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals, or
in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known such quarantine shall be
at the shelter designated as the animal shelter.
(2) The owner upon demand by the animal control officer shall
forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is
suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the
expense of which shall be borne by the owner. Said animal may be reclaimed by
the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of the required fees, and
upon compliance of the licensing provisions set forth in § 10-201.
(3) When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or
rabies suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while under
such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of
such animal to the state health department for pathological examination, and
shall notify the proper public health officer of the city of the diagnosis.
(4) When one or both reports indicate a positive diagnosis of rabies, the
animal control officer shall recommend an area-wide quarantine for a period of
sixty (60) days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no pet animal shall
be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets during such period of
10-11
quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from
the city without written permission of the animal control officer.
During this quarantine period and as long afterward as he decides it is
necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, the city health officer shall require
that all dogs or cats, three (3) months of age and older, shall be vaccinated
against rabies with a canine rabies vaccine approved by the Biologics Control
Section of the U. S. Department of Agriculture. The types of approved canine
anti-rabies vaccine to be used and the recognized duration of immunity for each
shall be established by the city health officer. All vaccinated dogs or cats shall
be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for thirty (30) days
after vaccination. During the quarantine period, the city health officer shall be
empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment
of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located
throughout the area of the health jurisdiction.
No dog or cat which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray,
unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to be adopted by the animal shelter
during the period of rabies emergency quarantine, except by special
authorization of the city health officer and the animal control officer.
(5) Dogs or cats bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately
destroyed or if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict
isolation of the animal in a kennel for six (6) months shall be enforced. If the
dog or cat has been previously vaccinated, within time limits established by the
city health officer or Public Health Service based on the kind of vaccine used,
revaccination and restraint (leashing and confinement) for thirty (30) days shall
be carried out.
(6) In the event there are additional cases of rabies occurring during
the period of the quarantine, such period of the quarantine may be extended for
an additional six (6) months.
(7) No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, or remove from the
corporate limits, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed
to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as herein provided,
without written permission from the animal control officer.
(8) The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon
demand be surrendered to the animal control officer.
(9) The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be infected with rabies.
(10) No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for
quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by
the animal control officer.
(11) That each and every provision of this chapter relative to rabies
control shall be applicable to all animals and rodents and the owners thereof in
the City of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 3-402)
10-12
10-403. Reports of bite cases. It shall be the duty of every physician
or other medical practitioner to report to the animal control officer the names
and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with
such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. (1985 Code, § 3-403)
10-404. Responsibilities of veterinarians. It shall be the duty of
every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control officer any animal
considered by him to be a rabies suspect. (1985 Code, § 3-404)
10-405. Exemptions. (1) Hospitals, clinics, and other premises
operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are
exempt from the provisions of this title except where expressly stated.
(2) The licensing and vaccination requirements of this title shall not
apply to any dog belonging to a non-resident of the city and kept within the city
for not longer than thirty (30) days, provided all such dogs shall at all times
while in the city be kept within a building, enclosure, or vehicle, or be under
restraint by the owner. (1985 Code, § 3-405)
10-406. Inspections of premises. For the purpose of discharging the
duties imposed by this title and to enforce its provisions, the animal control
officer or any police officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which
a dog or cat is kept or harbored and to demand the exhibition by the owner of
such dog or cat or the exhibition of the license for such dog or cat. It is further
provided that the animal control officer may enter the premises where any
animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to
examine such animal and to take possession of such animal, when in his
opinion, it is required to insure humane treatment to such animal. (1985 Code,
§ 3-406)
10-407. Interference with animal control officer. No person shall
interfere with, hinder, or molest the animal control officer in the performance
of any duty imposed by this title or seek to release any animal in the custody of
the animal control officer except as provided in this title. (1985 Code, § 3-407)
10-408. Records of animal control officer. (1) It shall be the duty of
the animal control officer to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed
records of the licensing, impoundment, and disposition of all animals coming
into his custody.
(2) It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep or cause to
be kept accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him and his
investigation of same. (1985 Code, § 3-408)
10-13
CHAPTER 5
VICIOUS DOGS AND CATS
SECTION
10-501. Definitions.
10-502. Procedure for declaring a dog or cat vicious.
10-503. Notification of vicious dog or vicious cat declaration.
10-504. Hearing on vicious dog declaration or vicious cat declaration.
10-505. Appeal from vicious dog declaration or vicious cat declaration.
10-506. Requirements for keeping a vicious dog or cat.
10-507. Impoundment.
10-508. Notice of impoundment.
10-509. Hearing on impoundment and/or destruction.
10-510. Exceptions.
10-511. Change of status.
10-512. Change of ownership.
10-501. Definitions. (1) "Vicious dog" means:
(a) Any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition
to attack without provocation, to cause serious injury, or to otherwise
threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
(b) Any dog which, without provocation, has attacked or bitten
a human being or domestic animal; or
(c) Any dog owned or harbored primarily, or in part for the
purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.
(2) "Vicious cat" means:
(a) Any cat with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition
to attack without provocation, to cause serious injury, or to otherwise
threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
(b) Any cat which, without provocation, has attacked or bitten
a human being or domestic animal. (as added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept.
2008)
10-502. Procedure for declaring a dog or cat vicious. (1) An animal
control officer, police officer, or any adult person may request under oath that
a dog or cat be classified as vicious as defined in § 10-501 by submitting a sworn,
written complaint. Upon receipt of such complaint, the city manager (or his
designee) shall notify the owner of the dog or cat, in writing, that a complaint
has been filed and that an investigation into the allegations as set forth in the
complaint will be conducted.
(2) At the conclusion of an investigation, the city manager (or his
designee) may:
10-14
(a) Determine that the dog or cat is not vicious and, if the dog
or cat is impounded, waive any impoundment fees incurred and release
the dog or cat to its owner; or
(b) Determine that the dog or cat is vicious and order the owner
to comply with the requirements for keeping a vicious dog or cat set forth
in § 10-506, and if the dog or cat is impounded, release the dog or cat to
its owner after the owner has paid all fees incurred for impoundment. If
all impoundment fees have not been paid within ten (10) days after a
final determination that the dog or cat is vicious, the city manager (or his
designee) may cause the dog or cat to be humanely destroyed.
(c) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a dog
or cat to be declared vicious prior to taking action under state law. (as
added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-503. Notification of vicious dog or vicious cat declaration.
(1) Within five (5) days after declaring a dog or cat vicious, the city
manager (or his designee) shall notify the owner by certified mail or personal
delivery of the dog's or cat's designation as a vicious dog or vicious cat and other
requirements for keeping a vicious dog or vicious cat as set forth in § 10-506.
The city manager (or his designee) shall also notify the City of Maryville Animal
Control Facility of the designation of any dog as a vicious dog or the designation
of any cat as a vicious cat.
(2) The notice shall inform the owner that he or she may request, in
writing, a hearing to contest the city manager's finding (or that of this designee)
and designation within five (5) days after delivery of the vicious dog declaration
or vicious cat declaration notice. (as added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-504. Hearing on vicious dog declaration or vicious cat
declaration. (1) The city manager (or his designee) shall hold such a hearing
within ten (10) days after receiving the owner's written request for such a
hearing. The city manager (or his designee) shall provide notice of the date,
time, and location of the hearing to the owner by certified mail or personal
delivery and to the complainant by regular mail.
(2) At a hearing, all interested parties shall be given the opportunity
to present evidence on the issue of the animal's viciousness. Criteria to be
considered at a hearing shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Provocation;
(b) Severity of attack or injury to a person or animal;
(c) Previous aggressive history of the dog or cat;
(d) Observable behavior of the dog or cat;
(e) Site and circumstances of the incident; and
(f) Statements from interested parties.
10-15
(3) A determination at the hearing that the dog or cat is in fact a
vicious dog or vicious cat as defined in § 10-501 shall subject the dog or cat and
its owner to the requirements of this chapter.
(4) Failure of the owner to request a hearing shall result in the dog or
cat to being finally declared vicious and shall subject the dog or cat and its
owner to the requirements of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept.
2008)
10-505. Appeal from vicious dog declaration or vicious cat
declaration. If the city manager (or his designee) determines that the dog or
cat is vicious at the conclusion of the hearing conducted under § 10-504, that
decision shall be final unless the owner of the dog or cat appeals the decision to
circuit court in the time and manner provided by state law. (as added by
Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-506. Requirements for keeping a vicious dog or cat. The owner
of a vicious dog or cat shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Confinement. All vicious dogs or cats shall be securely confined
indoors or in an enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the
owner that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent
the dog or cat from escaping. The pen or structure shall have minimum
dimensions of five feet (5') in width and length by ten feet (10') in height and
must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If no bottom is
secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than
two feet (2'). All pens or structures must be kept clean and sanitary. The
enclosure must provide shelter and protection from the elements and must
provide adequate exercise room, light and ventilation. Under no circumstances
may a vicious dog or cat be confined by a fence, whether it is electronic, a similar
underground wire system, or otherwise. Under no circumstances may more than
one (1) dog or cat be kept in any one (1) pen or structure.
(2) Indoor confinement. No vicious dog or cat may be kept on a porch,
patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog or cat to
exit the structure on its own volition. In addition, no vicious dog or cat may be
kept in a house or structure when open windows or screen doors are the only
obstacle preventing the dog or cat from exiting the house or structure.
(3) Number of vicious dogs or cats per residence. Only one (1) animal
that has been declared vicious may be owned per residence.
(4) Leash and muzzle. The owner of a vicious dog or cat shall not allow
the dog or cat to go outside its kennel, pen, or structure unless the dog or cat is
muzzled, under the physical control of a capable adult, and restrained by a leash
not more than four feet (4') in length, which shall be bright yellow in color, and
of sufficient strength to control the dog or cat. The muzzle must not cause injury
to the dog or cat or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent the
dog or cat from biting any human being or animal.
10-16
(5) Signs. The owner of a vicious dog or cat shall display, in a
prominent place on the owner's premises, a clearly visible warning sign reading
"Beware of Vicious Dog." The sign shall be readable from the driveway entrance
or street. The owner shall also display a sign with a symbol warning children of
the presence of a vicious dog or cat. Similar signs shall be posted on the dog's or
cat's kennel, pen or structure. The sign shall be at least twelve inches (12") by
twelve inches (12") in size.
(6) Insurance. The owner of a vicious dog or cat shall obtain public
liability insurance of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), per
dog or cat, insuring the owner for any damage or personal injury that may be
caused by the owner's vicious dog or cat. The policy shall contain a provision
requiring the city to be notified immediately by the agent issuing the policy in
the event that the policy is cancelled, terminated or expired. The owner must
provide proof of the insurance to the City of Maryville Animal Control Facility.
If there is a lapse in insurance or a cancellation, the owner shall be in violation
of this chapter.
(7) Compliance; consequences for failure to comply. (a) For the safety
and welfare of the general public, an owner of a vicious dog or cat must
comply with the requirements for keeping a vicious dog or cat within the
following timeframe:
(i) Immediate. Immediately upon the owner's receipt of
the declaration notice, the owner shall comply with the
confinement requirements set forth in § 10-506(1) and (2). The
owner may continue to keep the vicious dog or cat confined indoors
or may, at the owner's option, confine the vicious dog or cat
outdoors provided the requirements of § 10-506(1) are met at all
times while the vicious dog or cat is confined outdoors.
(ii) Within twenty-four (24) hours. The requirements set
forth in § 10-506(4) and (5) must be met within twenty-four (24)
hours of the owner's receipt of the declaration notice.
(iii) Within five (5) days. The requirement set forth in
§ 10-506(3) and (6) must be met within five (5) days of the owner's
receipt of the declaration notice.
(iv) Should an owner of a vicious dog or cat choose to
contest the city manager's finding (or that of his designee) and
designation of his or her dog or cat as vicious and said owner has
not complied with the requirements of this section within the
allotted timeframe, the vicious dog or cat shall be delivered to the
animal shelter for safe-keeping until the contest hearing is heard.
The owner shall be responsible for an and all boarding fees for the
vicious dog or cat, veterinarian or other professional services which
the vicious dog or cat needs as determined by animal control
officers, animal shelter staff, or the animal shelter's veterinarian,
10-17
and for any and all damage to city property caused by the vicious
dog or cat.
(b) Failure of an owner to comply with any of the requirements
for keeping a vicious dog or cat, or failure of an owner to continue
compliance with said requirements, shall result in the vicious dog or cat
being apprehended by the City of Maryville Animal Control Facility or
the police department. Said vicious dog or cat shall remain in the custody
and control of the division of animal control until such time as the owner
can prove, to the city's satisfaction, compliance with the requirements for
keeping a vicious dog or cat or until the conclusion of five (5) working
days, whichever occurs first. If the vicious dog or cat remains impounded
at the conclusion of five (5) working days, said vicious dog or cat shall
become the property of the city and may be destroyed. (as added by
Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-507. Impoundment. When a dog or cat has severely attacked a
human being or domestic animal, and a police officer or animal control officer
witnessed the attack or witnessed the injuries caused by the attack, such dog or
cat shall be impounded. (as added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-508. Notice of impoundment. Within five (5) days of impoundment
of a dog or cat under § 10-507, the City of Maryville Animal Control Facility
shall notify the dog's owner or cat's owner, if known, in writing of the
impoundment. (as added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-509. Hearing on impoundment and/or destruction. (1) The owner
of an impounded dog or cat shall have the right to file, within five (5) days after
receiving notice, a written request for a hearing before the city manager (or his
designee) to contest the impoundment.
(2) Upon request by the owner for a hearing pursuant to subsection (1),
a hearing shall be held within fourteen (14) days after the request for a hearing.
Notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing shall be provided by
certified mail or delivered personally to the dog's owner.
(3) The city manager (or his designee) shall issue a decision after the
close of a hearing and shall notify the owner in writing of the decision.
(4) After considering all of the relevant evidence, the city manager (or
his designee) may request the district attorney general to petition the circuit
court to order the destruction of the impounded dog or cat, or may release the
dog or cat to its owner conditional on the owner complying with the
requirements for keeping a vicious dog or cat as set forth in § 10-506. (as added
by Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-510. Exceptions. (1) This chapter shall not apply to any dog used by
the police department or law enforcement agency.
10-18
(2) No dog or cat shall be declared vicious for injury or damage
sustained by a person who was entering the owner's property to commit a
burglary, robbery, assault, willful trespass, or other tort or crime.
(3) No dog or cat shall be declared vicious for injury or damage
sustained by a person who is teasing, tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or
otherwise provoking the dog or cat.
(4) No dog or cat shall be declared vicious solely because it bites or
attacks:
(a) A person assaulting its owner, excluding a police officer
attempting to subdue or effect the arrest of a subject; or
(b) An unrestrained animal that attacks it or its young while it
is restrained in compliance with this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2008-37,
Sept. 2008)
10-511. Change of status. The owner of a vicious dog or cat shall notify
the City of Maryville Animal Control Facility:
(1) Immediately if the vicious dog or cat is unconfined and on the loose,
or has attacked a human being or domestic animal without provocation;
(2) If the owner has moved outside of the city limits, in which case the
owner shall give the owner's new address; or
(3) If the dog or cat has died. (as added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
10-512. Change of ownership. (1) If the owner of a vicious dog or cat
sells, gives away, or otherwise transfers custody of the vicious dog or cat, the
owner shall, within three (3) days, provide the City of Maryville Animal Control
Facility with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner.
(2) The previous owner shall notify the new owner of the animal's
designation as a vicious dog or a vicious cat, and, if the new owner resides
within the city limits, of the requirements and conditions for keeping a vicious
dog or vicious cat as set forth in § 10-506.
(3) If the new owner resides within the city limits, the new owner must
obtain the required enclosure prior to the acquisition of the vicious dog or cat or
confine the dog or cat indoors.
(4) The new owner must fully comply with the provisions of this
chapter, including obtaining liability insurance, prior to the acquisition of the
vicious dog or vicious cat. (as added by Ord. #2008-37, Sept. 2008)
11-1
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES1
CHAPTER
1. ALCOHOL.
2. FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
3. [REPEALED.]
4. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET.
5. INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL.
6. FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES.
7. TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE WITH
TRAFFIC.
8. MISCELLANEOUS.
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOL2
SECTION
11-101. [Deleted.]
11-102. Public intoxication.
11-103. Possession or consumption of beer or alcoholic beverages on certain
property prohibited.
11-101. [Deleted]. (Ord. #97-07, Feb. 1997, as deleted by Ord. #2004-41,
Nov. 2004)
11-102. Public intoxication. It shall be unlawful for any person to
appear in a public place within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville
1Municipal code references
Animals and fowls: title 10.
Housing and utilities: title 12.
Fireworks and explosives: title 7.
Traffic offenses: title 15.
Streets and sidewalks (non-traffic): title 16.
2Municipal code reference
Sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer: title 8.
State law reference
See Tennessee Code Annotated § 33-8-203 (Arrest for Public
Intoxication, cities may not pass separate legislation).
11-2
while under the influence of any intoxicant, controlled substance, narcotic drug
or any drug producing stimulating effects on the central nervous system to the
degree that:
(1) The offender may be endangered; or
(2) There is endangerment to other persons or property; or
(3) The offender unreasonably annoys people in the vicinity. (1985
Code, § 10-228)
11-103. Possession or consumption of beer or alcoholic beverages
on certain property prohibited.1 (1) It shall be unlawful for any person:
(a) To possess an open container containing beer or alcoholic
beverages or to consume beer or alcoholic beverages on the premises of
any retail beer sales outlet which does not have an on-premises permit.
(b) To possess an open container containing beer or alcoholic
beverages, or consume beer or alcoholic beverages on any public street,
sidewalk, playground, school property, public park or recreational facility
or public parking lot within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville.
(c) To possess an open container containing beer or alcoholic
beverages or to consume beer or alcoholic beverages on any privately
owned parking lot held open to use by the public.
(2) For the purposes of this section an "open container" is one which
has any opening through which its contents may pass in order to be consumed
by any person.
(3) Despite the provisions of this section, possession and consumption
of beer is permitted during certain city sponsored or co-sponsored special events
within the physical parameters of the special event zone during the time of the
special event if otherwise provided by resolution of the city council. (1985 Code,
§ 10-229, as amended by Ord. #2013-05, March 2013)
1Municipal code reference
Public consumption of beer prohibited: § 8-207.
11-3
CHAPTER 2
FORTUNE TELLING, ETC.
SECTION
11-201. Fortune telling, etc.
11-201. Fortune telling, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold
himself forth to the public as a fortune teller, clairvoyant, hypnotist, spiritualist,
palmist, phrenologist, or other mystic endowed with supernatural powers. (1985
Code, § 10-235)
11-4
CHAPTER 3
[REPEALED]
(1985 Code, § 10-201, as repealed by Ord. #2015-16, Feb. 2015)
11-5
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
SECTION
11-401. Breaching the peace.
11-402. Anti-noise regulations.
11-401. Breaching the peace. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person
to disturb the peace of others by striking or fighting another or by any other
violent conduct or by conduct calculated to provoke violence or violation of the
law. No person shall do any act or use any language calculated or intended or
intending to incite others to engage in riotous, violent or disorderly conduct. No
person shall knowingly permit any offense enumerated in this section upon any
premises owned or under the control of such person when it is in the power of
such person to prevent or discontinue such prohibited acts or conduct.
(2) The language prohibited in this section is that language which by
its common acceptance causes or tends to cause or insight an immediate breach
of the peace. (1985 Code, § 10-202, as replaced by Ord. #2008-30, Sept. 2008)
11-402. Anti-noise regulations. Subject to the provisions of this
section, the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary
noise is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be
detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public
peace and welfare, is prohibited.
(1) Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. The following acts,
among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in
violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
(a) Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck, or other vehicle while not in
motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching,
apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or
as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended;
the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud
or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device of any unreasonably loud
or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
(b) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio,
phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but
not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or
amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with
motion pictures, radio, or television, in such a manner or with such
volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.,
11-6
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office
or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any
person in the vicinity.
(c) Yelling, shouting, hooting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours
of 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any persons in any hospital,
dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
(d) Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any person in the vicinity.
(e) Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle,
streetcar, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to
cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
(f) Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of
proper municipal authorities.
(g) Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) Building operations. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in any residential area or
section or the construction or repair of streets and highways in any
residential area or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and
6:00 P.M. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building
inspector granted for a period while the emergency continues not to
exceed thirty (30) days. If the building inspector should determine that
the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., and
if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to
any party in interest through delay, he may grant permission for such
work to be done between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or
during the process of the work.
(i) Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation
of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is
in session.
(j) Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud
and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
11-7
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and other
containers.
(k) Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum,
loudspeaker, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose
of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale or display of
merchandise.
(l) Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of
mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or
standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes.
(2) Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply
to or be enforced against:
(a) Municipal vehicles. Any vehicle of the city while engaged
upon necessary public business.
(b) Repair of streets, etc. Excavations or repairs of bridges,
streets, or highways at night, by or on behalf of the municipality, the
county, or the state, when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impracticable to perform such work during the day.
(c) Noncommercial and nonprofit use of loudspeakers or
amplifiers. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the
course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character and in
the course of advertising functions sponsored by nonprofit organizations.
However, no such use shall be made until a permit therefor is secured
from the recorder. Hours for the use of an amplifier or public address
system will be designated in the permit so issued and the use of such
systems shall be restricted to the hours so designated in the permit.
(1985 Code, § 10-234)
11-8
CHAPTER 5
INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION
11-501. Escape from custody or confinement.
11-502. Impersonating a government officer or employee.
11-503. False emergency alarms.
11-504. Resisting or interfering with an officer.
11-505. False, misleading, etc. reports to police--intentional giving prohibited.
11-501. Escape from custody or confinement. It shall be unlawful
for any person under arrest or otherwise in custody of or confined by the
municipality to escape or attempt to escape, or for any other person to assist or
encourage such person to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or
confinement. (1985 Code, § 10-209)
11-502. Impersonating a government officer or employee. No
person other than an official police officer of the municipality shall wear the
uniform, apparel, or badge, or carry any identification card or other insignia of
office like or similar to, or a color able imitation of that adopted and worn or
carried by the official police officers of the municipality. Furthermore, no person
shall deceitfully impersonate or represent that he is any government officer or
employee. (1985 Code, § 10-211)
11-503. False emergency alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person
intentionally to make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police
or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. (1985
Code, § 10-217)
11-504. Resisting or interfering with an officer. It shall be unlawful
for any person knowingly to resist or in any way interfere with or attempt to
interfere with any officer or employee of the municipality while such officer or
employee is performing or attempting to perform his municipal duties. (1985
Code, § 10-210)
11-505. False, misleading, etc. reports to police--intentional giving
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make to the
Maryville Police Department any false, misleading or unfounded report, or
knowingly to offer any false, misleading or unfounded information of any type
whatsoever, for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the Maryville
Police Department or with the intention of misleading any police officer (1985
Code, § 10-237)
11-9
CHAPTER 6
FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
SECTION
11-601. Air rifles, etc.
11-602. Throwing missiles.
11-603. Weapons and firearms generally.
11-601. Air rifles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in the
municipality to discharge any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, "BB" gun, or sling shot
capable of discharging a metal bullet or pellet, whether propelled by spring,
compressed air, expanding gas, explosive, or other force-producing means or
method. (1985 Code, § 10-213)
11-602. Throwing missiles. It shall be unlawful for any person
maliciously to throw any stone, snowball, bottle, or any other missile upon or at
any motor vehicle, other than a bus or motorcycle, building, tree, or other public
or private property or upon or at any person. (1985 Code, § 10-214, as amended
by Ord. #2015-16, Feb. 2015)
11-603. Weapons and firearms generally. It shall be unlawful for any
person to carry in any manner whatsoever, with the intent to go armed, any
razor, dirk, knife, blackjack, brass knuckles, pistol, revolver or any other
dangerous weapon or instrument. However, the foregoing prohibition shall not
apply to members of the United States Armed Forces carrying such weapons as
prescribed by the applicable regulation, nor to any police officer engaged in his
or her official duties. Furthermore, the prohibition shall not apply to persons
who may have been summoned by such police officer to assist in the discharge
of police officer's duties, nor to any conductor of any passenger or freight train
of any railroad while on duty. This prohibition further shall not apply to persons
with a lawful Tennessee handgun carry permit or a gun carry permit from
another state that is recognized as having reciprocal rights with the State of
Tennessee with regard to gun carry permits. It shall also be unlawful for any
unauthorized person to discharge a firearm within the municipality with the
exceptions of:
(1) Any commercial indoor firing range that has been constructed
pursuant to all applicable municipal, state and federal rules, regulations ard
statutes, and
(2) Discharges that are otherwise permitted by law. (1985 Code,
§ 10-212, as amended by Ord. #2007-31, Oct. 2007, and replaced by Ord.
#2018-27, Aug. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
11-10
CHAPTER 7
TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE
WITH TRAFFIC
SECTION
11-701. Trespassing.
11-702. Trespassing on trains.
11-703. [Deleted.]
11-704. Interference with traffic.
11-705. Prowling.
11-706. Window peeping.
11-701. Trespassing. The owner or person in charge of any lot or parcel
of land or any building or other structure within the corporate limits may post
the same against trespassers. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any
such posted lot or parcel of land or into any such posted building or other
structure without the consent of the owner or person in charge.
It shall also be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass for any peddler,
canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, or other person to fail to leave promptly
the private premises of any person who requests or directs him to leave. (1985
Code, § 10-226)
11-702. Trespassing on trains. It shall be unlawful for any person to
climb, jump, step, stand upon, or cling to, or in any other way attach himself to
any locomotive engine or railroad car unless he works for the railroad
corporation and is acting the scope of his employment or unless he is a lawful
passenger or is otherwise lawfully entitled to be on such vehicle. (1985 Code,
§ 10-221)
11-703. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 10-225, as deleted by Ord. #2015-16,
Feb. 2015)
11-704. Interference with traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person
to stand, sit, or engage in any activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk,
bridge, or public ground in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere
unreasonably with the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon.
(1985 Code, § 10-233)
11-705. Prowling. No person shall knowingly prowl on premises owned
or leased by another in the nighttime without the express or implied consent of
that person. This provision shall not apply to public property such as public
streets or parks. (as added by Ord. #2008-33, Sept. 2008)
11-11
11-706. Window peeping. No person shall knowingly go upon property
owned or leased by another and peep through the window of a building on that
property without the express or implied consent of the person who owns or
leases the property and the express or implied consent of any person being
peeped upon. (as added by Ord. #2008-34, Sept. 2008)
11-12
CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
11-801. [Deleted.]
11-802. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc.
11-803. Posting notices, etc.
11-804. Curfew for minors.
11-805. Wearing masks.
11-806. Loitering in public places.
11-807. Smoking in certain places.
11-808. Water conservation.
11-809. [Deleted.]
11-801. [Deleted.] (1985 Code, § 10-223, as deleted by Ord. #2015-16,
Feb. 2015)
11-802. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to permit to be maintained on property owned or occupied by him any cave, well,
cistern, or other such opening in the ground which is dangerous to live and limb
without an adequate cover or safeguard. (1985 Code, § 10-232)
11-803. Posting notices, etc. No person shall fasten, in any way, any
show-card, poster, or other advertising device upon any public or private
property unless legally authorized to do so. (1985 Code, § 10-227)
11-804. Curfew for minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor under
the age of eighteen (18) years, to be abroad at night after 11:00 P.M. unless upon
a legitimate errand for, or accompanied by, a parent, guardian, or other adult
person having lawful custody of such minor. (1985 Code, § 10-224)
11-805. Wearing masks. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear
on or in any public way or place while wearing any mask, device, or hood
whereby any portion of the face is so hidden or covered as to conceal the identity
of the wearer. The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
(1) Children under the age of ten (10) years.
(2) Workers while engaged in work wherein a face covering is
necessary for health and/or safety reasons.
(3) Persons wearing gas masks in civil defense drills and exercises or
emergencies.
(4) Any person having a special permit issued by the city recorder to
wear a traditional holiday costume. (1985 Code, § 10-236)
11-13
11-806. Loitering in public places. (1) Definition of loitering. The
term loitering as used in this section is defined as willfully loafing, lounging,
lingering, consorting or remaining idle with no apparent purpose, either with
others or alone, on a public street, public highway, public sidewalk, public
parking lot, or other public place or building when such behavior tends to hinder
or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or pedestrians
or when such behavior interferes with the free exercise of lawful commercial
trade or other lawful activity in, on or near any such public place. Loitering is
also defined as the act of parking a vehicle in a commercial or public parking
area without any intent to shop or otherwise conduct business or to engage in
the use of parks or recreational facilities at the nearby establishments or
locations for which such parking area is used.
(2) Places where loitering is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to loiter
in any public place, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, public streets,
public highways, public parking lots, school playgrounds, and public parks and
recreation areas. No posting of signs is required for enforcement of this section
in such public areas. Business owners maintaining parking areas for their
customers use may post such signs in such parking areas giving notice that
loitering is prohibited on such private property. Such posting shall provide
notice that this section shall be effective and may be enforced in the private
parking area of such businesses.
(3) Violation. Any person or persons found to be in violation of this
section shall be issued a citation to City of Maryville Municipal Court and shall
be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs. (as added by Ord. #2004-28, June 2004)
11-807. Smoking in certain places. (1) The term "smoke" or "smoking"
as defined in this section shall mean and include the carrying of a lighted
cigarette, a lighted cigar or a lighted pipe of any kind, or the lighting of a
cigarette, cigar or pipe of any kind.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry any lighted
smoking materials in any form at any time in the following public places within
the City of Maryville:
(1) Within all public elementary and secondary schools, except
in areas specifically designated by the superintendent as smoking areas
and which are posted with one or more signs which read: "Smoking
Permitted in this Area."
(2) Public areas such as libraries and museums, except in areas
specifically designated as smoking areas and which are posted with one
or more signs which read: "Smoking Permitted in this Area."
(3) All elevators used by the public in any building or place.
(3) All managers and owners of any establishments in the City of
Maryville serving or doing business with the public and in which more than 25
persons are employed, other than those specifically covered under subsection (2)
11-14
above, may at their discretion bring their establishment within the provisions
and restrictions of this section by notifying in writing the city manager of the
City of Maryville of their election so to do and by posting signs as herein
provided within various areas of their businesses.
(4) Every owner or person in charge of a public place where smoking
is prohibited as defined in subsection (2) and every owner or person electing to
bring their establishment under the provisions of this section as provided in
subsection (3) shall post and maintain one or more signs in the areas where
smoking is prohibited which shall read, "Smoking Prohibited by Law" in letters
at least one inch in height. Such signs shall be prominently displayed and
located so as to be clearly visible to the public.
(5) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be punished under the general penalty clause for this municipal
code. (as added by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
11-808. Water conservation measures. (1) When the flow downstream
at City of Maryville withdrawal operations in Little River is 41 cubic feet per
second (CFS) or less, appeal to the water customers of the system will be made
through the news media for voluntary water conservation.
(2) When the flow downstream of the withdrawal operations is 40 CFS
or less, water supplied to customers of the system shall not be used for
non-essential purposes. For this purpose "non-essential purposes" shall include
but not necessarily be limited to filling swimming pools, car washing, car
washing facilities, recreational facilities and watering of trees, lawns, gardens
and other vegetation.
(3) When the flow downstream of the withdrawal operations is 38.5
CFS or less the amount of water consumed by large industrial customers and
large non-residential/non-health care commercial customers shall be reduced by
approximately five percent (5%) of their average daily consumption until notice
is given that the restriction is no longer in effect.
(4) When any of the conditions specified in subsection (2) and
subsection (3) above are existing or are eminent official notice of these
restrictions will be given promptly to the public through the news media.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership
or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this
section, and any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall upon
conviction of any violation be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each separate offense. Each day
that a violation occurs shall be construed a separate offense and punished
accordingly. (as added by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
11-809. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013, and deleted
by Ord. #2015-16, Feb. 2015)
12-1
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES
CHAPTER
1. BUILDING CODE.
2. PLUMBING CODE.
3. ELECTRICAL CODE.
4. MECHANICAL CODE.
5. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
6. [REPEALED.]
7. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR THE CITY OF MARYVILLE
WATER QUALITY CONTROL DEPARTMENT.
8. [MOVED TO TITLE 19.]
9. [REPEALED.]
10. [REPEALED.]
11. RESIDENTIAL CODE.
12. [MOVED TO TITLE 13.]
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE1
SECTION
12-101. Building code adopted.
12-102. Local modifications.
12-103. Available in recorder's office.
12-104. Violations.
12-101. Building code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by the
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-510 and for the purpose
of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, use and occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenance connected or attached to any building or structure, the
International Building Code,2 2018 edition, and Appendices A and B thereto,
with the modifications thereto hereinafter set forth, as prepared and adopted by
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-2
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as a part of this code except as otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, and
is hereinafter referred to as the "building code".(1985 Code, § 4-101, as amended
by Ord. #96-22, Oct. 1996, replaced by Ord. #2003-36, Oct. 2003, amended by
Ord. #2006-13, Feb. 2006, and Ord. #2008-02, Feb. 2008, and replaced by
Ord. #2009-07, March 2009, Ord. #2013-21, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-19, July
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-102. Local modifications. The following sections and appendices of
the International Building Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended in the City
of Maryville, as hereinafter provided:
(1) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.1 Title. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(2) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting at the end of the
section the following:
"The following Appendices are specifically included in the adoption. All
others are excluded.
 Appendix A Employee Qualifications
 Appendix B Board of Appeals"
(3) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.4.3 Plumbing.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the last sentence
and inserting the following:
"Private sewage disposal systems shall comply with the regulations of the
Blount County Environmental Health Department"
(4) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 103.1 Creation of
enforcement agency. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
deleting Section 103.1 in its entirety and replacing with the following:
"Section 103.1 Building Official. The provisions of this code shall be
enforced by the Building Official."
(5) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 104.10.1 Flood
hazard areas. Is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting
Section 104.10.1 in its entirety with no replacement.
(6) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 105.2 Work exempt
from permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting
Number 1 in its entirety and replace with:
"1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 200 square feet if the structure has a permanent foundation or 400
square feet if the structure is a pre-manufactured building without a
permanent foundation."
12-3
(7) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 105.4 Validity of
permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following at the beginning:
"A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the
work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or
set aside any of the provisions of this code, nor shall such issuance of a
permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a
correction of errors in plans of in construction, or of violation of this code.
The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error
or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
code"
(8) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 105.5. Expiration.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and
the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"105.5. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the
work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 60 days
after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 30 days after the time the work
is commenced. Work authorized by that permit shall be completed within
the time frame set forth in the following:
For Building Permits with Construction Valuation in the amount of:
$0.1 - $250,000 - twelve (12) months;
$250,000.01 - $500,000.00 - eighteen (18) months;
$500,000.01 - $1,000,000.00 - twenty four (24) months;
$1,000,000.01 and up - thirty-six (36) months
Extensions of time may be granted by the Building Official; however, the
extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one
or more extensions of time. Each extension shall be for a period of time
not to exceed 180 days. A fee of fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee of the
original permit shall he charged to cover administrative expenses for each
extension granted."
(9) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 105.6 Suspension or
revocation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting at the
end the following:
"After a permit has become void, if the owner wishes to commence
construction to complete the structure for which the original permit was
issued, the Owner shall reapply for a new building permit for the
completion of the construction. When a new building permit is issued, the
permit fee for the completion of the construction shall be equal to the
permit fee that was paid when the original permit was issued."
12-4
(10) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 105.7 Placement of
Permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"105.7 Placement of Permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on
the site of the work or be made available to inspectors upon request until
the completion of the project."
(11) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 107.3.4
Design Professional in responsible charge. is hereby amended locally in the City
of Maryville by inserting the following at the end of the first paragraph:
"The registered design architect shall be the responsible design
professional in responsible charge unless otherwise designated by the
owner or the owner's authorized agent."
(12) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 110.5 Inspection
request. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following at the end:
"No inspections shall be performed on any site or portion thereof where
there is an unsafe condition or a violation of the occupational safety and
health standards for the construction industry promulgated by the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)."
(13) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 111.1 Change of
occupancy. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following at the end of the paragraph and before the exception:
"Said certificate shall not be issued until the following have been tested
and approved by the appropriate agency or department:
 Fire protection systems
 Mechanical Systems
 Utility systems
 Site work beyond the confines of the building
 General building construction requirements-"
(14) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 113 Board of
Appeals. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by changing the title
from "Board of Appeals" to "Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals".
Every occurrence of "Board of Appeals" in Section 113 and its subsections shall
be changed to "Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals Board".
(15) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 114.4, Violation and
Penalties is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and insert in its place:
"Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, owner or agent who shall violate
a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish, or
move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved,
or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement
or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, or directive of the
building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
12-5
of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and the
enforcement and penalty clause of this Ordinance. ."
(16) Chapter 10, Means of Egress: Section 1008.2 Means of egress
illumination. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following under "Exceptions":
"5. Unenclosed pavilions and similar structures that are not provided
with electrical utility service and not intended for occupancy after
daylight hours."
(17) Chapter 10, Means of Egress: Section 1015.2 Where required. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the first sentence
and replacing it with the following sentence:
"Guards shall be provided along open-sided walking surfaces or ground
surfaces, mezzanines, industrial equipment platforms, retaining walls,
stairways, ramps, landings and any other locations that are located more
than 30 inches above the floor or grade below at any point within 36
inches horizontally to the edge of the open side."
(18) Chapter 16, Structural Design: Section 1612.3 Establishment of
flood hazard areas. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting "Blount County, Tennessee, and Incorporated Areas, City of Maryville
Community Number 475439" for name of jurisdiction and inserting "September
19, 2007" as the date of issuance.
(19) Chapter 28: Mechanical Systems. is hereby amended locally in the
City of Maryville by deleting every reference to "International Fuel Gas Code".
The International Fuel Gas Code is specifically not adopted in the City of
Maryville.
(20) Chapter 29, Plumbing Systems: Section 2901.1 Scope. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the sentence "Private
sewage disposal systems shall conform to the International Private Sewage
Disposal Code." and replacing with the following:
"Private sewage disposal systems shall comply with the regulations of the
Blount County Environmental Health Department."
(21) Chapter 29, Plumbing Systems: Section 2902.3 Employee and
public toilet facilities. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting the following at the end:
"Exception 3: Unenclosed pavilions and similar structures with a floor
area of one thousand square feet or less and not served with water and
sewer services shall not be required to provide public toilet facilities or
other plumbing fixtures. For the purpose of this section guards as
described in Section 1015, whether said guards are required or not by this
code, shall not be considered to enclose the structure."
(22) Appendix B: Board of Appeals. is hereby amended locally in the
City of Maryville by changing the title from "Board of Appeals" to "Construction
Board of Adjustments and Appeals". Every occurrence of "Board of Appeals" in
12-6
Appendix B and its subsections shall be changed to "Construction Board of
Adjustments and Appeals".
(23) Appendix B: Section 8101.2 Membership of board. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and the
following substituted in lieu thereof:
"The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall consist of
seven (7) persons appointed by the chief appointing authority for four
year terms and shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. The building
official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote
on any matter before the board."
(24) Appendix B: Section 8101.2.2 Qualifications. is hereby amended
locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the word "five" and replacing it with
the word "seven" in the first sentence. Appendix B Section 8101.2.2 is also
amended locally by inserting "or as determined by the Building Official" after
the word "disciplines".
(25) Appendix B: Section B 101.3.3 Postponed Hearing. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the word "five" and
replacing it with the word "seven".
(26) Appendix 8: Section 8101.4 Board decision. is hereby amended
locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the word "majority" after the word
"concurring" and deleting "of two-thirds of its members". (1985 Code, § 4-102, as
amended by Ord. #97-76, Nov. 1997; Ord. #97-80, Dec. 1997, and Ord. #98-43,
Nov. 1998, and replaced by Ord. #2003-36, Oct. 2003, Ord. #2008-02, Feb. 2008,
Ord. #2009-07, March 2009, Ord. #2013-21, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-19, July
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-103. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
as modified, has been filed with the recorder of the City for a period of fifteen
(15) days prior to the passage of this ordinance, will remain on file as long as
this ordinance is in effect, and that all public hearing and notice requirements
in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501 et seq. have been or will be met by the
time of the final passage of this ordinance. (1985 Code, § 4-103, and replaced by
Ord. #2013-21, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-19, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-104. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, occupant or
agent who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be taken in
violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally adopted as
modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation is committed or continued. Upon
being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be punished according to
the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or through injunctive
remedies in state or federal court as appropriate. In the event court action is
12-7
taken, the city shall be entitled to recover from any person adjudicated to have
violated this chapter the city's reasonable attorney fees and litigation costs
incurred in bringing the action(s) to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Additionally, violators may in the discretion of the city be subject to fines
and penalties to be imposed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 6-54-1001 et seq. as adopted locally in the city
code. (1985 Code, § 4-104, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2008-02, Feb. 2008,
Ord. #2009-07, March 2009, Ord. #2013-21, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-19, July
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-8
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE1
SECTION
12-201. Plumbing code adopted.
12-202. Local modifications.
12-203. Available in recorder's office.
12-204. Violations.
12-201. Plumbing code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by §
6-54-501 through 6-54-510 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, and for the
purpose of regulating plumbing installations, including alterations, repairs,
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and the appurtenances thereto, within
or without the municipality, when such plumbing is or is to be connected with
the Maryville water or sewerage system, the International Plumbing Code,2
2018 edition, and subsequent modifications thereto, as prepared and adopted by
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as a part of this code except as particularly stated otherwise in this chapter, and
is hereinafter referred to as the "plumbing code."
The city does not incorporate by reference any changes or amendments
adopted by the agency or association that promulgates the plumbing code unless
such changes or amendments are subsequently expressly adopted by ordinance
of the city. (1985 Code, § 4-201, as replaced by Ord. #2003-38, Oct. 2003,
amended by Ord. #2008-3, Feb. 2008, and replaced by Ord. #2009-08, March
2010, Ord. #2013-23, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-21, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-202. Local modifications. The following sections and appendices of
the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended in the City
of Maryville, as hereinafter provided:
(1) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.1 Title. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
1Municipal code references
Cross connections: title 18.
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) are available from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-9
(2) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: 101.2 Scope. is hereby locally
amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the third and fourth sentences, and
at the end of the first paragraph inserting:
"The provisions of the International Plumbing Code 2018 Edition shall
apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing
systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and
appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all
aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of private sewage disposal
systems shall comply with the regulations of the Blount County
Environmental Health Department. Provisions in the appendices shall
not apply unless specifically adopted. The following Appendices are
specifically included in the adoption. All others are excluded.
 Appendix B - Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities
 Appendix C - Vacuum Drainage System
 Appendix D - Degree Day and Design Temperatures
 Appendix E - Sizing of Water Piping System
 Appendix F - Structural Safety
Exception: Detached one- and two- family dwellings and multiple single
family dwellings (townhouse) not more than three stories high with
separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with
the International Residential Code."
(3) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101 General. is
hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by adding the following
Sub-section:
"101.5 Conflicts with other City of Maryville Rules, Regulations, Rates,
and Policies. When any provisions of this code conflicts with provisions
addressed in the City of Maryville Water and Sewer Department Rules
and Regulations, the City of Maryville Title 19 Chapter 6 Stormwater
Discharges Ordinance, or the City of Maryville Land Development and
Public Works Standards Part 1 - Drainage and Construction Standards
the most restrictive provision shall be enforced. If no determination can
be made by the Building Official about which is the "most restrictive"
then this code shall not apply."
(4) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 103.1 Creation of
enforcement agency. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
deleting Section 103.1 in its entirety and replacing with the following:
"103.1 Building Official. The provisions of this code shall be enforced by
the Building Official."
(5) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.5.3 Expiration.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and
the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"106.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the
work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 60 days after
its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended
12-10
or abandoned for a period of 30 days after the time the work is commenced.
Work authorized by that permit shall be completed within the time frame set
forth in the building permit associated with the same construction project, or
within one year if a building permit has not been issued for the construction
project. Extensions of time may be granted by the Building Official; however,
the extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions
of time. Each extension shall be for a period of time not to exceed 180 days. A fee
of fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee of the original permit shall be charged to
cover administrative expenses for each extension granted."
(6) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.6 Fee Schedule.
is hereby amended by deleting the section and its subsections in their entirety
and replacing with:
"Section [A] 106.6 Fee schedule. Fees shall be as adopted by the City of
Maryville, Tennessee. Refund of fees shall be subject to fee refund policy
as established by the Building Official."
(7) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 107 Inspection and
Testing. is hereby amended by adding the following section:
"107.8 Building Occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a
change made in occupancy or the nature or the use of a building or part
of a building until after the Building Official has issued a Certificate of
Occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until the following have
been tested and or approved by the appropriate agency or department."
 Fire protection systems
 Mechanical Systems
 Utility systems
 Site work beyond the confines of the building
 General building construction requirements"
(8) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 108, Violations is
hereby locally amended to add the following section:
"108.8 Cesspool, septic tanks, etc. It is mandatory that every cesspool,
septic tank, and seepage pit, which has been abandoned or has been
discontinued otherwise from further use or to which no waste or soil pipe
from a plumbing fixture is connected, shall have the sewage removed
therefrom and be completely filled with earth, sand, gravel, concrete, or
other approved material. The top cover or arch over the cesspool, septic
tank, or seepage pit shall be removed before filling and the filling shall
not extend above the top of the vertical portions of the sidewalls or above
the level of any outlet pipe until inspected and approved by the City of
Maryville Water and Sewer Department Utility Construction Inspector,
following which the cesspool septic tank or seepage pit shall be filled to
the level of the top of the ground."
12-11
(9) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 108.4, Violation and
Penalties. is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and insert in its place:
"108.4, Violation and Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant,
owner or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect,
construct, alter, demolish, or move any structure, or has erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, moved, or demolished a building or
structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and
permitted thereunder, or directive of the building official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law and the enforcement and penalty clause of
this Ordinance."
(10) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 109 Means of Appeal.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and
the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"Section 109 Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals 109.1
Appeals relative to the application of this code shall be as established and
regulated by the International Building Code as locally adopted and
amended in the City of Maryville."
(11) Chapter 3, General Regulations: Section 303.3 Plastic Pipe,
Fittings, and Components. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
adding the following at the end of the existing paragraph:
"The use of coextruded PVC pipe in outside building sanitary sewers is
prohibited. Its use in storm drains and storm sewers shall be at the
discretion of the local authority."
(12) Chapter 4, Fixtures, Faucets and Fixture Fittings. Section 403.3,
Required public toilet facilities, is hereby amended locally in the City of
Maryville by inserting the following at the end of the exception:
"Unenclosed pavilions and similar structures with a floor area of one
thousand square feet or less and not served with water and sewer
services shall not be required to provide public toilet facilities or other
plumbing fixtures. For the purpose of this section guards, whether
required or not, shall not be considered to enclose the structure."
(13) Chapter 6, Water Supply and Distribution: Section 603.2
Separation of Water Service and Building Sewer: Exception 1. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by replacing "minimum of 12 inches"
with "minimum of 18 inches"
(14) Chapter 7, Sanitary drainage, Section 701.2, Sewer required. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting "International
Private Sewage Disposal Code" and replace with the following: "regulations of
the Blount County Environmental Health Department."
12-12
(15) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 701.3 Separate sewer
connection. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the
following as the last sentence to the paragraph:
"A common building sewer line must be a minimum of six (6) inches
diameter."
(16) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Tables 702.3 and 702.4 are hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in their entirety and the
following added in their place:
"702.3 Approved Material: Building Sewer Pipe and Pipe Fittings. Only
the following materials will be accepted in the installation of building sewer
pipes and fittings:
1. Cast iron soil pipe and fittings,
2. Brass fittings,
3. Bronze fittings,
4. Type 1 PVC pipe and fittings, minimum schedule 40 (ASTM
0-2665),
5. ASTM D - 3034 PVC pipe encapsulated with six (6) inches of
bedding material (Size no. 7 or 67 crushed stone) on the top, both
sides, and the bottom of the pipe,
6. Ductile iron pipe and fittings."
(17) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 702 Materials is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the following section:
"702. 7 Co-Mingling. Co-mingling of materials in the building sewer shall
be accomplished only through the use of neoprene adapters with stainless
steel bands."
(18) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 704.1 Drainage piping
installation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting after
Table 704.1 the following:
"Notwithstanding the above, four (4) inch nominal diameter building
sewer drainage piping shall have a minimum fall of 1 /4 inch per foot, and
six (6) inch nominal diameter building sewer drainage piping shall have
a minimum fall of 1/8 inch per foot."
(19) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 705.3 Asbestos cement. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the section in its
entirety and inserting the following in its place:
"705.3 Asbestos cement. Asbestos - cement pipe and fittings are
prohibited."
(20) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 705.6 Concrete joints. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the section in its
entirety and inserting the following in its place:
"705.6 Concrete joints. Concrete pipe and fittings are prohibited."
(21) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 706.1 Connections and
changes in directions. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting at the end:
12-13
"Bends greater than 45 degrees shall be prohibited in the building sewer."
(22) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 708.1.3 Building drain and
building sewer junction. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
deleting the section in its entirety and inserting the following in its place:
"708.1.3 Building drain and building sewer junction. The first exterior
cleanout shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet but no more than
five (5) feet from the exterior wall of the building without prior approval
of the plumbing official. The use of two-way cleanouts is prohibited."
(23) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 708.1.4 Changes of
direction. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and inserting the following in its place:
"708.1.4 Changes of direction. Cleanouts shall be installed at each change
of direction of the building sewer which is greater than 90 degrees.
(Please note that this change may be accomplished with two or more
fittings. Example - Two 45 degree bends and a 22 1/2 degree bend
installed in succession shall require a cleanout be installed between them
regardless length of separation.)"
(24) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 708.1.5 Minimum Size. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the section in its
entirety and inserting the following in its place:
"708.1.5 Minimum size. Building sewer cleanouts shall be the same
nominal size as the pipe they serve."
(25) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 708.1.9 Clearances. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the section in its
entirety and inserting the following in its place:
"708.1.9 Clearances. All building sewer cleanouts shall be provided with
clearance of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) for rodding."
(26) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 708.2 Cleanout plugs. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the sentences:
"Plugs shall have raised square or countersunk heads. Countersunk
heads shall be installed where raised heads are a trip hazard."
and replacing with:
"Cleanout plugs shall have countersunk heads or be of the recessed slot
type only."
(27) Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage: Section 708.3.2 Building sewers. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting "100 feet" in the first
sentence and replacing with "80 feet" and deleting "400 feet (122 m) apart." in
the last sentence and replacing with "350 feet (106.7 m) apart." at the end of the
second sentence. (1985 Code, § 4-202, as replaced by Ord. #2003-38, Oct. 2003,
Ord. #2008-03, Feb. 2008, Ord. #2009-08, March 2009, Ord. #2013-23, Oct. 2013,
and Ord. #2018-21, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-203. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
12-14
as modified, has been filed with the recorder of the city for a period of fifteen (15)
days prior to the passage of this ordinance, will remain on file for as long as this
ordinance is in effect, and that all notice and public hearing requirements in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501 et seq. have been or will be met by the
time of the final passage of this ordinance.(1985 Code, § 4-203, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-23, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-21, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-204. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, occupant or
agent who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be taken in
violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally adopted as
modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation is committed or continued. Upon
being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be punished according to
the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or through injunctive
remedies in state or federal court as appropriate.
In the event court action is taken, the city shall be entitled to recover
from any person adjudicated to have violated this chapter the city's reasonable
attorney fees and litigation costs incurred in bringing the action( s) to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. Additionally, violators may in the discretion of the
city be subject to fines and penalties to be imposed by the administrative
hearing officer pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 6-54-1001 et seq. as
adopted locally in the city code. (1985 Code, § 4-204, modified, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-23, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-21, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-15
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-301. Electrical code adopted.
12-302. Available in recorder's office.
12-303. Permit required for doing electrical work.
12-304. Violations.
12-305. Enforcement.
12-306. Fee schedule.
12-307. Establishment of wiring protective requirements.
12-308. Modifications.
12-301. Electrical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
§ 5-54-502 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, and for the purpose of providing
practical minimum standards for the safeguarding of persons and of buildings
and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat,
power, radio, signaling, for other purposes, the National Electric Code,2 2017
edition as hereinafter modified and, as prepared by the National Fire Protection
Association, is hereby referred to as the "electrical code" and is adopted by the
City of Maryville and incorporated by reference as the ordinances of the city.
(Ord. #98-09, Feb. 1998, as replaced by Ord. #2003-39, Oct. 2003, Ord. #2010-10,
Feb. 2010, Ord. #2015-65, Nov. 2015, and Ord. #2018-25, July 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
12-302. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code has been filed
with the recorder of the city for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the passage
of this ordinance and will remain on file while this ordinance is in effect. (1985
Code, § 4-302, as replaced by Ord. #2018-25, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19))
12-303. Permit required for doing electrical work. No electrical
work shall be done within this municipality until a permit therefor has been
issued by the municipality. The term "electrical work" shall not be deemed to
include minor repairs that do not involve the installation of new wire, conduits,
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks and explosives: title 7.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy,
Massachusetts 02269-9101.
12-16
machinery, apparatus, or other electrical devices generally requiring the
services of an electrician. (1985 Code, § 4-303)
12-304. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, occupant or
agent who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be taken in
violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally adopted as
modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation is committed or continued. Upon
being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be punished according to
the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or through injunctive
remedies in state or federal court as appropriate. In the event court action is
taken, the city shall be entitled to recover from any person adjudicated to have
violated this chapter the city's reasonable attorney fees and litigation costs
incurred in bringing the action(s) to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Additionally, violators may in the discretion of the city be subject to fines
and penalties to be imposed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-1001 et seq. as adopted locally in the city
code. (as added by (1985 Code, § 4-304, as replaced by Ord. #2003-39, Oct. 2003,
Ord. #2015-65, Nov. 2015, and Ord. #2018-25, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19))
12-305. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the building official to
enforce compliance with this chapter and the electrical code as herein adopted
by reference. He is authorized and directed to make such inspections of electrical
equipment and wiring, etc., as are necessary to insure compliance with the
applicable regulations, and may enter any premises or building at any
reasonable time for the purpose of discharging his duties. He is authorized to
refuse or discontinue electrical service to any person or place not complying with
this chapter and/or the electrical code. (1985 Code, § 4-305, as replaced by Ord.
#2018-25, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-306. Fee schedule. A schedule of fees for electrical work done by
permit shall be adopted by the city council and all changes and amendments
thereto may be made by resolution or ordinance. (1985 Code, § 4-306, as
replaced by Ord. #2004-37, Sept. 2004, and amended by Ord. #2015-65, Nov.
2015)
12-307. Additional electrical requirements. (1) Wiring methods
requirements. The wiring methods for all structures shall be installed in an
approved raceway or shall be metallic-sheathed cable, except that non-metallic
sheathed cables, including NM, NMB, NMC, NMS, SE and UF shall be
permitted to be installed in apartment buildings not more than three (3) stories
above grade plane in height, detached one- and two- family dwellings and
multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories
12-17
above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory
structures. Renovations and repairs of existing buildings shall comply with this
section to the extent judged practical by the building official. In instances where
there is conflict between the electrical code and this section, this section shall
govern.
(2) Service equipment disconnecting means. Service equipment shall
have only one (1) means of disconnecting services of two hundred twenty five
(225) amperes or less.
(3) Smoke alarms. Except as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-120-111(b), no one- and two-family dwellings shall be approved for
connection of new electric service unless such dwelling is equipped with at least
one (1) smoke alarm which, when activated, initiates an alarm audible in every
sleeping room. The smoke alarm or alarms shall be listed in accordance with the
2018 International Residential Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc.; and in accordance with the manufacturer's directions.
(4) Used manufactured homes. Used manufactured homes that are
being considered for electrical service shall have an electrical safety inspection
by an electrician duly licensed in Tennessee. The electrical safety inspection
shall be performed and a written statement provided to the building official
indicating compliance with the following electrical safety inspection list prior to
the request for electrical service inspection by the City of Maryville Electrical
Inspector. If the used manufactured home is not in compliance with the
electrical safety inspection list, the electrician shall obtain the appropriate
permits and inspections, and perform the necessary corrective work to obtain
compliance. The list of items to be inspected by the electrician of the said
electrical safety inspection shall at a minimum be the following:
ELECTRICAL SAFETY INSPECTION LIST
(a) Manufactured homes shall have listed, enclosed-type service
entrance equipment located inside the manufactured home, with proper
rated overcurrent protection for each branch circuit. Overcurrent
protection for circuits of twenty (20) amperes or less may be either circuit
breakers, or plug fuses and fuse holders of type "S"' and shall be of the
time-delay type. The manufactured home disconnecting means located
inside shall be fed from an outside location with a feeder from the main
service entrance for such manufactured home. If the supply or feeder from
the main service to the disconnecting means located inside does not have
a grounding conductor as required by article 550(C) of the 2017 National
Electrical Code, one shall be installed.
(b) Inspection shall be both visual and mechanical; switch and
receptacle plates and light fixtures will be removed to check conductor
connections, insulation of splices, boxes, and general code requirements.
(c) The used manufactured home shall be equipped with at least
one (1) smoke alarm which, when activated, initiates an alarm audible in
every sleeping room. The smoke alarm or alarms shall be listed in
12-18
accordance with the 2018 International Residential Code, published by
the International Code Council, Inc.; and in accordance with the
manufacturer's directions. (Ord. #97-66, Sept. 1997, as replaced by
Ord. #2010-10, Feb. 2010, Ord. #2015-65, Nov. 2015, and Ord. #2018-25,
July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-308. Modifications. Local modifications.
(1) Article 110.24(B) Available Fault Current. Modifications. is
locally amended by deleting it in its entirety with no replacement.
(2) Article 210.12(A). Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection.
Dwelling Units. shall be locally amended by numbering the exception at the end
as
"Exception 1" and adding the following after the exception:
"Exception 2. Notwithstanding the above, Arc Fault Circuit Interrupters
(AFCIs) shall be optional for bathrooms, laundry areas, garages,
unfinished basements, which are portions or areas of the basement not
intended as habitable rooms and limited to storage, work or similar area,
and for branch circuits dedicated to supplying refrigeration equipment.
Should there be any conflict within this section as to application, this
exception shall prevail."
(3) Article 210.19(A)(3) Household Ranges and Cooking Appliances.
is amended locally by deleting in its entirety and replacing it with the following:
"Section 210.19(A)(3) Household Ranges and Cooking Appliances. All
range taps shall be on separate wired circuits."
(4) Article 210.52(A)(2). Wall Space. shall be locally amended by
adding the following at the end:
"(4) Receptacles shall not be required in the wall space behind doors
which may be opened fully against a wall surface. Wall space
measurement shall begin at the edge of the door when fully opened."
(5) Article 210.52(C)(2). Island Countertop Spaces shall be locally
amended by deleting in its entirety and replacing with:
"(2) Island Countertop Spaces. The installation of receptacles for island
counter spaces below the countertop shall be optional."
(6) Article 210.52(C)(3). Peninsular Countertop Spaces shall be locally
amended by deleting in its entirety and replacing with:
"(3) Peninsular Countertop Spaces. The installation of receptacles for
peninsular counter spaces below the countertop shall be optional."
(7) Article 334.15(C). In Unfinished Basements and Crawlspaces shall
be locally amended by adding the following at the end:
"Exception: Non-metallic-Sheathed Cable shall not be required to be run
through bored holes in unfinished basements and crawlspaces with less
than four (4) feet and six (6) inches of clearance."
(8) Article 410.10. Luminaires in Specific Locations. shall be locally
amended by adding the following at the end:
12-19
(D) In Crawlspaces. Light fixtures in crawlspaces shall have guarded
covers. (as added by Ord. #2010-10, Feb. 2010, and replaced by Ord.
#2015-65, Nov. 2015 and Ord. #2018-25, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-20
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION
12-401. Mechanical code adopted.
12-402. Local modifications.
12-403. Available in recorder's office.
12-404. Violations.
12-401. Mechanical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, and for the purpose of regulating the
design of buildings for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the
design and selection of mechanical, electrical, water-heating and illumination
systems and equipment which will enable the effective use of energy in building
construction, the International Mechanical Code,1 2018 edition as prepared and
maintained by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code except as otherwise specifically
stated in this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2015-66, Nov. 2015, as replaced by
Ord. #2018-24, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-402. Local modifications. The following sections and appendices
of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended in the
City of Maryville, as hereinafter provided:
(1) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.1 Title. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(2) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.2 Scope. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the last sentence
before the exception in its entirety without replacement.
(3) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 103.1 Department
of Mechanical Inspection. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
deleting Section 103.1 in its entirety and replacing with the following:
"Section 103.1 Building Official. The provisions of this code shall be
enforced by the Building Official."
(4) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.4.2 Validity. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the following at the
beginning:
"A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the
work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or
set aside any of the provisions of this code, nor shall such issuance of a
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) are available from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-21
permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a
correction of errors in plans of in construction, or of violation of this code.
The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error
or on the basis on incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
code"
(5) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.4.3 Expiration.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and
the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"106.4.3. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the
work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 60 days
after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 30 days after the time the work
is commenced. Work authorized by that permit shall be completed within
the time frame as set forth in the building permit for the same project or
one (1) year for projects that do not require a building permit."
(6) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.4.4 Extensions.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and
the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"Extensions of time may be granted by the Building Official; however, the
extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. The
building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of
time. Each extension shall be for a period of time not to exceed 180 days. A fee
of fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee of the original permit shall he charged to
cover administrative expenses for each extension granted."
(7) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.4.5 Suspension
or revocation of permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting at the end the following:
"After a permit has become void, if the owner wishes to commence
construction to complete the structure, equipment or system for which the
original permit was issued, the owner shall reapply and pay for a new permit for
the completion of the construction."
(8) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.4.8 Posting of
Permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"106.4.8 Placement of Permit. The permit or copy shall be kept on the site
of the work or be made available to inspectors upon request until the
completion of the project."
(9) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.5.2 Fee
Schedule. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"106.5.2 Fee schedule. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas,
mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a
12-22
fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the
schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. A permit
shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor
shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if
any, has been paid."
(10) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and
the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"106.5.3 Fee refunds. The Building Official is authorized to establish a
refund policy."
(11) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 107.2.2 Inspection
request. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following at the end:
"No inspections shall be performed on any site or portion thereof where
there is an unsafe condition or a violation of the occupational safety and health
standards for the construction industry promulgated by the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA)."
(12) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 108.4, Violation
penalties. is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and insert in its place:
"Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, owner or agent who shall violate
a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish, or
move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved,
or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement
or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, or directive of the
building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law."
(13) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 108.5, Stop work
orders. is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the last
sentence and replacing with:
"Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with
a stop work order, except that such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to
penalties as described by law."
(14) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 109 Means of
appeals. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"Section 109 Means of appeals. Appeals relative to the application of the
this code shall be as established and regulated by the International
Building Code as locally adopted and amended in the City of Maryville."
(as added by Ord. #2015-66, Nov. 2015, and replaced by Ord. ##2018-24,
July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-23
12-403. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
as modified, has been filed with the recorder of the city for a period of fifteen (15)
days prior to the passage of this ordinance, will remain on file as long as this
Ordinance is in effect and that all public hearing and notice requirements in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501 et seq. have been or will be met by the
time of the final passage of this ordinance. (as added by Ord. #2015-66, Nov.
2015, and replaced by Ord. #2018-24, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-404. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, occupant or
agent who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be taken in
violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally adopted as
modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation is committed or continued. Upon
being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be punished according to
the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or through injunctive
remedies in state or federal court as appropriate. In the event court action is
taken, the city shall be entitled to recover from any person adjudicated to have
violated this chapter the city's reasonable attorney fees and litigation costs
incurred in bringing the action(s) to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Additionally, violators may in the discretion of the city be subject to fines
and penalties to be imposed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-1001 et seq. as adopted locally in the city
code. (as added by Ord. #2015-66, Nov. 2015, as replaced by Ord. #2018-24, July
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-24
CHAPTER 5
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE1
SECTION
12-501. Energy conservation code adopted.
12-502. Local modifications.
12-503. Available in recorder's office.
12-504. Violations and penalty.
12-501. Energy conservation code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by § 6-54-501 through 6-54-510 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, and
for the purpose of regulating the design of buildings for adequate thermal
resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical,
electrical, water-heating and illumination systems and equipment which will
enable the effective use of energy in building construction, the International
Energy Conservation Code,2 2018 edition, as prepared and maintained by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this Code except as otherwise specifically stated in this chapter, and
is hereinafter referred to as the "energy code."
The city does not incorporate by reference any changes or amendments
adopted by the agency or association that promulgates the Energy Code unless
such changes or amendments are subsequently expressly adopted by ordinance
by the City. (as replaced by Ord. #2010-25, Sept. 2010, Ord. #2013-22, Oct. 2013,
and Ord. #2018-20, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-502. Local modifications. The following sections and appendices of
the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended
in the City of Maryville, as hereinafter provided:
(1) Chapter 1 [CE], Scope and Administration: Section C101.1 Title is
hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville"
in the brackets for the name of jurisdiction.
(2) Chapter 1 [CE], Scope and Administration: Section C101.5
Compliance. is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the
1Municipal code references
Fire protection, fireworks, and explosives: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: titles 18 and 19.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) are available from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-25
first sentence in its entirety and replacing it with "Residential buildings shall
meet the provisions of IECC - Residential Provisions, or Chapter 11, Energy
Efficiency, of the International Residential Code for One- and Two Family
Dwellings 2018 Edition.
(3) Chapter 1 [CE], Scope and Administration: Section C108.4 Failure
to comply. is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting "shall
be liable to a fine as set by the applicable governing authority." and insert
"subject to penalties as prescribed by law." in its place.
(4) Chapter 1 [CE], Scope and Administration: Section C109 Board of
Appeals is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety, including its subsections, and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"Section C109 Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals C109.1
Appeals relative to the application of this code shall be as established and
regulated by the International Building Code as locally adopted and
amended in the City of Maryville."
(5) Chapter 1 [RE], Scope and Administration: Section R101.1 Title is
hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville"
in the brackets for the name of jurisdiction.
(6) Chapter 1 [RE], Scope and Administration: Section R101.5
Compliance. is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the
first sentence in its entirety and replacing it with "Residential buildings shall
meet the provisions of IECC - Residential Provisions, or Chapter 11, Energy
Efficiency, of the International Residential Code for One- and Two Family
Dwellings, 2018 Edition.
(7) Chapter 1 [RE], Scope and Administration: Section R108.4 Failure
to comply. is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting "shall
be liable to a fine as set by the applicable governing authority." and insert
"subject to penalties as prescribed by law." in its place.
(8) Chapter 1 [RE], Scope and Administration: Section R109 Board of
Appeals is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety, including its subsections, and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"Section R109 Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals C109.1
Appeals relative to the application of this code shall be as established and
regulated by the International Building Code as locally adopted and
amended in the City of Maryville."
(9) Chapter 4 [RE], Residential Energy Efficiency: Section R402.2.10,
Slabon-grade. is hereby amended by deleting the last sentence and replacing
with:
"Due to local termite infestation vulnerability conditions, the slabongrade
floor perimeter insulation required by this section shall be optional
in the City of Maryville. Should said insulation be provided, the
installation shall comply with this section." (as replaced by Ord. #2010-
25, Sept. 2010, Ord. #2013-22, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-20, July 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
12-26
12-503. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
as modified, has been filed with the recorder of the city for a period of fifteen (15)
days prior to the passage of this ordinance, will remain on file as long as this
ordinance is in effect and that all public hearing and notice requirements in
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501 et seq. have been or will be met by the
time of the final passage of this ordinance. (as replaced by Ord. #2010-25, Sept.
2010, deleted by Ord. #2013-22, Oct. 2013, and added by Ord. #2018-20, July
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-504. Violations and penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant,
occupant or agent who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply
therewith or with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be
taken in violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally
adopted as modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation is committed or
continued. Upon being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be
punished according to the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or
through injunctive remedies in state or federal court as appropriate. In the
event court action is taken, the city shall be entitled to recover from any person
adjudicated to have violated this chapter the city's reasonable attorney fees and
litigation costs incurred in bringing the action(s) to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
Additionally, violators may in the discretion of the city be subject to fines
and penalties to be imposed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 6-54-1001 et seq. as adopted locally by the city. (as
replaced by Ord. #2010-25, Sept. 2010, deleted by Ord. #2013-22, Oct. 2013, and
added by Ord. #2018-20, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-27
CHAPTER 6
REPEALED
(This chapter was repealed by Ord. #2003-40, Oct. 2003)
12-28
CHAPTER 7
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR THE CITY OF MARYVILLE
WATER QUALITY CONTROL DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
12-701. Construction standards adopted.
12-702. Available in recorder's office.
12-703. Violations.
12-701. Construction standards adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for
the purpose of regulating construction and repairs to the City of Maryville's
water and wastewater systems within or without the municipality, the
"Construction Standards for the City of Maryville Water Quality Control
Department-February 1999 Edition", is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the "WQC
Standards." (1985 Code, § 4-1101, modified)
12-702. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the WQC
Standards has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there
for the use and inspection of the public. (1985 Code, § 4-1102)
12-703. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall
violate a provision of the WQC Standards, or fail to comply therewith or with
any of the provisions thereof, or violate a detailed statement or plan submitted
and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of these standards
or any revisions thereof is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any
such violation such person shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than
$500.00 for each violation. (1985 Code, § 4-1103, modified)
1Municipal code references
Cross-connections: title 18.
Street excavations: title 16.
Water and sewer systems: title 18.
12-29
CHAPTER 8
[MOVED TO TITLE 19.]1
1Land development and public works standards was moved in conjunction
with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
12-30
CHAPTER 9
REPEALED
(This chapter was repealed by Ord. #2003-40, Oct. 2003)
12-31
CHAPTER 10
REPEALED
(This chapter was repealed by Ord. #2003-40, Oct. 2003)
12-32
CHAPTER 11
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION
12-1101. Residential code for one- and two-family dwellings adopted.
12-1102. Local modifications
12-1103. Available in recorder's office.
12-1104. Violations.
12-1101. Residential code for one- and two-family dwellings
adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by the Tennessee Code Annotated,
§§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-510 and for the purpose of regulating the construction,
alteration, repair, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and
demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenance connected or
attached to any building or structure, the International Residential Code for
One- and Two- Family Dwellings,1 2018 Edition, Chapters 1-23, 25-33, 44 and
Appendices E, H, and J thereto, with the modifications thereto hereinafter set
forth, as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code except as otherwise
specifically stated in this chapter, and is hereinafter referred to as the
"residential Code." (as added by Ord. #2003-37, Oct. 2003, amended by
Ord. #2008-04, Feb. 2008, and replaced by Ord. #2009-09, March 2009, and
Ord. #2013-25, Oct. 2013, amended by Ord. #2015-67, Nov. 2015, and replaced
by Ord. #2018-23, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-1102. Local modifications. The following sections and appendices
of the International Residential Code for One- and Two- Family Dwellings, 2018
edition, are hereby amended in the City of Maryville, as hereinafter provided:
(1) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R101.1 Title. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville"
as the name of the jurisdiction.
(2) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R102.5 Appendices.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting at the end of the
section the following:
"The following Appendices are specifically included in the adoption. All
others are excluded.
 Appendix E Manufactured Housing Used As Dwellings
 Appendix H Patio Covers
 Appendix J Existing Buildings and Structures
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) are available from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
12-33
(3) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R103.1 Creation of
enforcement agency. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
deleting Section R103.1 in its entirety and replaced with the following:
"Section R103.1 Building Official. The provisions of this code shall be
enforced by the Building Official."
(4) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R104.10.1 Flood
hazard areas. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting
Section R104.10.1 in its entirety.
(5) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R105.2 Work exempt
from permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting
number 1 in its entirety and replaced with:
"1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 200 square feet if the structure has a permanent foundation or
does not exceed 400 square feet if the structure is a pre-manufactured
building without a permanent foundation."
(6) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R105.4 Validity of
permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following at the beginning:
"A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the
work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or
set aside any of the provisions of this code, nor shall such issuance of a
permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a
correction of errors in plans of in construction, or of violation of this code.
The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error
or on the basis on incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
code"
(7) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R105.5. Expiration.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its entirety and
the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the
work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 60 days
after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 30 days after the time the work
is commenced. Work authorized by that permit shall be completed within
the time frame set forth in the following:
For Building Permits with Construction Valuation in the amount of:
$0.01 - $250,000 - twelve (12) months;
$250,000.01 - $500,000.00 - eighteen (18) months;
$500,000.01 - $1,000,000.00 - twenty four (24) months;
$1,000,000.01 and up - thirty-six (36) months
12-34
Extensions of time may be granted by the Building Official; however, the
extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one
or more extensions of time. Each extension shall be for a period of time
not to exceed 180 days. A fee of fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee of the
original permit shall he charged to cover administrative expenses for each
extension granted."
(8) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R105.6 Suspension
or revocation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting at
the end the following:
"After a permit has become void, if the owner wishes to commence
construction to complete the structure for which the original permit was
issued, the Owner shall reapply for a new building permit for the
completion of the construction. When a new building permit is issued, the
permit fee for the completion of the construction shall be equal to the
permit fee that was paid when the original permit was issued."
(9) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R105.7 Placement
of Permit. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"R105. 7 Placement of Permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept
on the site of the work or be made available to inspectors upon request
until the completion of the project."
(10) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R109.3 Inspection
request. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following at the end:
"No inspections shall be performed on any site or portion thereof where
there is an unsafe condition or a violation of the occupational safety and
health standards for the construction industry promulgated by the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)."
(11) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R110.1 Use and
occupancy. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the
following at the end of the paragraph and before the exception:
"Said certificate shall not be issued until the following have been tested
and approved by the appropriate agency or department:
 Fire protection systems
 Mechanical systems
 Utility systems
 Site work beyond the confines of the building
 General building construction requirements"
(12) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section R112 Board of
Appeals. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting in its
entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"Section R112 Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals R112.1
Appeals relative to the application of this code shall be as established and
12-35
regulated by the International Building Code as locally adopted and
amended in the City of Maryville."
(9) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 113.4, Violation and
Penalties is hereby locally amended in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, owner or agent who shall violate
a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish, or
move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved,
or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement
or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, or directive of the
building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law."
(13) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R301.2 Climatic and
geographic design criteria. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting the following information in Table R301.2 (1 ):
"Table R301.2 (1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
Insert "10 PSF" in the table for Ground Snow Load.
Insert "115" in the table for Wind Speed.
Insert "No" in the table for Topographic Effects.
Insert "No" in the table for Special Wind Region.
Insert "No" in the table for Windborne Debris Zone.
Insert "C" in the table for Seismic Design Category.
Insert "Severe" in the table for Weathering.
Insert "12 inches" in the table for Frost Line Depth.
Insert "Moderate to heavy" in the table for Termite.
Insert "19 degrees Fahrenheit" in the table for Winter Design Temp.
Insert "No" in the table for Ice Barrier Underlayment Required.
Insert in the table for Flood Hazards:
"(a) "December 7, 1971 is the date for City of Maryville's entry into
the National Flood Insurance Program; (b) September 19, 2007 is
the date of the Flood Insurance Study, and, (c) the effective FIRM
panels are 0119, 0120, 0137, 0138, 0139, 0143, 0232, 0234, 0235,
0251, 0252, 0253, 0254, 0255, and 0275 dated September 19, 2007"
Insert "210" in the table for Air Freezing Index.
Insert "59.4" in the table for Mean Annual Temp.
Insert "980 feet" in the table for Elevation.
Insert "35° North" in the table for the Latitude.
Insert "1 go F" in the table for Winter Heating.
Insert "90° in the table for Summer Cooling.
Insert "0.97" in the table for Altitude Correction Factor.
Insert "70° F (Heat)" in the table for Indoor Design Temperature.
Insert "75° F - 70° F" in the table for Design Temperature Cooling.
Insert "51° Fin the table for Heating Temperature Difference.
12-36
Insert "15° - 20° F" in the table for Cooling Temperature Difference.
Insert "15 mph" in the table for Wind Velocity Heating.
Insert "7.5 mph" in the table for Wind Velocity Cooling.
Insert "74° F" in the table for Coincident Wet Bulb.
Insert "Medium" in the table for Daily Range.
Insert ''70° db no visible condensation" in the table for Winter Humidity.
Insert "50% @ 75° db" in the table for Summer Humidity.
(14) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R301.2.2 Seismic provisions.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting item 1,
renumbering item 2 to item 1 and inserting "and townhouses" just after the
word dwellings and at the end of the section inserting "All references to
"townhouses in seismic design category C" in Chapters 6, 7 and 28 shall not
apply in the City of Maryville."
(15) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R301.2.2.1 Determination
of seismic design category. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
deleting the entire sentence and replacing with "Buildings shall be assigned a
seismic design category in accordance with Table R301.2.2.1.1. For the purpose
of determining the seismic design category for this code in the City of Maryville
the value for SDS in Table R301.2.2.1.1 shall be 0.4149."
(16) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R302.5.1 Opening
protection. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the
words ", equipped with a self-closing device" and insert a period after the word
"doors".
(17) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R302.13 Fire protection of
floors. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the words
"or electric-powered" in exception 2. Additionally, the following shall be inserted
at the end of exception 2:
"For the purpose of this section a crawl space or basement shall be
considered intended for storage where any access opening for the space
exceeds 36 inches by 48 inches in dimension."
(18) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R303.4 Mechanical
ventilation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by adding the
word "(Optional)." in the section title after the word ventilation and by deleting
the words "the dwelling unit shall be provided with whole-house mechanical
ventilation" and replacing with the words "dwelling units provided with
whole-house mechanical ventilation shall be"
(19) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R312.1.1 Where required.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the first sentence
and replacing it with the following sentence:
"Guards shall be provided along open-sided walking surfaces or ground
surfaces, mezzanines, retaining walls, stairways, ramps, landings and
any other locations that are located more than 30 inches above the floor
or grade below at any point within 36 inches horizontally to the edge of
the open side."
12-37
(20) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R312.2 Window fall
protection. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting section
R312.2 and its subsections in their entirety.
(21) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R313.1 Townhouse
automatic fire sprinkler systems. is hereby amended locally in the City of
Maryville by deleting the entire section and the exception and replacing with
"Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be required to be install
in townhouses in the City of Maryville. Installation of automatic fire
extinguishing systems in townhouses shall be optional. Nothing in this code
shall be construed as requiring automatic fire extinguishing systems in
townhouses. See Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-120-101 (a) (8)."
(22) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R313.1.1 Design and
installation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting
"Where installed" at the beginning before the word "automatic".
(23) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R313.2 One- and two-family
dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems. is hereby amended locally in the
City of Maryville by deleting the entire section and the exception and replacing
with "Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be required to be
install in one- and two-family dwellings in the City of Maryville. Installation of
automatic fire extinguishing systems in townhouses shall be optional. Nothing
in this code shall be construed as requiring automatic fire extinguishing systems
in one- and two-family dwellings. See Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-120-101(a)(8)."
(24) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R313.2.1 Design and
installation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting
"Where installed" at the beginning before the word "automatic".
(25) Chapter 3, Building Planning: Section R322.1.7 Protection of water
supply and sanitary sewage. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville
by deleting "and Chapter 3 of the International Private Sewage Disposal Code"
and inserting ", the requirements of the water and sewer service utility
providers and the Blount County Health Department" in its place.
(26) Chapter 4, Foundations: Figure R403.1 (1) Concrete and Masonry
Foundation Details. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting a note in the figure as follows:
"The bottom of all foundations shall extend a minimum of 12 inches below
finished grade."
(27) Chapter 5, Floors: Section R502.11.4 Truss Design Drawings. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting "to the building
official and approved prior to installation" and replacing it with "for review
when required by the building official".
(28) Chapter 8, Roof-ceiling Construction: Section R802.10.1 Truss
design drawings. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting
"to the building official and approved prior to installation" and replace it with
"for review when required by the building official".
12-38
(29) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Table N1102.1.1 (R402.1.1)
Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component is hereby amended
locally in the City of Maryville by:
In the row for climate zone "4 except Marine", change Ceiling R-Value
from "R49" to "R-38", and change the Wood Frame Wall R-Value from "20
or 13 + 5" to "13", and change the Mass Wall R-Value from "8/13" to
"5/10".
(30) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Table N1102.1.3 (R402.1.3)
Equivalent U-factors is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by:
In the row for climate zone "4 except Marine", change Ceiling U-Factor
from "0.026" to "0.030", and change the Frame Wall U-Factor from
"0.060" to "0.082", and change the Mass Wall U-Factor from "0.098" to
"0.141".
(31) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1102.2.6 (R402.2.6)
Steel-frame ceilings, walls. and floors. is hereby amended locally in the City of
Maryville by inserting "Table N1102.1.1," after the first occurrence of the word
"of'.
(32) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1102.4.1.1
(R402.4.1.1) Installation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
adding the words "and visual inspection option." after the word "Installation" in
the section title, and adding the words", and be field verified." after the word
"construction".
(33) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1102.4.1.2
(R402.4.1.2) Testing. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
adding the word "(optional)" after the word 'Testing" in the section title, and
inserting "Where required by the building official," before the first sentence.
(34) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1103.1.1 (R403.1.1)
Programmable thermostat. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville
by adding the word "(optional)." after the word "thermostat" in the section title,
and inserting "Where required by the building official and," before the first
sentence.
(35) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1103.3.3 (R403.3.3)
Duct testing (Mandatory). is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
deleting the word "(Mandatory)" in the section title and "inserting "Where
required by the building official," at the beginning.
(36) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1103.5.3 (R403.5.3)
Hot water pipe insulation (Prescriptive). is hereby amended locally in the City
of Maryville by deleting the word "Prescriptive" and replacing it with the word
"Optional" in the section title, by inserting before the first sentence "Where
required by the building official,", and by inserting "Where required by the
building official," before the words "All remaining piping".
(37) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1103.6 (R403.6)
Mechanical ventilation (Mandatory). is hereby amended locally in the City of
Maryville by deleting the word "Mandatory" and replacing it with the word
12-39
"Optional" in the section title, and deleting "The building shall be provided with
ventilation that meets" and replacing with "Buildings provided with mechanical
ventilation shall comply".
(38) Chapter 11 [RE]: Energy Efficiency: Section N1103.10 (R403.10)
Pools and permanent spa energy consumption (Mandatory). is hereby amended
locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the word "Mandatory" and replacing
it with the word "Optional" in the section title, and inserting "Where required
by the building official," before the first sentence.
(39) Chapter 26, General Plumbing Requirements: Section P2603.5.1
Sewer depth. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting in
two places "twelve inches" as the number to be inserted.
(40) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3002.2 Building Sewer.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the section in its
entirety and the following substituted in lieu thereof:
"P3002.2 Approved Material: Building Sewer Pipe and Pipe Fittings.
Only the following materials will be accepted in the installation of
building sewer pipes and fittings:
1. Cast iron soil pipe and fittings,
2. Brass fittings,
3. Bronze fittings,
4. Type 1 PVC pipe and fittings, minimum schedule 40 (ASTM
0-2665),
5. ASTM D - 3034 PVC pipe encapsulated with six (6) inches
of bedding material (Size no. 7 or 67 crushed stone) on the
top, both sides, and the bottom of the pipe,
6. Ductile iron pipe and fittings.
The following pipe and fitting materials are specifically prohibited:
1. Asbestos - cement pipe and fittings,
2. Concrete pipe and fittings,
3. Coextruded PVC pipe in outside building sanitary sewers."
(41) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3003.13 Joints between
different materials. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting the following at the end:
"Co-mingling of materials in the building sewer shall be accomplished
only through the use of neoprene adapters with stainless steel bands."
(42) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.1 Drainage fittings
and connections. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting
the following at the end:
"Bends greater than 45 degrees shall be prohibited in the building sewer."
(43) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.2.6 Cleanout plugs.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the entire section
and replacing with:
"Cleanout plugs shall be copper alloy, plastic or other approved materials.
Cleanout plugs for borosilicate glass piping systems shall be of
12-40
borosilicate glass. Copper alloy cleanout plugs shall conform to ASTM
A74 and shall be limited for use only on metallic piping systems.
Cleanout plugs in building sewers shall have countersunk heads or be of
the recessed slot type only."
(44) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.2.2 Spacing. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the following at the
end:
"Cleanouts in building sewers shall be installed not more than 80 feet
apart measured from the upstream entrance of the cleanout."
(45) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.2.4 Change of
direction. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the
words "building sewer," in the first sentence with nothing to be inserted in its
place and inserting the following at the end of the section:
"In the building sewer cleanouts shall be installed at each change of
direction which is greater than 90 degrees. (Please note that this change
may be accomplished with two or more fittings. Example - Two 45 degree
bends and a 22 1/2 degree bend installed in succession shall require a
cleanout be installed between them regardless length of separation.)"
(46) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.2.9 Accessibility. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the following at the
end:
"All building sewer cleanouts shall be provided with clearance of not less
than 36 inches (914 mm) for rodding."
(47) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.2.3 Building drain
and building sewer junction. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville
by deleting the section in its entirety and the following substituted in lieu
thereof:
"Building drain and building sewer junction. The first exterior cleanout
shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet but no more than five (5) feet
from the exterior wall of the building without prior approval of the
plumbing official. The use of two-way cleanouts is prohibited."
(48) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.2.5 Cleanout size.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the second
sentence.
(49) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.4 Drain pipe sizing.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting the following at
the end:
"A common building sewer line must be a minimum of six (6) inches
diameter."
(50) Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage: Section P3005.4.2. Building drain
and sewer size and slope. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting the following at the end:
"Notwithstanding the above, four ( 4) inch nominal diameter building
sewer drainage piping shall have a minimum fall of 1 /4 inch per foot, and
12-41
six (6) inch nominal diameter building sewer drainage piping shall have
a minimum fall of 1 /8 inch per foot."
(51) Appendix E: Manufactured Housing Used As Dwellings: Section
AE304.3.2.1 Investigation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting "Where required by the building official," before the first sentence.
(52) Appendix E: Manufactured Housing Used As Dwellings: Section
AE304.3.2.2 Fee. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting
"Where required by the building official," before the first sentence.
(53) Appendix E: Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings: Section
AE305.5.1 Structural inspections for the manufactured home installation. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting at the end of the
section:
"Exception: The inspections required by this section shall not apply to
manufactured homes as exempted by the State of Tennessee but shall
apply to any construction or installation of decks, porches, steps or other
structures or equipment. All manufactured homes shall pass a final
inspection and have a certificate of occupancy issued." (as added by
Ord. #2003-37, Oct. 2003, amended by Ord. #2004-38, Sept. 2004,
Ord. #2004-39, Sept. 2004, Ord. #2008-04, Feb. 2008, and replaced by
Ord. #2009-09, March 2009, Ord. #2013-25, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-23,
July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-1103. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one (1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
as modified, has been filed with the recorder of the city for a period of fifteen (15)
days prior to the passage of this ordinance and will remain on file and available
for public review for as long as this ordinance is in effect and that all public
hearing and notice requirements in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501
et seq. have been or will be met by the time of the final passage of this
ordinance. (as added by Ord. #2003-37, Oct. 2003, and replaced by
Ord. #2009-09, March 2009, Ord. #2013-25, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-23, July
2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-1104. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, occupant or
agent who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be taken in
violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally adopted as
modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof during which any violation is committed or continued. Upon
being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be punished according to
the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or through injunctive
remedies in state or federal court as appropriate.
In the event court action is taken, the city shall be entitled to recover
from any person adjudicated to have violated this chapter the city's reasonable
12-42
attorney fees and litigation costs incurred in bringing the action(s) to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. In the city's discretion, violations of this part may
further be adjudicated by the city's administrative hearing officer pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-1001 et seq. as locally adopted. (as added by
Ord. #2003-37, Oct. 2003, and replaced by Ord. #2009-09, March 2009,
Ord. #2013-25, Oct. 2013 and Ord. #2018-23, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
12-43
CHAPTER 12
[MOVED TO TITLE 13]
(This chapter1 was added by Ord. #2003-42, Oct. 2003, and repealed by
Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
1§§ 12-1201 through 12-1208.
13-1
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS1
CHAPTER
1. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
2. [REPEALED.]
3. [REPEALED.]
4. [REPEALED.]
5. [MOVED TO TITLE 19.]
6. [REPEALED.]
CHAPTER 1
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION
13-101. Property maintenance code adopted.
13-102. Local modifications.
13-103. Available in recorder's office.
13-104. Violations.
13-105.--13-110. Deleted.
13-101. Property maintenance code adopted. Pursuant to the
authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated,§§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-510
and for the purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures, the International Property
Maintenance Code,2 2018 edition as prepared and adopted by the International
Code Council is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as a part
of the ordinances of the City of Maryville. This code shall hereinafter be known
as property maintenance code. It is adopted subject to the changes and additions
set forth herein. (1985 Code, § 8-401, as replaced by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013,
and Ord. #2018-22, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
1Municipal code references
Animal control: title 10.
Littering streets, etc.: § 16-107.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) are available from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
13-2
13-102. Local modifications. The following sections and appendices of
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, are hereby
amended in the City of Maryville, as hereinafter provided:
(1) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 101.1 Title. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting "City of Maryville" as the
name of the jurisdiction.
(2) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 103.5 Fees. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the section in its entirety
with no replacement.
(3) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.3 Prosecution of
violation. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and replacing with:
"Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of
violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and of a violation of the City Code. If the notice
of violation is not complied with the Code Official may in his discretion
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination
of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions
of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and
shall be a lien upon such real estate."
(4) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 106.4 Failure to
comply. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and replacing with:
"Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code
or fail to comply therewith or of any of the requirements thereof shall be
prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws and may be
penalized pursuant to the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville.
Each day that violation continues after due notice has been served shall
be deemed a separate offense regardless of whether an additional citation
has been issued. If the City must resort to the equitable relief to abate a
violation, the violator should be liable to the City for the City's reasonable
attorney's fees and litigation expenses in bringing and prosecuting the
equitable action.
Additionally, violators may in the discretion of the City be subject to fines
and penalties to be imposed by the Administrative Hearing Officer
pursuant to T.C.A. §6-54-1001 et seq. as adopted locally in the City Code."
(5) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 108.2 Closing of
vacant structures. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting after Section 108.2.1 a new section as follows:
"108.2.2 Boarding of abandoned structures. All windows and doors of
abandoned structures shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent
entry by unauthorized persons. Boarding sheet material shall be
13-3
minimum 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) nominal thick wood structural panels
complying with the International Building Code."
(6) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 109.6 Hearing. is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the last sentence in
its entirety with no replacement.
(7) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 111 Means of Appeal.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the section and
all of its subsections in their entirety with no replacement.
(8) Chapter 1, Scope and Administration: Section 112.4 Failure to
comply. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the
section in its entirety and replacing with:
"Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to penalties as prescribed by law and the enforcement section and
penalty clause of this Ordinance."
(9) Chapter 3, General Requirements: Section 302.4 Weeds. is hereby
amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the first paragraph in its
entirety and inserting the following in its place:
"All mowable parcels or mowable portions of parcels of a parcel located in
the City limits, shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of twelve (12) inches.
Parcels that are three (3) acres or larger and are adjacent to the city
rights-of-way or adjacent to a parcel which contains an existing dwelling
within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the larger parcel shall have a fifty
(50) feet setback from the shared property line that shall be maintained
free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eighteen (18) inches.
However, parcels three (3) acres or larger shall mow the entire parcel at
least two (2) times during growing season.
Mowable shall mean all parcels other than heavily wooded parcels where
equipment cannot maneuver because of the natural density of the
vegetation. Slopes where the gradient is steeper than three units
horizontal to one unit vertical (33%) shall not be considered mowable.
The requirements of this section shall apply only to the extent that they
do not conflict with the City of Maryville's Stormwater Quality
Management Plan and stormwater regulations City Code Title 19 as
amended which shall both supersede the provisions of this part.
This section does not apply to government owned property including
greenways, parks and recreation areas nor does it apply to active and
bona fide agricultural uses for livestock, crops or plant nurseries.
Further, this section shall not apply to properties that legitimately
qualify for and have Greenbelt classification for tax assessment purposes.
(10) Chapter 3, General Requirements: Section 302.6 Exhaust vents. Is
hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by deleting the entire section
and replacing with:
13-4
302.6 Wood smoke. Wood smoke (smoke coming from the burning of
wood) shall not be permitted to escape one commercially operated
property and come on to abutting or adjacent public or private property
where such wood smoke:
1. Is detectable by sight or smell below the roof lines or 15 feet
above grade, whichever is less, at the affected neighboring
buildings or structures; and
2. Results in complaints from owners or tenants of such
abutting or adjoining property.
A person or entity producing such wood smoke will not be considered in
violation of this ordinance if there exists on its property for each wood
smoke producing fire:
1. A properly functioning, and at least 15 foot high chimney,
smoke stack, flue or chute directing the wood smoke
upward; and a functioning commercial grade exhaust fan to
disburse the wood smoke to a higher altitude; or
2. Any commercially designed system or device, such as a
scrubber, that removes particulate matter. Persons or
entities producing wood smoke as part of participation in a
city-approved special event are exempted from the
provisions of this ordinance.
(11) Chapter 3, General Requirements: Section 302.9 Defacement of
property. Is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting at the
end:
"All graffiti shall be removed or the surface repainted to match the
existing surfaces."
(12) Chapter 3, General Requirements: Section 302 Exterior property
areas. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting at the end
a new section as follows:
"302.10. Junkyards. All junkyards and other places where vehicles or
scrap is collected before being discarded, reused or recycled shall be
operated and maintained subject to the following regulations:
(1) All vehicles, junk and/or scrap stored or kept in such yard
shall be kept so that they will not catch and hold water in
which mosquitoes may breed and so that they will not
constitute a place in which rats, mice, or other vermin may
be harbored, reared, or propagated.
(2) All such junkyards shall be enclosed within close fitting
plank or metal solid fences touching the ground on the
bottom and being not less than six (6) feet in height. Such
fence is to be built so that it will be impossible for stray cats
and/or stray dogs to have access to such junkyards.
Additionally, such fence shall be subject to any other
regulations that are provided in the City of Maryville
13-5
Municipal Code or Maryville Land Development
Regulations.
(3) All such junk yards within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
right-of-way within the municipality shall be screened by
natural objects, plantings, fences, or other appropriate
means so as not to be visible from the right-of-way.
Additionally, such screening, plantings, or fences shall be
subject to any other regulations that are provided in the
City of Maryville Municipal Code or Maryville Land
Development Regulations.
(4) Such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary
condition and so as not to be a menace to the public health
or safety."
(13) Chapter 3, General Requirements: Section 304.14 Insect screens.
is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting "January 1 to
December 31" as the dates to be inserted.
(14) Chapter 6, Mechanical and Electrical Requirements: Section 602.3
Heat supply. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by inserting
"January 1 to December 31" as the dates to be inserted.
(15) Chapter 6, Mechanical and Electrical Requirements: Section 602.4
Occupiable work spaces. is hereby amended locally in the City of Maryville by
inserting "January 1 to December 31" as the dates to be inserted. (1985 Code,
§ 8-405, as replaced by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-22, July 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
13-103. Available in recorder's office. The Council of the City of
Maryville hereby declares that one ( 1) copy of the aforesaid code and revisions,
as modified, has been filed with the Recorder of the City for a period of fifteen
(15) days prior to the passage of this ordinance, that it will remain on file as long
as this ordinance is in effect and that all public hearing and notice requirements
in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501 et seq. have been or will be met by the
time of the final passage of this ordinance. (1985 Code, § 8-406, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013, and Ord. #2018-22, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
13-104. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation, tenant, occupant or
agent who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof or cause such action to be taken in
violation of the provisions of this code adopted by reference or locally adopted
as modified shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or portion thereof during which any violation is committed or continued. Upon
being found guilty of such violation, such person shall be punished according to
the general penalty clause of the City of Maryville or through injunctive
remedies in state or federal court as appropriate. In the event court action is
taken, the city shall be entitled to recover from any person adjudicated to have
13-6
violated this chapter the city's reasonable attorney fees and litigation costs
incurred in bringing the action(s) to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Additionally, violators may in the discretion of the city be subject to fines
and penalties to be imposed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-1001 et seq. as adopted locally in the city
code. (1985 Code, § 8-407, as amended by Ord. #2001-35, Nov. 2001, and
replaced by Ord. #2010-13, April 2010, Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013, and Ord.
#2018-22, July 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
13-105.--13-110. Deleted. (as deleted by #2018-22, July 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
13-7
CHAPTER 2
[REPEALED]
(This chapter was repealed by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
13-8
CHAPTER 3
[REPEALED]
(This chapter was repealed by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
13-9
CHAPTER 4
[REPEALED]
(This chapter was repealed by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
13-10
CHAPTER 5
[MOVED TO TITLE 19.]1
1Grading, soil erosion and sedimentation control was moved in
conjunction with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
13-11
CHAPTER 6
[REPEALED]
(This chapter was repealed by Ord. #2013-24, Oct. 2013)
14-1
TITLE 14
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
2. ZONING AND LAND USE ORDINANCE.
3. HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION.
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
14-101. Creation.
14-102. Membership.
14-103. Organization, powers, duties, etc.
14-104. Deleted.
14-101. Creation. Pursuant to the provisions of Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 13-4-101, there is hereby created a municipal planning
commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission. (1985 Code,
§ 11-101)
14-102. Membership. The planning commission shall consist of seven
(7) members, one (1) of whom shall be the mayor or a person designated by the
mayor, one (1) of whom shall be a member of the city council who shall be
appointed by council, and five (5) of whom shall be appointed by the mayor. A
majority of the membership shall be freeholders within the City of Maryville.
One member may reside outside of the corporate limits but within Blount
County.
Terms shall be a maximum of five (5) years, except for the term of office
of the member of the city council, which shall run concurrently with membership
on the city council. Terms shall be arranged so that the term of one (1) member
will expire each year.
Any vacancy in the appointed membership shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the mayor, who shall have authority to remove any appointed
member when concurred by a majority vote of the city council. (1985 Code, §
11-102, as replaced by Ord. #2018-30, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-103. Organization, powers, duties, etc. The planning commission
shall be organized and shall carry out its powers, functions, and duties in
accordance with all applicable provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13.
(1985 Code, § 11-103)
14-2
14-104. Deleted. (1985 Code, § 11-104, as deleted by Ord. #2018-30,
Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-3
CHAPTER 2
ZONING AND LAND USE ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-201. General provisions.
14-202. Basic definitions and interpretations.
14-203. Board of zoning appeals, planning department, downtown design
review board and regional planning commission basic powers,
functions and procedures.
14-204. Permits
14-205. Appeals, variances, interpretations.
14-206. Hearing procedures for appeals and applications.
14-207. Enforcement and review.
14-208. Nonconforming situations.
14-209. Zoning districts and zoning map.
14-210. Permissible uses.
14-211. Supplemental use regulations.
14-212. Site plan review process.
14-213. Landscaping and screening.
14-214. Density and dimensional regulations
14-215. Streets and sidewalks.
14-216. Utilities.
14-217. [Repealed.]
14-218. Signs.
14-219. Parking.
14-220. Amendments.
14-221. Fees.
14-222. Fences and vegetation adjacent to roadways.
14-201. General provisions. (1) Short title. This ordinance shall be
known and may be cited as the Maryville Zoning and Land Use Ordinance.
(2) Authority.
(a) This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in the
Tennessee Code Annotated including but not limited to authority found
in § 13-7-201 et seq.
(b) Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers to or cites a section
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, the Maryville Subdivision Regulations
or Maryville City Charter and that section is later amended or
superseded, the ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the
amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the
superseded section.
(3) Jurisdiction. This ordinance shall be effective throughout the city's
corporate limits.
14-4
(4) Effective date. The provisions in this ordinance were originally
adopted and became effective on June 15, 2006.
(5) Relationship to existing zoning, subdivision and flood control
ordinances. To the extent that the provisions of this ordinance are the same in
substance as the previously adopted provisions that they replace in the city's
zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, and flood control ordinances, they
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless
otherwise specifically provided. In particular it is the express intent of this
ordinance that a situation that did not constitute a lawful, nonconforming
situation under the previously adopted zoning ordinance does not achieve lawful
nonconforming status under this ordinance merely by the repeal of the zoning
ordinance. In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part thereof, and
the whole or part of any future ordinance of the city, the most restrictive shall
in all cases apply.
(6) Relationship to land use plan. It is the intention of the council that
this ordinance implements the planning policies and affects the zoning adopted
by the council for the city, as reflected in the land-use plan and other planning
and zoning documents. While the council reaffirms its commitment that this
ordinance and any amendment to it be in conformity with adopted planning
policies, the council hereby expresses its intent that neither this ordinance nor
any amendment to it may be challenged on the basis of any alleged
nonconformity with any planning document.
(7) No use or sale of land or buildings except in conformity with
ordinance provisions. (a) Subject to the provisions of this ordinance addressing
nonconforming uses, no person may use, occupy, or sell any land or
buildings or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of land or
buildings under his control except in accordance with all of the applicable
provisions of this ordinance.
(b) For purposes of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a
building or land relates to anything and everything that is done to, on, or
in that building or land.
(8) Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council
that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance
are severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses,
or phrases of this ordinance since the same would have been enacted without
the incorporation into this ordinance of such unconstitutional or invalid section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase.
(9) Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the
time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first
and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, that day shall be excluded in the computation.
14-5
(10) Miscellaneous. (a) As used in this ordinance, words importing the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.
(b) Words used in the singular in this ordinance include the
plural and words used in the plural include the singular. (as replaced by
Ord. #2006-32, June 2006 , and amended by Ord. #2018-30, Sept. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
14-202. Basic definitions and interpretations. (1) Definitions.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context,
the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated
when used in this ordinance.
(a) "Accessory building." A minor building that is located on the
same lot as a principal building and that is used incidentally to a
principal building or that houses an accessory use.
(b) "Accessory use" means any incidentally supporting and
functionally dependent use located on the same lot with its principal use,
an accessory use is not necessarily coterminous with an accessory
structure; an accessory use may be either auxiliary or subsidiary.
(c) "Adult day care." A service and/or licensed facility that
provides accommodations for less than twenty-four (24) hours for more
than five (5) unrelated adults and provides supervision, personal care
services, and limited medical services to occupants of the facility. This
service shall include buildings and structures occupied by persons older
than eighteen (18) years of age and who receive care from individuals
other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood, marriage, or
adoption, in a place other than the home of the person cared for.
(d) "Antenna." Equipment designed to transmit or receive
electronic signals.
(e) "Assisted living housing." A residential use containing not
more than sixty (60) dwelling units to house older persons who are frail
but not infirm. Lower level assistance than intermediate care institution,
assisted living housing provides medical care and activities for daily
living on an as needed basis. Uses are intended to simulate residential
living in appearance, and typically generate lower levels of impact
consistent with a comparable number of traditional residential units.
Units may be under one roof, in several buildings not to exceed sixty (60)
units per building and may include cottages and independent units from
the main facility that provides meals, recreation, and low level medical
service.
(f) "Base flood." The flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also known as the 100-year flood.
(g) "Boarding house." A residential use consisting of at least
one dwelling unit together with more than two rooms that are rented or
are designed or intended to be rented but which rooms, individually or
14-6
collectively, do not constitute separate dwelling units. A rooming house
or boarding house is distinguished from a tourist home in that the former
is designed to be occupied by longer term residents (at least
month-to-month tenants) as opposed to overnight or weekly guests.
(h) "Building" means any roofed structure, including
conventional buildings, tents, mobile homes, and such. Buildings may be
either principal or accessory, according to their use.
(i) "Certify." Whenever this ordinance requires that some
agency certify the existence of some fact or circumstance to the city, the
city may require that such certification be made in any manner that
provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification.
(j) "Child care home." A home for not more than nine
orphaned, abandoned, dependent, abused, or neglected children, together
with not more than two adults who supervise such children, all of whom
live together as single housekeeping unit. A child care home as defined
in this ordinance is an institution which conforms to Tennessee licensing
regulations pertaining to such institutions.
(k) "Child care institution." An institutional facility housing
more than nine (9) orphaned, abandoned, dependent, abused, or neglected
children, and meeting State licensing regulations.
(l) "City" means the legal entity of the City of Maryville,
Tennessee as incorporated under the laws of Tennessee, and includes the
legislative, administrative, and adjudicative agencies of the city.
(m) "Conference/training center." A public or private facility or
improved location, including open space and buildings, for the purpose of
providing a common meeting place for professional training and
education, social events for formal or informal organizations, and where
food and drink may be prepared, served, and consumed. Such a facility
must include facilities and provision for overnight lodging for conference
center guests.
(n) "Consignment store and thrift shop" (see municipal code
§ 9-106 for definitions and regulations).
(o) "Continuing care retirement community." A continuing care
retirement community ("CCRC") consists of a specified combination of
residential uses that may be special exception or permitted uses. A
CCRC shall include single family housing (including duplexes, and
multi-family townhouses) and a minimum combination of at least two (2)
of the following three uses: independent living and care, assisted living
housing, and nursing care facilities, where the average length of stay in
these type facilities is more than forty-five (45) days. At least one of such
facilities must be State-licensed. Other non-residential uses may be
included in this type of development when integrally designed to be
compatible and accessory to the primary uses and intent of the
development as a whole.
14-7
(p) "Convenience store." A one-story retail store containing less
than two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area that is designed
and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household
supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in
contrast to a "supermarket"). It is designed to attract and depends upon
a large volume of stop-and-go traffic.
(q) "Corner lot" means any lot bounding the intersection of two
(2) streets (or upon the inside of a curve of a street) where the corner
interior angle is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees (or if
tangents to the points where the street lines meet the curve form such
angle).
(r) "Council." The City Council of the City of Maryville.
(s) "Day care center." Any child care arrangement that provides
day care on a regular basis for more than four hours per day for more
than five (5) children of preschool age, and meets requirements for
licensing by the state of Tennessee.
(t) "Deck." A roofless, outdoor space built as an aboveground
platform that adjoins a house and is also supported by means other than
the principal structure.
(u) "Developer." A person who is responsible for any
undertaking that requires a zoning permit or other use-related permit as
described in the terms of this ordinance.
(v) "Development." That which is to be done pursuant to a
zoning permit or other use-related permit as described in the terms of
this ordinance.
(w) "Driveway." That portion of the vehicle accommodation area
that consists of a travel lane bounded on either side by an area that is not
part of the vehicle accommodation area.
(x) "Duplex." A two (2) family residential use in which the
dwelling units share a common wall (including without limitation the
wall of an attached garage or porch) and in which each dwelling unit has
living space on the ground floor and a separate, ground floor entrance.
(y) "Dwelling unit." An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen,
and bathroom facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a
permanent residence by one family.
(z) "Erected" includes altered, constructed, enlarged, installed,
moved, remodeled, reconstructed and similar actions, and when used in
conjunction with a sign, includes painting, hanging or otherwise affixing.
(aa) "Extraterritorial planning area." That portion of the city's
planning jurisdiction that lies outside the corporate limits of the city and
constitutes the city's urban growth boundary.
(bb) "Family" means an individual or two or more persons related
by blood or marriage or a group of not more than five (5) persons not so
related living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
14-8
(cc) "Farmers' market" (see municipal code § 9-105 for definition
and regulations).
(dd) "Fence" means an unroofed enclosing barrier of any nature
(including vegetation) or construction. A vegetative fence may form a
screen. The opacity of a fence or screen shall be deemed the ratio of open
area which permits unobstructed passage of light and air to closed area,
expressed as a percent. A retaining wall is a fence insofar as it extends
in height above the finished grade of the high side.
(ee) "Flag lot." A lot having a narrow portion of which fronts on
a public/private street and where access to the public/private street is
across that narrow portion for the exclusive use of that lot only.
(ff) "Flea market" (see municipal code § 9-104 for definition and
regulations).
(gg) "Floodplain." Any land area susceptible to partial or
complete inundation by water from the base flood. As used in this
chapter, the term refers to that area designated as subject to flooding
from the base flood (100-year flood) on the flood boundary and floodway
map prepared by the Tennessee Valley Authority and approved by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), a copy of which is on
file in the planning department.
(hh) "Floodway." The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one (1) foot. As used in this ordinance the term refers to that
area designated as a floodway on the flood boundary and floodway map
prepared by the Tennessee Valley Authority and approved by FEMA, a
copy of which is on file in the planning department. The adopted
floodway is depicted on the city zoning map as an overlay zoning district,
pursuant to the terms of this ordinance.
(ii) "Freestanding sign." A sign that is attached to, erected on,
or supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other
structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or
other structure having a principal function other than the support of a
sign. A sign that stands without supporting elements is also a
freestanding sign.
(jj) "Garage sale" (see municipal code § 9-102 for definition and
regulations).
(kk) "Gathering place." A facility maintained for the purpose of
providing accommodations for weddings, family reunions, social
functions, and dances and which may involve activities such as on site
catering, playing live and recorded music, display sales and rental of
clothing, decorations associated with a particular function and activity to
be conducted on said property. Such a facility shall be located on no less
than two (2) acres and must be located along a state or federal highway.
14-9
It is the intent of this ordinance that all the above activities are to be
conducted in connection with activities conducted on said
accommodations.
(ll) "Gross floor area." The total area of a building measured by
taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended
for occupancy or storage.
(mm) "Ground floor" means the story connected to the outside at
ground level plus or minus four (4) feet.
(nn) "Halfway house." A home for not more than nine (9) persons
who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse,
mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct, together with not more
than two persons providing supervision and other services to such
persons, not more than eleven (11) of whom live together as a single
housekeeping unit.
(oo) "Height of a structure" means the distance measured
vertically in feet from the finished grade (or, in the case of a building,
from the ground level from which fire protection equipment can service
the lot) to the highest point of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard
roof, to the average point between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, gambrel
roofs, and to the highest point of a horizontal member or of any
substantial part of other structures. Height limits for airport hazard
districts shall be deemed elevations, measured from an airport reference
point or from mean sea level.
(pp) "Home for handicapped or infirm." A residence within a
single dwelling unit for at least six (6) but not more than nine (9) persons
who are physically or mentally handicapped or infirm, together with not
more than two (2) persons providing care or assistance to such persons,
all living together as a single housekeeping unit. Persons residing in
such homes, including the aged and disabled, principally need residential
care rather than medical treatment.
(qq) Home occupation." An activity for gain or support which:
(i) is conducted by a person on the same lot (in a
residential district) where such person resides, and
(ii) is incidental or is not commonly associated with the
residential use as to be regarded as an accessory use, and can be
conducted without any significantly adverse impact on the
surrounding neighborhood.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a use may be
regarded as having a significantly adverse impact on the surrounding
neighborhood if:
(i) goods, stock in trade, or other commodities are
displayed
(ii) tools, machinery, and equipment are not screened
from view of the surrounding neighborhood
14-10
(iii) any on-premises retail sales occur
(iv) more than one (1) person not a resident of the
premises is employed in connection with the purported home
occupation,
(v) it creates objectionable noise, fumes, odor, dust or
electrical interference
(vi) more than twenty percent(20%) of the total gross floor
area of residential buildings plus other buildings housing the
purported home occupation or more than five hundred (500) square
feet of gross floor area (whichever is less) is used for home
occupational purposes.
The following is a nonexhaustive list of examples of enterprises
that may be home occupations if they meet the foregoing definitional
criteria:
(i) the office or studio of a physician, dentist, artist,
musician, lawyer, architect, engineer, teacher, or similar
professional;
(ii) workshops, greenhouses, or kilns:
(iii) dressmaking or hairdressing studios not to exceed one
(1) hairdressing chair within the primary structure.
(iv) similar or like use as determined by the
administrator.
(rr) "Impact overlay permit." A permit issued by the planning
commission that authorizes the recipient to make use of property in
accordance with the requirements of this ordinance as well as any
additional requirements imposed as a result of an impact analysis. The
impact analysis shall be performed pursuant to the requirements
described in the impact overlay district of this ordinance.
(ss) "Independent living facility." A residential use to house
older persons who are not infirmed. Independent living residential
services may include meals, housekeeping, social programs, daily
maintenance and other services. An independent living facility is
intended to be residential in character and is expected to generate lower
levels of impact than traditional residential units. Independent care
facilities may be part of a continuing care retirement community.
(tt) "Institution for handicapped or infirm care." An
institutional facility housing and providing care or assistance for more
than nine (9) persons who are physically or mentally handicapped or
infirm. Persons residing in such homes, including the aged or disabled,
principally need residential care rather than medical treatment.
(uu) "Intermediate care home." A facility maintained for the
purpose of providing accommodations for not more than seven occupants
needing medical care and supervision at a lower lever than that provided
14-11
in a nursing care home but at a higher level than that provided in
institutions for the handicapped or infirm.
(vv) "Kennel." A commercial operation that:
(i) provides food and shelter and care of animals for
purposes not primarily related to medical care (a kennel may or
may not be run by or associated with a veterinarian), or
(ii) engages in the breeding of animals for sale.
(ww) "Leased garden area." A plot of ground, not to exceed two (2)
acres, leased or rented for the sole purpose of cultivating herbs, fruits,
flowers, and/or vegetables for non-profit use. On site retail sales are
prohibited.
(xx) "Light industrial." Light industrial uses as permitted and
allowed within the business/transportation zone and special exception
uses within the central community zone are specific operations that will
have little or no adverse impact on surrounding districts or uses. Light
industrial uses may include storage, distribution, manufacturing,
processing and fabrication which will have little or no adverse effects
upon nearby residential or commercial uses.
(yy) "Lot." A parcel of land whose boundaries have been
established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a
recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for
purposes of transfer of title.
If a public body or any authority with the power of eminent domain
condemns, purchases, or otherwise obtains fee simple title to or a lesser
interest in a strip of land cutting across a parcel of land otherwise
characterized as a lot by this definition, or a public road is created across
a parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this definition, and
the interest thus obtained or the road so created is such as effectively to
prevent the use of this parcel as one lot, then the land on either side of
this strip shall constitute a separate lot.
Subject to the provision in this ordinance concerning
nonconforming lots, and the subdivision regulations of the city, the
permit-issuing authority and the owner of two or more contiguous lots
may agree to regard the lots as one lot if necessary or convenient to
comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance.
(zz) "Lot area." The total gross lot area circumscribed by the
boundaries of a lot, except that:
(i) when the legal instrument creating a lot shows the
boundary of the lot extending into a public right-of-way, then the
lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the
street right-of-way line, or if the right-of-way line cannot be
determined, a line running parallel to and thirty (30) feet from the
center of the traveled portion of the street, and
14-12
(ii) in a residential district, when a private road that
serves more than three (3) dwelling units is located along any lot
boundary, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot
area shall be the inside boundary of the traveled portion of that
road.
(aaa) "Lot frontage" is the length of a straight line drawn between
the two (2) points where the abutting property lot lines or other adjacent
lot lines cut a given street line of a public street. In the case of a corner
lot, one or both of the end points shall be deemed to be the imaginary
point (s) of the intersection of tangents to any curve from where the street
lines begin such curve. A lot may have more than one frontage; however,
only one such frontage shall be required to meet the minimum frontage
requirements of this code. Situations in which property abuts the end
line of a street designed later to be extended shall not be deemed frontage
situations.
(bbb) "Lot line" means the legal boundary for a lot.
(ccc) "Lot width" is the length of a straight line drawn between
the points where any street setback line cuts the lot lines adjacent to and
intersecting that street line from which the setback is measured. In the
case of uses for which required lot width exceeds required lot frontage, lot
width may be similarly measured along any line parallel to the street
setback line and located farther from the centerline than the street
setback line is located. Lot width requirements shall be applied for each
separate lot frontage.
(ddd) "Mobile home. A dwelling unit that:
(i) is not constructed in accordance with the standards
set forth in the city building code, and
(ii) is composed of one or more components, each of which
was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and
designed to be transported to the home site on its own chassis, and
(iii) exceeds forty (40) feet in length, and eight (8) feet in
width.
(eee) "Mobile home park." A residential use in which more than
one mobile home is located on a single lot.
(fff) "Modular home." A dwelling unit constructed in accordance
with the standards set forth in the city building code and composed of
components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and
transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent
foundation. Among other possibilities, a modular home may consist of
two sections transported to the site in a manner similar to a mobile home
(except that the modular home meets the city building code applicable to
site-built homes), or a series of panels or room sections transported on a
truck and erected or joined together on the site.
14-13
(ggg) "Motor home." A motor vehicle which is designed,
constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping
place.
(hhh) "Multi-family apartments." A multi-family residential use
other than a multi-family conversion or multi-family townhouse.
(iii) "Multi-family conversion." A multi-family residence
containing not more than four (4) dwelling units and resulting from the
conversion of a single building containing at least two thousand (2,000)
square feet of gross floor area that was in existence on the effective date
of this provision and that was or originally designed, constructed and
occupies as a single-family residence.
(jjj) "Multi-family residence." A residential use consisting of a
building containing three or more dwelling units. For purposes of this
definition, a building includes all dwelling units that are enclosed within
that building or attached to it by a common floor or wall (even the wall
of an attached garage or porch).
(kkk) "Multi-family townhouse." A multi-family residential use in
which each dwelling unit shares a common wall (including without
limitation the wall of an attached garage or porch) with at least one (1)
other dwelling unit and in which each dwelling unit has living space on
the ground floor and a separate, ground floor entrance.
(lll) "Neighborhood utility facilities." Utility facilities that are
designed to serve the immediately surrounding neighborhood and that
must, for reasons associated with the purpose of the utility in question,
be located in or near the neighborhood where such facilities are proposed
to be located.
(mmm) "Nonconforming sign." A sign that, on the effective date
of this chapter, legally does not conform to one or more of the regulations
set forth in this ordinance.
(nnn) "Nonconforming use." A nonconforming situation that
occurs when property is used for a purpose or in a manner made unlawful
by the use regulations applicable to the district in which the property is
located. The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made
of the property.
(ooo) "Nursery schools." A facility for the organized instruction of
pre-kindergarten children.
(ppp) "Nursing care institution." An institutional facility
maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and medical
supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to more than
nine (9) persons.
(qqq) "Parking space." A portion of the vehicle accommodation
area set aside for the parking of one vehicle.
14-14
(rrr) "Person." An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or other entity
acting as a unit.
(sss) "Personal care services." Personal care services are those
services that require state license and/or advanced schooling in order to
practice a trade and employment and would include but not be limited to
cosmetologists and barbers, licensed massage therapists, athletic
trainers, acupuncture technicians, dietitians and nutritionists, opticians,
physical therapists, or any similar or like occupation.
(ttt) "Planned residential development." A development
constructed on a tract of at least five (5) acres under single ownership,
planned and developed as an integral unit, and consisting of single-family
detached residences combined with either two (2) family residences or
multi-family residences, or both, all developed in accordance with the
planned development provisions of this ordinance.
(uuu) "Planned Unit Development (PUD)." A development
constructed on a tract of at least twenty-five (25) acres under single
ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, and consisting of
a combination of residential and nonresidential use on land within a PUD
district.
(vvv) "Planning commission" means the municipal planning
commission, created in accordance with appropriate provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 13, Public Planning and Housing, with
jurisdiction in Maryville and the surrounding territory.
(www) "Planning department." The section of the City of
Maryville which is responsible for administering land use regulations and
performing current and long-range planning duties for the city.
(xxx) "Planning jurisdiction." The area within the city limits as
well as the area beyond the city limits within which the city is authorized
to plan for and regulate development also known as the urban growth
boundary.
(yyy) "Primary residence with accessory apartment." A residential
use having the external appearance of a single-family residence but in
which there is located a second dwelling unit that comprises not more
than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the building or
more than a total of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
(zzz) "Principal building." The primary building on a lot or a
building that houses a principal use.
(aaaa) "Principal use" means the one specific primary purpose of
use, characterized by an essential element without which the use would
not exist as such; a principal use is not necessarily coterminous with a
principal structure; a principal use may involve one or more operations;
a principal use is functionally independent of other uses with which it
may jointly occupy a lot or a structure.
14-15
(bbbb) "Professional service." Professional service means a
vocation, calling, occupation, or employment requiring training in the
arts or sciences, or combination thereof, requiring advanced study in a
specialized field; any occupation requiring licensing by the state and
maintenance of professional ethics and standards applicable to a certain
field and may include, but not be limited to the fields of, accounting,
architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, law, medicine,
professional engineering, real estate, appraising, professional nursing; or
a person who is licensed or registered by the state to perform a certain
trade or specific activity within the fields mentioned above or of similar
employment.
(cccc) "Public rummage sale" (see municipal code § 9-103 for
definition and regulations).
(dddd) "Receive-only earth station." An antenna and attendant
processing equipment for reception of electronic signals from satellites.
(eeee) "Restaurant." An establishment where food and drink is
prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principle building.
(ffff) "Rooming house. (See boarding house.)
(gggg) "Sign." Any device that:
(i) is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot
where such device is located to accomplish either of the objectives
set forth in subdivision (b) of this definition; and
(ii) is designed to attract the attention of such persons or
to communicate information to them.
(hhhh) "Sign permit." A permit issued by the city that authorizes
the recipient to erect, move, enlarge, or substantially alter a sign.
(iii) "Single-family detached residence." More than one (1)
dwelling per lot. A residential use consisting of two (2) or more
single-family detached dwelling units on a single lot.
(jjjj) "Single-family detached residence."One (1) dwelling unit per
lot. A residential use consisting of a single detached building containing
one (1) dwelling unit and located on a lot containing no other dwelling
units.
(kkkk) "Story." Any fully enclosed level of a building with at least
an eight (8) foot distance from floor to ceiling. Such level must span the
entire distance from all exterior walls (i.e., partial mezzanine floors do
not count as a story). A basement or upper level may also count as a
story providing it satisfies the criteria above. The top floor area under a
sloping roof with less floor area is a half story.
(llll) "Street." A public street or a street with respect to which an
offer of dedication has been made and acceptance of dedication has been
made by the City of Maryville.
(mmmm) "Structures." Any erected material or combination of
materials the use of which requires a location on the ground, including,
14-16
but not limited to, buildings, stadiums, radio towers, shed, storage bins,
fences, septic tanks, signs and parking lots. Structures may be either
principal or accessory, according to their use.
(nnnn) "Subdivision." The division of a tract of land into two (2)
or more lots, sites, or other divisions requiring new streets or utility
construction, or any subdivision of less than five (5) acres for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale or building development and
includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to context, relates to the
process of re-subdividing or to the land or area subdivided.
(oooo) "Tearoom/café." An establishment having a maximum
seating capacity of sixty (60) seats serving food and drink such as baked
goods, soups, sandwiches, entrees and desserts.
(pppp) "Total floor area" means that area measured to the exterior
face of exterior walls of the first story of a building plus, similarly
measured, the area of any additional usable stories.
(qqqq) "Tower." Any structure whose principal function is to
support an antenna.
(rrrr) "Tract." A lot. The term tract is used interchangeably with
the term lot, particularly in the context of subdivisions, where one "tract"
is subdivided into several "lots".
(ssss) "Transient vendor" (see municipal code § 9-201, et seq. for
definition and regulations).
(tttt) "Travel trailer." A structure that:
(i) is intended to be transported over the streets and
highways (either as a motor vehicle or attached to or hauled by a
motor vehicle) and
(ii) is designed for temporary use as sleeping quarters but
that does not satisfy one or more of the definitional criteria of a
mobile home.
(uuuu) "Trees," Vegetation growing to a mature height in excess
of twenty-five (25) feet.
(vvvv) "Two-family apartment." A two-family residential use
other than a duplex, two-family conversion, or primary residence with
accessory apartment.
(wwww) "Two-family conversion." A two-family residence
resulting from the conversion of a single building containing at least two
thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area that was originally
designed, constructed and occupied as a single-family residence.
(xxxx) "Two-family residence." A residential use consisting of a
building containing two (2) dwelling units. If two dwelling units share a
common wall, even the wall of an attached garage or porch, the dwelling
units shall be considered to be located in one building.
(yyyy) "Use." The activity or function that actually takes place or
is intended to take place on a lot.
14-17
(zzzz) "Utility facilities." Any above-ground structures or facilities
(other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as storage
incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a
governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any
entity defined as a public utility for any purpose by Tennessee Code
Annotated and used in connection with the production, generation,
transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity,
gas, oil or electronic signals. Excepted from this definition are utility
lines and supporting structures located within a public right-of-way.
(aaaaa) "Variance." A grant of permission by the board of zoning
appeals that authorizes the recipient to do that which, according to the
strict letter of this ordinance, he could not otherwise legally do.
(bbbbb) "Vegetation" means any object of natural growth and
includes ground cover, shrubs, and trees.
(ccccc) "Wholesale sales." On-premises sales of goods primarily to
customer engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
(ddddd) "Zoning permit." A permit issued by the city that
authorizes the recipient to make use of property in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance.
(eeeee) "Short term rental unit." A residential dwelling that is
rented wholly or partially for a fee for a period of less than thirty (30)
continuous days and does not include a hotel or a bed and breakfast
establishment.
(2) Lots divided by zoning district lines. (a) Whenever a single lot is
located within two (2) or more different zoning districts, and if any of the
portions of the zoning districts do not meet the applicable minimum lot
size, nor would they accommodate the density/dimension requirements,
then the regulations applicable to the zoning district within which the
larger portion of the lot lies shall apply to the entire lot.
(b) Whenever a single lot is located within two (2) or more
different zoning districts, and the portions of the zoning districts do meet
the applicable minimum lot size, and they could accommodate the
density/dimension requirements, then the regulations applicable to the
zoning district shall apply. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and
amended by Ord. #2009-18, May 2009, Ord. #2011-03, Feb. 2011, Ord.
#2012-06, Feb. 2012, Ord. #2015-69, Nov. 2015, Ord. #2016-02, Jan. 2016,
Ord. #2016-06, March 2016, Ord. #2017-34, Sept 2017 Ch17_2-5-19, Ord.
#2018-30, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19, and Ord. #2018-37, Nov. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
14-203. Board of zoning appeals; planning department, downtown
design review board and municipal planning commission basic powers,
functions and procedures. (1) Establishment, terms, removal and
replacement.
14-18
(a) The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall consist of five (5)
members and is established in accordance with Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 13-7-205. Members of the board may also be members of the
planning commission, design review board or historic zoning commission,
but none are required to be. All members shall be appointed by the mayor
and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council.
(b) All board of zoning appeals members shall reside within the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville. Board of zoning appeals
members shall serve for four (4) years staggered terms. BZA members
who are also members of other appointed boards or commissions (if any)
shall serve terms which are coterminous with their other appointments.
Members may continue to serve until their successors have been
appointed. Any vacancy shall be filled for any unexpired term by an
appointment by the mayor with confirmation by the city council.
(c) Members may be reappointed to successive terms without
limitation.
(d) Board zoning appeals members may be removed by the
mayor at any time for failure to attend three consecutive meetings or for
failure to attend twenty-five (25) percent or more of the meetings within
any twelve (12) month period or for any other good cause related to
performance of duties.
(e) If a board member moves outside the city, that shall
constitute a resignation from the board, effective upon the date a
replacement is appointed.
(2) Meetings of the board of zoning appeals. (a) The board of zoning
appeals shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet
frequently enough so that it can take action expeditiously on those
matters before it. Notice of at least five (5) days shall be provided of a
meeting of the board.
(b) All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, and the
agenda for each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the
meeting.
(3) Quorum. (a) A quorum for the board of zoning appeals shall
consist of a majority of the regular board membership (excluding vacant
seats). A quorum is necessary for the board to take official action.
(b) A member who has recused himself due to a conflict of
interest shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether
a quorum is present.
(4) Voting. (a) The concurring vote of a simple majority of the regular
board membership (excluding vacant seats) shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrator or to decide
in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any
ordinance or to grant any variance. All other actions of the board shall also be
taken by majority vote, a quorum being present.
14-19
(b) Once a member is physically present at a board meeting, any
subsequent failure to vote shall be recorded as a negative vote unless the
member has recused himself or abstains.
(c) A member may recuse himself from voting on a particular
issue under the following circumstances:
(i) If the member has a direct financial interest in the
outcome of the matter at issue, or
(ii) If the matter at issue involves the member's own
official conduct, or
(iii) If participation in the matter might violate the letter
or spirit of a member's code of professional responsibility, or
(iv) If a member has such close personal ties to the
applicant that the member cannot reasonably be expected to
exercise sound judgment in the public interest.
(v) For any other reason under state law where recusal
would be appropriate.
(5) Board of zoning appeals officers. (a) At its first regular meeting
in July, the board of zoning appeals shall, by majority vote of its
membership (excluding vacant seats) elect one (1) of its members to serve
as chairman and preside over the board's meetings and one (1) member
to serve as vice chairman. The persons so designated shall serve in these
capacities for terms of one year. Vacancies may be filled for the
unexpired terms only by majority vote of the board membership
(excluding vacant seats).
(b) The chairman and vice chairman and may take part in all
deliberation and vote on all issues.
(6) Powers and duties of the board of zoning appeals. (a) The board
of zoning appeals shall hear and decide:
(i) Appeals from any order, decision, requirement, or
interpretation of this ordinance made by any administrative
official in carrying out the duties of his office,
(ii) Applications for variances,
(iii) Questions involving interpretation of the zoning map,
including disputed district boundary lines and lot lines, and
requests for special exceptions as provided for in this ordinance,
(iv) Any other matter the board is required to act upon by
any other city ordinance. In exercising these powers the BZA shall
interpret this ordinance, the zoning map, and any other maps,
charts, and materials incorporated herein in light of all applicable
statutes and of the comprehensive plan for Maryville.
(b) The board may adopt rules and regulations governing its
procedures and operations, which rules and regulations are consistent
with the provisions of this ordinance.
14-20
(7) Planning department--land use administrator. Except as otherwise
specifically provided, primary responsibility for administering and enforcing this
ordinance may be assigned by the city manager to one or more individuals. The
person or persons to whom these functions are assigned shall be referred to in
this ordinance as the "land-use administrator" or "administrator". The term
"staff" or "planning staff is sometimes used interchangeably with the term
"administrator". "Administrator" shall mean the same as "building
commissioner" as referred to in Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 13-7-206 and
13-7-208.
(8) Downtown Design Review Board (DDRB). (a) Definition/purpose.
The Downtown Design Review Board is an ad hoc, advisory committee to the
Maryville Municipal Planning Commission. The purpose of the board is to assist
in creating guidelines and standards for downtown development, and to review
all conceptual plans for construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation, relocation
of any structure, or demolition of any historically significant structure, in the
downtown districts for compliance with those standards.
(b) Membership. Downtown Design Review Board members
shall be appointed by the mayor. The board shall consist of nine (9)
members: A representative of a local patriotic or historical organization;
an architect, if available; and a member of the planning commission, at
the time of such person's appointment. The remaining members shall be
appointed from the community in general. The terms of members of the
Downtown Review Board shall be five (5) years. Members may be
appointed to successive terms without limitation. DDRB members can
also be members of the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Historic Zoning
Commission, but are not required to be.
(c) Meetings. The DDRB shall establish a regular meeting
schedule and shall meet with sufficient frequency that it can take action
expeditiously. Adequate notice shall be provided of a meeting of the
board. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, and the
agenda for each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the
meeting. The board may adopt rules and regulations consistent with the
provisions of this part.
(i) Quorum. A quorum for the DDRB shall consist of a
majority of the regular board membership (excluding vacant seats).
A quorum is necessary for the board to take official action. A
member who has recused himself due to a conflict of interest shall
be counted as present for purposes of determining whether a
quorum is present.
(ii) Voting. The concurring vote of a simple majority of
the regular board membership (excluding vacant seats) shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any
14-21
ordinance or to grant any variance. All other actions of the board
shall also be taken by majority vote, a quorum being present.
A. A member may recuse himself from voting on
a particular issue under the following circumstances:
(1) If the member has a direct financial
interest in the outcome of the matter at issue, or
(2) If the matter at issue involves the
member's own official conduct, or
(3) If participation in the matter might
violate the letter or spirit of a member's code of
professional responsibility, or
(4) If a member has such close personal ties
to the applicant that the member cannot reasonably
be expected to exercise sound judgment in the public
interest.
(5) For any other reason under state law
where recusal would be appropriate.
(d) Jurisdiction. The DDRB has jurisdiction in non-residential
and multi-family uses per Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-4-133. The
Maryville Downtown Review Board is limited to the downtown zones, and
the following zoning districts must conform to downtown design
standards.
(i) Central Business District
(ii) Central Business District Support Zone
(iii) Heritage Development Zone
(iv) Office Transition Zone
(v) Washington Street Commercial Corridor
(e) The DDRB is to report its findings to the planning
commission for review and validation. In all cases, the review board shall
review and report within sixty (60) days all applications within the
designated zones. If noncompliance is found, then the applicant shall be
informed of the finding in writing no later than three (3) days after the
termination of the sixty (60) day period. If found in compliance, the
applicant shall be notified within a reasonable time of approval.
(f) Review of decision. Any applicant who may disagree with
any recommendation of the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board
may appeal to the Maryville Municipal Planning Commission when said
application is considered and make known his or her objections. (as added
by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and amended by Ord. #2009-37, July 2009,
Ord. #2017-04, March 2017, and Ord. #2018-30, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-204. Permits. (1) Permits required. (a) The use made
of property may not be substantially changed, substantial clearing,
grading, or excavation may not be commenced, and buildings or other
14-22
substantial structures may not be constructed, erected, moved, or
substantially altered except in accordance with and pursuant to one of
the following permits:
(i) A zoning permit issued by the administrator,
(ii) A special exception permit issued by the board of
zoning appeals,
(iii) A sign permit issued by the administrator.
(b) Zoning permits and special exception permits and sign
permits are issued under this ordinance only when a review of the
application submitted, including the plans contained therein, indicates
that the development will comply with the provisions of this ordinance if
completed as proposed. Such plans and applications as are finally
approved are incorporated into any permit issued, and unless
subsequently amended and approved as amended, all development shall
occur strictly in accordance with such approved plans and applications.
(c) A zoning permit, special exception permits, or sign permit
shall be issued in the name of the applicant (except that applications
submitted by an agent shall be issued in the name of the principal), shall
identify the property involved and the proposed use, shall incorporate by
reference the plans submitted, and shall contain any special conditions
or requirements lawfully imposed by the permit-issuing authority.
(2) No occupancy, use, or sale of lots until requirements fulfilled.
Issuance of a special-use or zoning permit authorizes the recipient to commence
the activity resulting in a change in use of the land or (subject to obtaining a
building permit) to commence work designed to construct, erect, move, or
substantially alter improvements. However, except as otherwise provided
expressly in this ordinance, the intended use may not be commenced, no
building may be occupied until all of the requirements of this ordinance and all
additional requirements imposed pursuant to the issuance of an approval,
permit or special exception permit have been met.
(3) Who may submit permit applications. (a) Applications for zoning,
special exception, and sign permits will be accepted only from persons
having the legal authority to take action in accordance with the permit.
As an illustration, in general this means that applications should be
made by the owner or lessees of the property, or their agents, or persons
who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability
to acquire the necessary permits under this ordinance or the agents of
such persons (who may make application in the name of such owners,
lessees, or contract vendees).
(b) The administrator may require an applicant to submit
evidence of his authority to submit the application in accordance with
subsection (1) whenever there appears to be a reasonable basis for
questioning this authority.
14-23
(4) Applications to be complete. (a) All applications for zoning, special
exception or sign permits must be complete before the permit-issuing
authority is required to consider the application.
(b) Subject to subsection (3), an application is complete when it
contains all of the information that is necessary for the permit-issuing
authority to decide whether or not the development, if completed as
proposed, will comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance.
(c) All detailed or technical design requirements and
construction specifications relating to various types of improvements
(streets, sidewalks, etc.) shall be in accordance with any public works
standards adopted by the City of Maryville, or in accordance with
specifications outlined by the city director of engineering and public
works. It is not necessary that the application contain the type of
detailed construction drawings that would be necessary to determine
compliance with the standards, so long as the plans provide sufficient
information to allow the permit-issuing authority to evaluate the
application in light of the substantive requirements. However, whenever
this ordinance requires a certain element of a development to be
constructed in accordance with other specifications, separate and apart
from this document, then no construction work on such element may be
commenced until detailed construction drawings have been submitted to
and approved by the administrator. Failure to observe this requirement
may result in permit revocation or other penalty as provided otherwise
in this ordinance.
(d) The presumption established by this ordinance is that all of
the information set forth in the Maryville Land Development and Public
Works Standards is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this section.
However, it is recognized that each development is unique, and therefore
the permit-issuing authority may allow less information or require more
information to be submitted according to the needs of the particular case.
For applications submitted to the city council or board of zoning appeals,
the applicant may rely in the first instance on the recommendations of
the administrator as to whether more or less information than set forth
in the Maryville Land Development and Public Works Standards should
be submitted.
(e) The administrator shall make every effort to develop
application forms, instructional sheets, checklists, or other techniques or
devices to assist applicants in understanding the application
requirements and the form and type of information that must be
submitted. In classes of cases where a minimal amount of information is
necessary to enable the administrator to determine compliance with this
ordinance, such as applications for zoning permits to construct
single-family or two-family houses, or applications for sign permits, the
14-24
administrator shall develop standard forms that will expedite the
submission of the necessary plans and other required information.
(5) Staff consultation before formal application. Before submitting an
application for any other permit, developers are strongly encouraged to consult
with the planning staff concerning the application of this ordinance to the
proposed development.
(6) Staff consultation after applications submitted. (a) Upon receipt
of a formal application for a zoning or special exception permit, the
administrator shall review the application and confer with the applicant
to ensure that he understands the planning staff's interpretation of the
applicable requirements of this ordinance, that he has submitted all of
the information that he intends to submit, and that the application
represents precisely and completely what he proposes to do.
(b) If the application is for a special exception, the
administrator shall place the application on the agenda of the board of
zoning appeals when the applicant indicates that the application is as
complete as he intends to make it. However, if the administrator believes
that the application is incomplete, he shall recommend to the appropriate
board that the application be denied on that basis.
(7) Zoning permits. (a) A completed application form for a zoning
permit shall be submitted to the administrator by filing a copy of the
application with the administrator in the planning department.
(b) The administrator shall issue the zoning permit unless he
finds, after reviewing the application and consulting with the applicant
as provided in § 14-204(6), that:
(i) The requested permit is not within his jurisdiction
according to the table of permissible uses, or
(ii) The application is incomplete, or
(iii) If completed as proposed in the application, the
development will not comply with one or more requirements of this
ordinance (not including those requirements concerning which a
variance has been granted or those the applicant is not required to
comply with based on a prior nonconforming use).
(c) If the administrator determines that the development for
which a zoning permit or special exception is requested will have or may
have substantial impact on surrounding properties, he shall, at least ten
(10) days before taking final action on the permit request, send a written
notice to those persons who have listed for taxation real property any
portion of which is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the lot that is the
subject of the application, informing them that:
(i) An application has been filed for a permit authorizing
identified property to be used in a specified way,
(ii) All persons wishing to comment on the application
should contact the administrator by a certain date, and
14-25
(iii) Persons wishing to be informed of the outcome of the
application should send a written request for such notification to
the administrator.
(8) Authorizing use or occupancy before completion of development
under zoning permit. In cases when, because of weather conditions or other
factors beyond the control of the zoning-permit recipient (exclusive of financial
hardship), it would be unreasonable to require the zoning-permit recipient to
comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the
intended use of the property or occupying any buildings, the administrator may
authorize the commencement of the intended used or the occupancy of buildings
(insofar as the requirements of this ordinance are concerned) if the permit
recipient provides a performance bond or other security satisfactory to the
administrator to ensure that all of the requirements of this ordinance will be
fulfilled within a reasonable period (not to exceed twelve (12) months)
determined by the administrator.
(9) Special exception permits. (a) An application for a special
exception permit shall be submitted to the board of zoning appeals by
filing a copy of the application with the administrator in the planning
department.
(b) Subject to subsection (c) the board of zoning appeals shall
issue the requested permit unless it concludes, based upon the
information submitted at the hearing, that:
(i) The requested permit is not within its jurisdiction
according to the table of permissible uses, or
(ii) The application is incomplete, or
(iii) If completed as proposed in the application, the
development will not comply with one or more requirements of this
ordinance (not including those the applicant is not required to
comply with under the circumstances specified in this ordinance in
§ 14-208.
(c) Even if the permit-issuing board finds that the application
complies with all other provisions of this ordinance, it may still deny the
permit if it concludes, based upon the information submitted at the
hearing, that if completed as proposed, the development, more probably
than not:
(i) Will materially endanger the public health or safety,
or
(ii) Will substantially injure the value of adjoining or
abutting property, or
(iii) Will not be in harmony with the area in which it is to
be located, or
(iv) Will not be in general conformity with the land-use
plan, thoroughfare plan, or other plan officially adopted by the
council, or
14-26
(v) Will create impacts on public services and facilities
which impacts are beyond the capacity of the city to address with
available public funds.
(10) Burden of presenting evidence, burden of persuasion. (a) The
burden of presenting a complete application to the permit-issuing board
shall be upon the applicant. However, unless the board informs the
applicant at the hearing in what way the application is incomplete and
offers the applicant an opportunity to complete the application (either at
that meeting or at a continuation hearing), the application shall be
presumed to be complete.
(b) Once a completed application has been submitted, the
burden of presenting evidence to the permit-issuing board sufficient to
lead it to conclude that the application should be denied for any reasons
stated in subsections 9(b)(i), 9(b)(iii) or 9(c) shall be upon the party or
parties urging this position, unless the information presented by the
applicant in his application and at the hearing is sufficient to justify a
reasonable conclusion that a reason exists to so deny the application.
(c) The burden of persuasion on the issue of whether the
development, if completed as proposed, will comply with the requirements
of this ordinance remains at all times on the applicant.
(11) Recommendation on special exception permit applications.
(a) When presented to the board of zoning appeals at the
hearing, the application for a special exception permit shall be
accompanied by a report setting forth the planning staff's proposed
findings concerning the application's completeness and the other
requirements of this ordinance, as well as, any staff recommendations for
additional requirements to be imposed by the board of zoning appeals.
Additional requirements shall be related to the review of the project
impact analysis, and shall bear a clear relationship to mitigation of
impacts identified in the analysis.
(b) If the staff proposes a finding or conclusion that the
application fails to comply with § 14-204(4) or any other requirement of
this ordinance, it shall identify the requirement in question and
specifically state supporting reasons for the proposed finding or
conclusions.
(12) Additional requirements on special exception permits.
(a) Subject to subsection (b), in granting a special exception
permit, the board of zoning appeals respectively, may attach to the permit
such reasonable requirements in addition to those specified in this
ordinance as will insure that the development in its proposed location:
(i) Will not endanger the public health or safety,
(ii) Will not injure the value of adjoining or abutting
property,
14-27
(iii) Will be in harmony with the area in which it is
located, and
(iv) Will be in conformity with the land-use plan,
thoroughfare plan, or other plan officially adopted by the council.
(b) The board of zoning appeals may not attach additional
conditions that modify or alter the specific requirements set forth in this
ordinance unless the development in question presents extraordinary
circumstances that justify the variation from the specified requirements.
(c) Without limiting the foregoing, the board may attach to a
permit a condition limiting the permit to a specified duration. Where no
action is taken to construct the improvement by the expiration date, a
new permit shall be required.
(d) All additional conditions or requirements shall be entered
on the permit.
(e) All additional conditions or requirements authorized by this
section are enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as any
other applicable requirement of this ordinance.
(f) A vote may be taken on application conditions or
requirements before consideration of whether the permit should be denied
for any of the reasons set forth in subsections 9(b) or (c).
(13) Authorizing use, occupancy, or sale before completion of
development under special exception permits. (a) In cases when, because of
weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the special
exception permit recipient (exclusive of financial hardship) it would be
unreasonable to require the permit recipient to comply with all of the
requirements of this ordinance before commencing the intended used of
the property or occupying any buildings or selling lots in a subdivision,
the permit-issuing board may authorize the commencement of the
intended use or the occupancy of buildings (insofar as the requirements
of this ordinance are concerned) if the permit recipient provides a
performance bond or other security satisfactory to the board to ensure
that all of these requirements will be fulfilled within a reasonable period
(not to exceed twelve (12) months).
(b) When the board imposes additional requirements upon the
permit recipient or when the developer proposes in the plans submitted
to install amenities beyond those required by this ordinance the board
may authorize the permittee to commence the intended used of the
property or to occupy any building before the additional requirements are
fulfilled or the amenities installed if it specifies a date by which or a
schedule according to which such requirements must be met or each
amenity installed and if it concludes that compliance will be ensured as
the result of one or more of the following:
(i) A performance bond or other security satisfactory to
the board is furnished,
14-28
(ii) A condition is imposed establishing an automatic
expiration date on the permit, thereby ensuring that the permit
recipient's compliance will be reviewed when application for
renewal is made,
(iii) The nature of the requirements or amenities is such
that sufficient assurance of compliance is given by other sections
of this ordinance concerning penalties, remedies for violations and
permit revocation.
(14) Completing developments in phases. (a) If a development is
constructed in phases or stages in accordance with this section, then,
subject to subsection (c), the provisions of § 14-204(2) (no occupancy, use,
or sale of lots until requirements fulfilled) shall apply to each phase as if
it were the entire development.
(b) As a prerequisite to taking advantage of the provisions of
subsection (a), the developer shall submit plans that clearly show the
various phases or stages of the proposed development and the
requirements of this ordinance that will be satisfied with respect to each
phase or stage.
(c) If a development that is to be built in phases or stages
includes improvements that are designed to relate to, benefit, or be used
by the entire development (such as a swimming pool or tennis courts in
a residential development) then, as part of his application for
development approval, the developer shall submit a proposed schedule for
completion of such improvements. The schedule shall relate completion
of such improvements to completion of one or more phases or stages of the
entire development. Once a schedule has been approved and made part
of the permit by the permit-issuing authority, no land may be used, no
buildings may be occupied, and no subdivision lots may be sold except in
accordance with the schedule approved as part of the permit.
(15) Expiration of permits. (a) Zoning, special exception, and sign
permits shall expire automatically if, within one (1) year after the
issuance of such permits:
(i) The use authorized by such permit has not
commenced, in circumstances where no substantial construction,
erection, alteration, excavation, demolition, or similar work is
necessary before commencement of such use, or
(ii) Less than ten percent (10%) of the total cost of all
construction, erection, alteration, excavation, demolition, or
similar work on any development authorized by such permit has
been completed on the site. With respect to phased development,
this requirement shall apply only to the first phase.
(b) If, after some physical alteration to land or structures begins
to take place, such work is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, then
the permit or approval authorizing such work shall immediately expire.
14-29
(c) The permit-issuing authority may extend for a period up to
six (6) months the date when a permit would otherwise expire pursuant
to subsections (a) or (b) if it concludes that: (1) the permit or approval
has not yet expired, (2) the permit or approval recipient has proceeded
with due diligence and in good faith, and (3) conditions have not changed
so substantially as to warrant a new application. Successive extensions
may be granted for periods up to six (6) months upon the same findings.
All such extensions may be granted without resort to the formal processes
and fees required for a new permit.
(d) For purposes of this section, the permit within the
jurisdiction of the board of zoning appeals is issued when such board
votes to approve the application and issue the permit. A permit within
the jurisdiction of the zoning administrator is issued when the earlier of
the following takes place:
(i) A copy of the fully executed permit is delivered to the
permit recipient and delivery is accomplished when the permit is
hand delivered or mailed to the permit applicant; or
(ii) The zoning administrator notifies the permit or
approval applicant that the application has been approved and
that all that remains before a fully executed permit can be
delivered is for the applicant to take certain specified actions, such
as having the permit executed by the property owner so it can be
recorded if required under applicable state law.
(16) Effect of permit on successors and assigns. Zoning, special
exception, and sign permits authorize the permittee to make use of land and
structures in a particular way. Such permits are transferable. However, so long
as the land or structures or any portion thereof covered under a permit
continues to be used for the purposes for which the permit was granted, then:
(a) no person (including successors or assigns of the person who
obtained the permit) may make use of the land or structures covered
under such permit for the purposes authorized in the permit except in
accordance with all the terms and requirements of that permit, and
(b) the terms and requirements of the permit apply to and
restrict the use of land or structures covered under the permit, not only
with respect to all persons having any interest in the property at the time
the permit was obtained but also with respect to persons who
subsequently obtain any interest in all or part of the covered property.
(17) Amendments to and modifications of permits. (a) Insignificant
deviations from any permit issued by the board of zoning appeals or the
administrator are permissible and the administrator may authorize such
insignificant deviations. A deviation is insignificant if it has no
discernible impact on neighboring properties, the general public, or those
intended to occupy or use the proposed development.
14-30
(b) Minor design modifications or changes in permits (including
approved plans) are permissible with the approval of the permit-issuing
authority. Such permission may be obtained without a formal
application, public hearing, or payment of any additional fee. For
purposes of this section, minor design modifications or changes are those
that have no substantial impact on neighboring properties, the general
public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed development.
(c) All other requests for changes in approved plans will be
processed as new applications. If such requests are required to be acted
upon by the administrator or board of zoning appeals, new conditions
may be imposed. However, the applicant retains the right to reject such
additional conditions by withdrawing his request for an amendment and
may then proceed in accordance with the previously issued permit.
(d) The administrator shall determine whether amendments to
and modifications of permits fall within the categories set forth above in
subsections (a), (b), and (c).
(e) A developer requesting approval of changes shall submit a
written request for such approval to the administrator, and that request
shall identify the changes. Approval must be given in writing.
(18) Reconsideration of board action. (a) Whenever the board of zoning
appeals disapproves an application for a special exception permit or a
variance, on any basis other than the failure of the applicant to submit
a complete application, such action may not be reconsidered by the BZA
at a later time unless the applicant clearly demonstrates that:
(i) Circumstances affecting the property that is the
subject of the application have substantially changed, or
(ii) New information is available that could not with
reasonable diligence have been presented at a previous hearing.
A request to be heard on this basis must be filed with the
administrator within sixty (60) days of the decision. Filing a
request to be reheard does not toll the period for appeal in
chancery court.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the board of zoning appeals
may at any time consider a new application affecting the same property
as an application previously denied. A new application is one that differs
in some substantial way in the judgment of the BZA from the one
previously considered.
(19) Applications to be processed expeditiously. Recognizing that
inordinate delays in acting upon appeals or applications may impose
unnecessary costs on the appellant or applicant, the city shall make every
reasonable effort to process appeals and permit applications as expeditiously as
possible, consistent with the need to ensure that all development conforms to the
requirements of this ordinance.
14-31
(20) Maintenance of common areas, improvements, and facilities. The
recipient of any zoning, special exception, or sign permit, or his successor, shall
be responsible for maintaining all common areas, improvements, or facilities
required by this ordinance or any permit issued in accordance with its
provisions, except those areas, improvements, or facilities with respect to which
an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the appropriate public
authority. As illustrationed, and without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, this means that private roads and parking areas, water and sewer
lines, and recreational facilities must be properly maintained so that they can
be used in the manner intended, and required vegetation and trees used for
screening, landscaping, or shading must be replaced if they die or are destroyed.
Responsibilities described herein may be assigned to a homeowners'
association or like group when documents are provided to the appropriate board,
which documents assure the existence and financial capacity of the responsible
entity. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006)
14-205. Appeals, variances, interpretations. (1) Appeals. (a) An
appeal from any final order or decision of the administrator may be taken
to the board of zoning appeals by any person aggrieved. An appeal is
taken by filing with the administrator and the board of zoning appeals a
written notice of appeal specifying the grounds of appeal. A notice of
appeal shall be considered filed with the administrator and the board of
zoning appeals when delivered to the planning department, and the date
and time of filing shall be entered on the notice by the planning staff.
(b) An appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days after the
date of the decision of order appealed from.
(c) Whenever an appeal is filed, the administrator shall
transmit in a timely manner to the board of zoning appeals all the
documents relating to the action appealed from.
(d) An appeal stays all actions by the administrator seeking
enforcement of or compliance with the order or decision appealed from,
unless the administrator certifies to the board of zoning appeals that (due
to facts stated in the certificate) a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent danger or irreparable harm to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of zoning
appeals or a court, issued on application of the party seeking the stay, for
due cause shown, after notice to the administrator.
(e) The board of zoning appeals may reverse or affirm (in whole
or in part) or may modify the order, requirement or decision or
determination appealed from and shall make any order, requirement,
decision or determination that in its opinion ought to be made in the case
before it. To this end, the board shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. Further, the board shall state in writing
14-32
the reasons supporting the change which they have made in the original
order, requirement, or decision.
(2) Variances. (a) An application for a variance shall be submitted to
the board of zoning appeals by filing a copy of the application with the
administrator in the planning department. Applications shall be handled
as prescribed in § 14-203.
(b) A variance may be granted by the board of zoning appeals
if it concludes the strict enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance
would result in practical difficulties (related to the configuration of the
land) or unnecessary hardships for the applicant and that, by granting
the variance, the spirit of the ordinance will be observed, public safety
and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. It may reach these
conclusions if it finds that:
(i) If the applicant complies strictly with the provisions
of the ordinance he can make no reasonable use of this property.
(ii) The hardship of which the applicant complains is one
suffered by the applicant rather than by neighbors or the general
public.
(iii) The hardship relates to the applicant's land, rather
than personal circumstances.
(iv) The hardship is unique, or nearly so, rather than on
shared by many surrounding properties.
(v) The hardship is not the result in the extension of a
nonconforming situation in violation of this ordinance and would
not authorize the initiation of a nonconforming use of land.
(c) In granting variances, the board of zoning appeals may
impose such reasonable conditions as will ensure that the use of the
property to which the variances applies will be as compatible as
practicable with the surrounding properties.
(d) A variance may be issued for an indefinite duration or for a
specified duration only.
(e) The nature of the variance and any conditions attached to
it shall be entered on the face of the permit required for construction or
occupancy of the building. All such conditions are enforceable in the
same manner as any other applicable requirement of this ordinance
(3) Interpretations. (a) The board of zoning appeals is authorized to
interpret the zoning map and to pass upon disputed questions of lot lines
or district boundary lines and similar questions. If such questions arise
in the context of an appeal from a decision of the zoning administrator,
they shall be handled as provided in section (1).
(b) An application for a map interpretation shall be submitted
to the board of zoning appeals by filing a copy of the application with the
administrator of the planning department. The application shall contain
14-33
sufficient information to enable the board to make necessary
interpretation.
(c) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as
shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(i) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of alleys, streets, highways, streams, or railroads shall
be construed to follow such centerlines.
(ii) Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot
lines, city limits or extraterritorial boundary lines shall be
construed as following such lines, limits or boundaries.
(iii) Boundaries indicated as following streams and banks
shall be construed to follow such watercourses, and in the event of
change in the watercourse shall be construed as following such
shorelines.
(iv) Where a district boundary divides a lot or where
distances are not specifically indicated on the official zoning map,
the boundary shall be determined by measurement, using the scale
of the official zoning map.
(v) Where a street or alley is hereafter officially vacated
or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each such parcel of
abutting property shall apply to that portion of street or alley
added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment.
(d) Interpretations of the location of floodway and floodplain
boundary lines may be made by the administrator subject to appeal to the
board of zoning appeals.
(4) Requests to be heard expeditiously. The board of zoning appeals
shall hear and decide all appeals, variance requests, and requests for
interpretations as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to follow
regularly established agenda procedures, provide notice, and obtain the
necessary information to make sound decisions.
(5) Burden of proof in appeals and variances. (a) When an appeal is
taken to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 1, the
applicant shall have the initial burden of presenting to the board
sufficient evidence and argument to justify a change in the order or
decision from which the appeal is taken. The burden of presenting
evidence is on to the appellant who shall also have the burden of
persuasion.
(b) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the
board of zoning appeals to reach the conclusions set forth in subsection
2(b), as well as the burden of persuasion on those issues, remains with
the applicant seeking the variance.
(6) Board action on appeals and variances. (a) With respect to
appeals, a motion to reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from shall include, insofar as
14-34
practicable, a statement of the specific reasons of findings or facts that
support the motion. If a motion to reverse or modify is not made or fails
to receive the majority vote necessary for adoption, then a motion to
uphold the decision appealed from shall be in order. This motion is
adopted as the board's decision if supported by a majority of a board's
membership (excluding vacant seats).
(b) Before granting a variance, the board must take a vote and
vote affirmatively on the six required findings stated in subsection 2(b)
of this section. Insofar as practicable, a motion to make an affirmative
finding on the requirements set forth in subsection 2(b) of this section
shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact
supporting such motion.
(c) A motion to deny a variance may be made on the basis that
any one or more of the six (6) criteria set forth in subsection 2(b) of this
section are not satisfied or that the application is incomplete. Insofar as
practicable, such a motion shall include a statement of the specific
reasons or findings of fact that support it. This motion is adopted as the
board's decision if supported by a majority of the board's membership
(excluding vacant seats). (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006)
14-206. Hearing procedures for appeals and applications.
(1) Hearing required on appeals and applications. (a) Before making
a decision on an appeal or an application for a variance, special exception,
or a petition from the planning staff to revoke a special exception permit,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a hearing on the appeal or
application.
(b) Subject to subsection (c), the hearing shall be open to the
public and all persons interested in the outcome of the appeal or
application shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and
arguments and ask questions of persons who testify.
(c) The board of zoning appeals may place reasonable and
equitable limitation on the presentations of evidence and arguments so
that the matter at issue may be heard and decided without undue delay.
(d) The BZA may continue the hearing until a subsequent
meeting and may keep the hearing open to take additional information
up to the point a final decision is made. No further notice of a continued
hearing need be published unless a period of six (6) weeks or more elapses
between hearing dates.
(2) Notice of hearing. The administrator shall give notice of any
hearing required by (1) as follows:
(a) Notice shall be given to the appellant or applicant and any
other person who makes a written request for such notice by mailing to
such persons a written notice not later than five (5) days before the
hearing.
14-35
(b) Notice shall be given to neighboring property owners and
other interested parties by publishing a notice one time in a newspaper
having general circulation in the area not less than five (5) nor more than
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing.
(c) The notice required by this section shall state the date, time,
and place of the hearing, reasonably identify the lot that is the subject of
the application or appeal, and give a brief description of the action
requested or proposed.
(3) Evidence. (a) The provisions of this section apply to all hearings
for which a notice is required by section (1).
(b) All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or
denial of the requested permit or appeal shall be based upon material
evidence, but not necessarily on evidence that would be admissible in a
court of law.
(4) Modification of application at hearing. (a) In response to questions
or comments by persons appearing at the hearing or to suggestions or
recommendations by the board of zoning appeals, the applicant may
agree to modify his application, including the plans and specifications
submitted.
(b) Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive
that the board cannot reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and
impact of the proposed changes without revised plans before it, the board
may approve the application with the stipulation that the permit will not
be issued until plans reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted
to the planning staff.
(5) Record. (a) A tape recording may be made of all hearings required
by section (1), and such recordings shall be kept for at least two years.
Accurate minutes shall also be kept of all such proceedings, but a
transcript need not be made.
(b) Whenever practicable, all documentary evidence presented
at a hearing as well as all other types of physical evidence shall be made
a part of the record of the proceedings and shall be kept by the City for at
least two years.
(6) Written decision. (a) Any decision made by the board of zoning
appeals regarding an appeal, variance, or issuance or revocation of a
special exception shall be reduced to writing and provided to the
applicant or appellant and all other persons who make a written request
for a copy.
(b) In addition to a statement of the board's ultimate disposition
of the case and any other information deemed appropriate, the written
decision shall state the board's findings and conclusions, as well as
supporting reasons or facts, whenever this ordinance requires the same
as a prerequisite to taking action.
14-36
(7) City council action regarding annexation and zoning matters.
Upon request of an interested party, an annexation or zoning matter which has
been recommended or not recommended by planning commission will be placed
on the next city council agenda provided the publish date for the public hearing
notice can be met. If the publish date cannot be met, then the item will be
placed on the following month's city council agenda. The request for a decision
by city council on such annexation or zoning matter must be in writing to the
city manager's office and must be made within sixty (60) days of the planning
commission decision.
14-207. Enforcement and review. (1) Complaints regarding
violations. Whenever the administrator receives a written, signed complaint
alleging a violation of this ordinance he shall investigate the complaint, take
whatever action is warranted, and inform the complaintant in writing what
actions have been or will be taken.
(2) Persons liable. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or
land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person
who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is
contrary to the requirements of this chapter may be held responsible for the
violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein
provided.
(3) Procedures upon discovery of violations. (a) If the administrator
finds that this ordinance is being violated, he shall send a written notice
to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional
written notices may be sent at the administrator's discretion.
(b) The final written notice (and the initial written notice may
be final notice) shall state what action the administrator intends to take
if the violation is not corrected and shall advise that the administrator's
decision or order may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would
seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this ordinance or pose a
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the administrator may
seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the
penalties or remedies authorized in subsection 4 of this section.
(4) Penalties and remedies for violations. (a) Violations of the
provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguard
established in connection with grants of variances or special exception
permits, shall constitute a civil offense, punishable by a fine of up to fifty
dollars ($50), or a maximum thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of this
ordinance or a failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
14-37
violations of any conditions and safeguards established in connection with
the grants of variances or special exception permits, shall also subject the
offender to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50) per day per violation. If
the offender fails to pay this penalty within ten (10) days after being cited
for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the city in a civil action
in the nature of debt.
(c) This ordinance may also be enforced by any appropriate
equitable action.
(d) Each day that any violation continues after notification by
the administrator that such violation exists shall be considered a
separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified in
this section.
(e) Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties
and remedies may be used to enforce this ordinance.
(5) Permit revocation. (a) A zoning, sign, or special exception permit
may be revoked by the permit-issuing authority (in accordance with the
provisions of this section) if the permit recipient fails to develop or
maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted, the
requirements of this ordinance or any additional requirements lawfully
imposed by the issuer of the permit.
(b) Before a special exception permit may be revoked, notice
shall be provided and a hearing held before the board of zoning appeals
as set forth in § 14-206. The notice shall inform the permit recipient of
the alleged grounds for the revocation.
(i) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to
authorize the permit-issuing authority to conclude that a permit
should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in Subsection (a)
shall be upon the party advocating that position. The burden of
persuasion shall also be upon that party.
(ii) A motion to revoke a permit shall include, insofar as
practicable, a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact
that support the motion.
(c) Before a zoning or sign permit may be revoked, the
administrator shall give the permit recipient ten (10) days notice of intent
to revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons
for the revocation and/or his right to obtain an informal hearing on the
allegations. If the permit is revoked, the administrator shall provide to
the permittee a written statement of the decision and the reasons
therefore.
(d) No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in
the manner authorized by any zoning, sign, or special exception permit
after such permit has been revoked in accordance with this section.
(6) Judicial review. Every final decision of the board of zoning appeals
shall be subject to review by the Chancery Court of Blount County or by Blount
14-38
County Circuit Court, Equity Division by proceedings in the nature of certiorari.
(as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006)
14-208. Nonconforming situations. (1) Definitions. Unless otherwise
specifically provided or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in
this article.
(a) "Effective date of this ordinance." Whenever this section
refers to the effective date of this ordinance, the reference shall be
deemed to include the effective date of any amendments to this ordinance
if the amendment, rather than this ordinance as originally adopted,
creates a nonconforming situation.
(b) "Expenditure." A sum of money paid out in return for some
benefit or to fulfill some obligation. The term also includes binding
contractual commitments to make future expenditures, as well as any
other substantial changes in position.
(c) "Nonconforming lot." A lot existing at the effective date of
this ordinance that does not meet the minimum area requirement of the
district in which the lot is located.
(d) "Nonconforming project." Any structure, development, or
undertaking that is incomplete at the effective date of this ordinance set
forth in this chapter and would be inconsistent with any regulation
applicable to the district in which it is located if completed as proposed or
planned.
(e) "Nonconforming use." A nonconforming situation that
occurs when property is used for a purpose or in a manner made unlawful
by the use regulations applicable to the district in which the property is
located. The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made
of the property.
(f) "Nonconforming situation." A situation that occurs when,
on the effective date of this ordinance set forth in this chapter, an existing
lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to
one or more of the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot
or structure is located. Among other possibilities, a nonconforming
situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum acreage
requirements, because structures exceed maximum height limitations,
because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such
matters as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with
this ordinance or because land or buildings are used for purposes made
unlawful by this ordinance. Nonconforming signs shall not be regarded
as nonconforming situations for purposes of this section but shall be
governed by the provisions of this ordinance specifically addressing signs.
(2) Continuation of nonconforming situations and completion of
nonconforming projects. (a) Unless otherwise specifically provided by the
14-39
provisions of this ordinance and subject to the restrictions and
qualifications set forth in sections (3) through (8), nonconforming
situations that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of the
provisions of this ordinance may be continued.
(b) Nonconforming projects may be completed only in
accordance with the provisions of section (8).
(3) Nonconforming lots. (a) When a nonconforming lot can be used
in conformity with all of the regulations applicable to the intended use,
except that the lot is smaller than the required minimums set forth in
§ 14-214, then the lot may be used as proposed just as if it were
conforming. However, no use (e.g., a two-family residence) that requires
a greater lot size than the established minimum lot size for a particular
zone is permissible on a nonconforming lot.
(b) When the use proposed for a nonconforming lot is one that
is conforming in all other respects but the applicable setback
requirements cannot reasonably be complied with, then the entity
authorized by this ordinance to issue a permit for the proposed use may
allow deviations from the applicable setback requirements if it finds that:
(i) The property cannot reasonably be developed for the
use proposed without such deviations,
(ii) These deviations are necessitated by the size or shape
of the nonconforming lot, and
(iii) The property can be developed as proposed without
any significantly adverse impact on surrounding properties or the
public health and safety.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b), compliance with applicable
building setback requirements is not reasonably possible if a building
that serves the minimal needs of the use proposed for the nonconforming
lot cannot practically be constructed and located on the lot in conformity
with such setback requirements. However, mere financial hardship does
not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably
possible.
(d) This section applies only to undeveloped nonconforming lots.
A lot is undeveloped if it has no substantial structures upon it. A change
in use of a developed nonconforming lot may be accomplished in
accordance with section (6).
(e) Subject to the following provision, if, on the date this section
becomes effective, an undeveloped nonconforming lot adjoins and has
continuous frontage with one or more other undeveloped lots under the
same ownership then neither the owner of the nonconforming lot nor his
successors in interest may take advantage of the provisions of this
section. This subsection shall not apply to a nonconforming lot if a
majority of the developed lots located on either side of the street where
such lot is located and within five hundred (500) feet of such lot are also
14-40
nonconforming. The intent of this subsection is to require nonconforming
lots to be combined with other undeveloped lots to create conforming lots
under the circumstances specified herein, but not to require such
combination when that would be out of character with the way the
neighborhood has previously been developed.
(4) Extension or enlargement of nonconforming situations. (a) Subject
to provisions in state law regarding expansion of nonconforming uses
found in Tennessee Code Annotated § 13-7-208, except as specifically
provided in this section, no person may engage in any activity that causes
an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation.
In particular, physical alteration of structures or the placement of new
structures on open land is unlawful if such activity results in:
(i) An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a
nonconforming use, or
(ii) Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional
restrictions such as setback requirements, height limitations or
density requirements or other requirements such as parking
requirements.
(b) Subject to subsection (d), a nonconforming use may be
extended throughout any portion of a completed building that, when the
use was made nonconforming by this ordinance, was clearly designed or
arranged to accommodate such use. However, subject to § 14-208(8)
(which authorized the completion of nonconforming projects in certain
circumstances); a nonconforming use may not be extended to additional
buildings or to land outside the original building.
(c) Subject to § 14-208(8), a nonconforming use of open land
may not be extended to cover more land than was occupied by that use
when it became nonconforming, except that a use that involves the
removal of natural materials form the lot (e.g., a quarry) may be
expanded to the boundaries of the lot where the use was established at
the time it became nonconforming if ten percent (10%) or more of the
earth products had already been removed on the effective date of this
ordinance.
(d) The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where
a nonconforming situation exists may be increased and the equipment or
processes used at a location where a nonconforming situation exists may
be changed if these or similar changes amount only to changes in the
degree of activity rather than changes in kind and no violations of other
provisions of this section occur.
(e) Notwithstanding subsection (a), any structure used for
single-family residential purposes and maintained as a nonconforming
use may be enlarged or replaced with a similar structure of a larger size,
so long as the enlargement or replacement does not create new
nonconformities or increase the extent of existing nonconformities with
14-41
respect to such matters as setback and parking requirements. This
paragraph is subject to the limitations stated in § 14-208(7).
(f) Notwithstanding subsection (a), whenever: (1) there exists
a lot with one or more structures on it, and (2) a change in use that does
not involve any enlargement of a structure is proposed for such lot, and
(3) the parking or loading requirements of this ordinance that would be
applicable as a result of the proposed change cannot be satisfied on such
lot because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can
practicably be used for parking or loading, then the proposed use shall
not be regarded as resulting in an impermissible extension or
enlargement of a nonconforming situation. However, the applicant shall
be required to comply with all applicable parking and loading
requirements that can be satisfied without acquiring additional land, and
shall also be required to obtain satellite parking if: (1) parking
requirements cannot be satisfied on the lot with respect to which the
permit is required; and (2) such satellite parking is reasonably available.
If such satellite parking is not reasonably available at the time the
zoning or special exception permit is granted, then the permit recipient
shall be required to obtain it if and when it does become reasonably
available. This requirement shall be a continuing condition of the permit.
(5) Repair, maintenance and reconstruction. (a) Minor repairs to and
routine maintenance of property where nonconforming situations exist or
permitted or encouraged. Major renovation, i.e., work estimated to cost
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the assessed value of the
structure to be renovated (on the most recent tax assessment) may be
done only in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) herein.
(b) If a structure located on a lot where a non-conforming
situation exists with damage to an extent that the cost of repair or
replacement would exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the assessed value
of the damaged structure (on the most recent tax assessment) then the
damaged structure may be repaired or replaced only in accordance with
the zoning permit issued pursuant to this section and in compliance with
existing zoning and applicable codes. This sub-section does not apply to
structures used for single family residential purposes which structures
may be reconstructed pursuant to a zoning permit just as they may be
enlarged or replaced as provided in subsection 4(e). This sub-section does
not apply to duplex and multi-family structures in the Oak Park Historic
District Zone XVI. This sub-section further does not apply to duplex and
multi-family residential structures in the College Hills Historic District
Zone XIII where such duplex or multi-family residential structures were
originally designed and constructed for duplex or multi-family use and
where such duplex or multi-family use has been continuous since the time
of construction. In such case, a duplex in Zone XIII that was originally
designed or constructed as a duplex could be rebuilt, repaired or replaced
14-42
as a duplex. Likewise, a multi-family residential structure in Zone XIII
originally designed or constructed as a multi-family structure could be
rebuilt, repaired or replaced as a multi-family structure.
(c) For purposes of subsection (a) and (b):
(i) The "cost" of renovation or repair or replacement shall
mean the fair market value of the materials and services necessary
to accomplish such renovation, repair, or replacement.
(ii) The "cost" of renovation or repair or replacement shall
mean the total cost of all such intended work, and no person may
seek to avoid the intent of subsections (a) or (b) by doing such work
on a piecemeal basis.
(d) The administrator shall issue a permit authorized by this
section if he finds that, in completing the renovation, repair, or
replacement work:
(i) No violation of section (4) will occur, and
(ii) The permittee will comply to the extent reasonably
possible with all provisions of this ordinance applicable to the
existing use (except that the permittee shall not lose his right to
continue a nonconforming use).
Compliance with a requirement of this ordinance is not reasonably
possible if compliance cannot be achieved without adding additional land
to the lot where the nonconforming situation is maintained or moving a
substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation. Mere financial
hardship caused by the cost of meeting such requirements as paved
parking does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not
reasonably possible.
(6) Change in use of property where a nonconforming situation exists.
(a) A change in use of property (where a nonconforming
situation exists) that is sufficiently substantial to require a new zoning
or special exception permit may not be made except in accordance with
subsections (b) through (d). However, this requirement shall not apply
if only a sign permit is needed.
(b) If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is
permissible in the district where the property is located, and all of the
other requirements of this ordinance applicable to that use can be
complied with, permission to make the change must be obtained in the
same manner as permission to make the initial use of a vacant lot. Once
conformity with this ordinance is achieved, the property may not revert
to its nonconforming status.
(c) If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is
permissible in the district where the property is located, but all of the
requirements of this ordinance applicable to that use cannot reasonably
be complied with, then the change is permissible if the entity authorized
by this ordinance to issue a permit for that particular use (the
14-43
administrator, board of zoning appeals, or council) issues a permit
authorizing the change. This permit may be issued if the permit-issuing
authority finds, in addition to any other findings that may be required by
this ordinance, that:
(i) The intended change will not result in a violation of
section 4, and
(ii) All of the applicable requirements of this ordinance
that can reasonably be complied with will be complied with.
Compliance with a requirement of this ordinance is not reasonably
possible if compliance cannot be achieved without adding
additional land to the lot where the nonconforming situation is
maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a
permanent foundation. Mere financial hardship caused by the cost
of meeting such requirements as paved parking does not constitute
grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible.
And in case may an applicant be given permission pursuant to this
subsection to construct a building or add to an existing building if
additional nonconformities would thereby be created.
(d) If the intended change in use is to another principal use that
is also nonconforming, then the change is permissible if the entity
authorized by this ordinance to issue a permit for that particular use
(administrator, board of zoning appeals, or council) issues a permit
authorizing the change. The permit-issuing authority may issue the
permit if it finds, in addition to other findings that may be required by
this ordinance, that:
(i) The use requested is one that is permissible in some
zoning districts with either a zoning or special exception permit,
and
(ii) All of the conditions applicable to the permit
authorized in subsection (c) of this section are satisfied, and
(iii) the proposed development will have less of an adverse
impact on those most affected by it and will be more compatible
with the surrounding neighborhood than the use in operation at
the time the permit is applied for.
(7) Abandonment and discontinuance of nonconforming situations.
(a) Except where Tennessee Code Annotated § 13-7-208(g)
requires otherwise, when a nonconforming use is: (1) discontinued for a
consecutive period of one hundred eighty (180) days, or (2) discontinued
for any period of time without a present intention to reinstate the
nonconforming use, the property involved may thereafter be used only for
conforming purposes.
(b) If the principal activity on property where a nonconforming
situation other than a nonconforming use exists is discontinued for any
period of time without a present intention of resuming that activity, then
14-44
that property may thereafter be used only in conformity with all of the
regulations applicable to the pre-existing use unless the entity with
authority to issue a permit for the intended use issues a permit to allow
the property to be used for this purpose without correcting the
nonconforming situations. This permit may be issued if the
permit-issuing authority finds that eliminating a particular
nonconformity is not reasonably possible (i.e., cannot be accomplished
without adding additional land to the lot where the nonconforming
situation is maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a
permanent foundation). The permit shall specify which nonconformities
need not be correct.
(c) For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a
nonconforming situation is lost pursuant to this section, all of the
buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are generally to
be considered as a whole. If a nonconforming use is maintained in
conjunction with a conforming use, the discontinuance of a nonconforming
use for the required period shall terminate the right to maintain it
thereafter.
(d) When a structure or operation made nonconforming by this
ordinance is vacant or discontinued at the effective date of this ordinance,
the one hundred eighty (180) day period for purposes of this section
begins to run on the effective date of this ordinance.
(8) Completion of nonconforming projects. (a) All nonconforming
projects on which construction was begun at least one hundred eighty
(180) days before the effective date of this ordinance as well as all
nonconforming projects that are at least ten (10) percent completed in
terms of the total expected cost of the project on the effective date of the
provisions of this ordinance may be completed in accordance with the
terms of their permits, so long as these permits were validly issued and
remain unrevoked and unexpired. If a development is designed to be
completed in stages, this subsection shall apply only to the particular
phase under construction.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (a), all work on any
nonconforming project shall cease on the effective date of this ordinance
comprising this ordinance, and all permits previously issued for work on
nonconforming projects may begin or may be continued only pursuant to
a zoning, special exception, or sign permit issued in accordance with this
section by the individual or board authorized by this ordinance to issue
permits for the type of development proposed. The permit-issuing
authority shall issue such a permit if it finds that the applicant has in
good faith made substantial expenditures or incurred substantial binding
obligations or otherwise changed his position in some substantial way in
reasonable reliance on the land-use law as it existed before the effective
date of this ordinance and thereby would be unreasonably prejudiced if
14-45
not allowed to complete his project as proposed. In considering whether
these findings may be made, the permit-issuing authority shall be guided
by the following, as well as other relevant considerations:
(i) All expenditures made to obtain or pursuant to a
validly issued and unrevoked building, zoning, sign, or special
exception permit shall be considered as evidence of reasonable
reliance on the land-use law that existed before this ordinance
became effective.
(ii) Except as provided in subsection (b)(i), no
expenditures made more than one hundred eighty (180) days
before the effective date of this ordinance may be considered as
evidence of reasonable reliance on the land-use law that existed
before this ordinance became effective. An expenditure is made at
the time a party incurs a binding obligation to make that
expenditure.
(iii) To the extent that expenditures are recoverable with
a reasonable effort, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by
having made those expenditures. For example, a party shall not
be considered prejudiced by having made some expenditure to
acquire a potential development site if the property obtained is
approximately as valuable under the new classification as it was
under the old, for the expenditure can be recovered by a sale of the
property.
(iv) To the extent that a nonconforming project can be
made conforming and that expenditures made or obligations
incurred can be effectively utilized in the completion of a
conforming project, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by
having made such expenditures.
(v) An expenditure shall be considered substantial if it is
significant both in dollar amount and in terms of: (1) the total
estimated cost of the proposed project, and (2) the ordinary
business practices of the developer.
(vi) A person shall be considered to have acted in good
faith if actual knowledge of a proposed change in the land-use law
affecting the proposed development site could not be attributed to
him.
(vii) Even though a person had actual knowledge of a
proposed change in the land-use law affecting a development site,
the permit-issuing authority may still find that he acted in good
faith if he did not proceed with his plans in a deliberate attempt to
circumvent the effects of the proposed ordinance. The
permit-issuing authority may find that the developer did not
proceed in an attempt to undermine the proposed ordinance if it
determines that: (1) at the time the expenditures were made,
14-46
either there was considerable doubt about whether any ordinance
would ultimately be passed, or it was not clear that the proposed
ordinance would prohibit the intended development, and (2) the
developer had legitimate business reasons for making
expenditures.
(c) When it appears from the developer's plans or otherwise
that a project was intended to be or reasonably could be completed in
phases, stages, segments, or other discrete units, the developer shall be
allowed to complete only those phases or segments with respect to which
the developer can make the showing required under subsection (b). In
addition to the matters and subject to the guidelines set forth in
Subdivisions (i) through (vi) of subsection (b), the permit-issuing
authority shall, in determining whether a developer would be
unreasonably prejudiced if not allowed to complete phases or segments
of a nonconforming project, consider the following in addition to other
relevant factors:
(i) Whether any plans prepared or approved regarding
uncompleted phases constitute conceptual plans only or
construction drawings based upon detailed surveying,
architectural, or engineering work.
(ii) Whether any improvements, such as streets or
utilities, have been installed in phases not yet completed.
(iii) Whether utilities and other facilities installed in
completed phases have been constructed in such a manner or
location or such a scale, in anticipation of connection to or
interrelationship with approved but uncompleted phases are
constructed in conformity with existing regulations.
(d) The permit-issuing authority shall not consider any
application for the permit authorized by subsection (b) that is submitted
more than sixty (60) days after the effective date of this ordinance. The
permit-issuing authority may waive this requirement for good cause
shown, but in no case may extend the application deadline beyond one (1)
year.
(e) The administrator shall send copies of this section to the
persons listed as owner for tax purposed (and developers, if different from
the owners) of all properties in regard to which a nonconforming project
is otherwise known to be in some stage of development. This notice shall
be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days before the effective
date of the provisions of this ordinance.
(f) The permit-issuing authority shall establish expedited
procedures for hearing applications for permits under this section. These
applications shall be heard, whenever possible, before the effective date
of the provisions of this ordinance, so that construction work is not
14-47
needlessly interrupted. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and
amended by Ord. #2007-11, April 2007)
14-209. Zoning districts and zoning map. (1) Zoning districts -
Establishment of districts.
(a) The following zoning districts are hereby established:
District I: Residential District: The land use and intensity of the
area is low density residential. Some mix of building types may be
included, e.g., two-family, three-family and four-family dwelling
units. Supplementary and complementary uses may exist in the
area, such as recreation areas, schools, churches, and community
centers.
District II: Business and Transportation District: The land uses
in the area include commercial (wholesale and retail), office,
highway-oriented commercial (e.g., service stations, convenience
stores, light industrial (assembly, light manufacturing),
public/institutional (e.g., municipal buildings, recreational
facilities), and residential (medium and high density). Liquor
stores are permitted in this district. Intensity of use is moderate to
high, with impacts on adjacent areas being of primary concern.
Body piercing and tattoo artists are permitted uses in this zoning
district.
District III: Environmental Conservation District: This includes
land with low development capability (e.g., flood hazard areas,
steep slopes). Uses would include those with low to moderate
development intensity (e.g., low density estate residential,
recreation/open space, public/semi-public).
District IV: Central Community District: This includes the
central business district and the immediately surrounding area.
Uses include office, commercial, high density, residential, public.
There is an allowed mix of land uses, and the intensity of the
development is high.
District V: Single Family District: This includes areas where
natural factors such as steep slopes, high erosion potential,
inadequate streets and inadequate utilities restrict high density
development within the corporate limits. The land use and
intensity of the area is low density single-family detached units.
District VI: Office District: The land uses permitted in the office
district are low density residential, professional and business
offices and personal care services. The district is designed to
accommodate a mixture of compatible professional and business
offices, residential uses, personal care uses and services that
neither generate large volumes of traffic nor need great amounts
of off-street parking. It is the intent of the district to provide ample
14-48
room and opportunity for all businesses without adversely
impacting residential uses within the district or adjoining it. In
addition, a tea room/cafe use may be an acceptable use in existing
structures in this zone subject to approval of a special exception by
the board of zoning appeals. The design standards that will be
considered for review of tearoom/cafe are set forth in § 14-211(9).
District VII: Neighborhood District: The land uses in the
neighborhood district are low density residential, professional and
office type uses with limited commercial and retail operations as
permitted uses. These uses are intended to be designed to
minimize disruption of traffic flows and negative impact on
adjacent residential uses. The district excludes all activities which
generate large volumes of traffic need for great amounts of
off-street parking, or which would have adverse impacts on the
residential sector of the community or residential uses allowed
within the district.
District VIII: Central Business District: (Designated downtown
zoning district subject to design review and "use on review") The
Central Business District is the civic and cultural center of
Maryville. In order to maintain the appropriate and expected
atmosphere of a traditional downtown, it is very important to
provide an intimate scale of the urban spaces. The level of detail
must be sufficiently matched by new developments. Size and
quantity of fenestration must be maintained. Ornate cornices and
other features should be maintained and replicated. New
buildings should be designed in the base and capital streetscape
style typical of the older shops. New elements such as colorful
canvas awnings or theme lights can be added to the facades to
create a contemporary visual unity. Design of these elements must
be carefully detailed to ensure common themes. The following
regulations will encourage the redevelopment and expansion of a
traditional, thriving, and charming Downtown Maryville. Liquor
stores are permitted in this district. All provisions set forth
regarding this district are in article IX, part 1, section 4.
District IX: Washington Street Commercial Corridor: (Designated
downtown zoning district subject to design review and "use on
review") The Washington Street Corridor is often the impression
that is left of Downtown and the entire City of Maryville by
thousands of motorists on their way to the Smoky Mountains. To
encourage a return to a more urban setting and away from a
typical "suburban commercial strip," Washington Street's design
standards maintain density and close set-backs to the street,
provide smaller signs, create streetscape improvements and
require prototype facilities (fast food, fuel stations, etc.) to alter
14-49
their designs to fit the character that Downtown Maryville is
striving for. Liquor stores are permitted in this district. All
provisions set forth regarding this district are in article IX, part 1,
section 5.
District X: Office Transition Zone: (Designated downtown zoning
district subject to design review and "use on review") Serving as
a the southern fringe of Downtown Maryville, the Office Transition
Zone provides mixed use opportunities in older homes and smaller
scale commercial structures. The zone's intent is to maintain and
establish the charm of the older homes and businesses, maintain
the existing small town feel by requiring lower density
developments, and preserve the human scale of the area. All
provisions set forth regarding this district are in article IX, part 1,
section 6.
District XI: Heritage Development Zone: (Designated downtown
zoning district subject to design review and "use on review") The
Heritage Development Zone's proximity to the original site of Ft.
Craig, the Central Business District, and its location on the
Greenbelt shall provide opportunities for festivals, festive retail,
cultural and heritage-related uses such as museums, craft shops,
antiques, or any appropriate use that will attract locals and
tourists to the area. All provisions set forth regarding this district
are in article IX, part 1, section 7.
District XII: Central Business District Support Zone: (Designated
downtown zoning district subject to design review and "use on
review") The Central Business District Support Zone is the zone
of contrast between the urban intimacy on Harper Avenue and the
open spaces of the north side of the Greenbelt. This zone takes full
advantage of the benefits of the Greenbelt by providing mixed use
development along its periphery. Businesses locating in the CBD
Support Zone are encouraged to spill their services out onto the
pathways and open areas of the Greenbelt. Liquor stores are
permitted in this district. All provisions set forth regarding this
district are in article IX, part 1, section 8.
District XIII: College Hill Historic District:1 The College Hill
Historic District has the largest concentration of extant historic
structures in the City of Maryville. Since the 1940s, new
construction has been limited in the district and it retains much of
its original character. In order to preserve and enhance the
1Historic Zoning Regulations (Required, Vol. I, and Suggested
Regulations, Vol. II, Ord. #2009-05) are available in the office of the city
recorder.
14-50
integrity of this important area of Maryville, design guidelines
specific to this District are in place to ensure historically
appropriate and compatible construction. Land use controls allow
only single family residential uses, and prohibit further conversion
of homes into duplexes or multiplexes. All provisions set forth
regarding this district are in article IX, Part 1, section 9.
District XIV: College Hill Historic Overlay District: The College
Hill Historic Overlay Zone has been created and the "Design
Guidelines for the College Hill Historic District" in order to
preserve the historic character through the application of design
guidelines. Any construction requiring a building permit must
apply for a Certificate of Appropriateness at the Planning
Department and have their building plans reviewed by the
Historic zoning commission. All provisions set forth regarding this
district are in article IX, part 1, section 10.
District XV: High Intensity Commercial District: Liquor stores
are permitted in this district. All provisions set forth regarding
this district are in article IX, part 1, section 11.
District XVI: Oak Park Historic District: The Oak Park Historic
District has a large concentration of extant historic structures in
the City of Maryville. Since the 1940s, new construction has been
limited in the district and it retains much of its original character.
In order to preserve and enhance the integrity of this important
area of Maryville, design guidelines specific to this district are in
place to ensure historically appropriate and compatible
construction. All provisions set forth regarding this district are in
article IX, part 1, section 12.
District XVII: Oak Park Historic Overlay Zone: The Oak Park
Historic Overlay Zone has been created and the "Design Guidelines
for the Oak Park Historic District" in order to preserve the historic
character through the application of design guidelines. Any
construction requiring a building permit must apply for a
certificate of appropriateness at the planning department and have
their building plans reviewed by the historic zoning commission.
All provisions set forth regarding this district are in article IX, part
1, section 13.
District XIX: Estate Zone: The Estate Zone is the most restrictive
residential district intended to be used for single-family residential
areas with low population densities. This district is created and
intended to be protected from the encroachment of uses not
performing a function necessary to the single-family residential
environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and
efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and
open space for dwellings and accessory facilities found within this
14-51
district. All provisions set forth regarding this district are in
article IX, part 1, section 14.
District XX: High Density Residential: This district is composed
of high density residential rental, owner, occupied or a combination
of both uses within the city located along arterials, and with
certain open space and development standards. The regulations
for this district are designed to protect the essential characteristics
of the district to promote and encourage a suitable environment for
family life and to permit certain commercial uses associated with
this type of increased density. To these ends, retail activity is
limited and this district is protected against encroachment of
general commercial or industrial uses while the regulations permit
high density development consistent with concentrations of
persons. Attached apartments and condominiums are permitted
along with accessory commercial uses conforming to the intent of
the district. All provisions set forth regarding this district are in
article IX, part 1, section 15.
District XX: Industrial: The Industrial zone district is established
and designed to provide areas in which the principle use of land is
for manufacturing, processing, assembly, fabrication of materials,
and warehousing. The general goals of the district are as follows:
to locate and develop industrial uses in conformance with
Maryville's master plan; to provide industrial areas and locations
that will be economically, functionally, and aesthetically beneficial
to both the residents and businesses of the community; and, to
encourage land uses that are associated with industrial facilities
and operations. All provisions set forth regarding this district are
in article IX, part 1, section 16.
District XXI: Institutional. The Institutional zone is established
and designed to provide an area in which the principal use of land
is for traditional academic and educational institutions and for
complimentary and accessory uses associated with a college
campus and environment. The general goals of this district are to
allow development on a traditional college campus and to
encourage uses specific to a learning environment.
District XXII: High Intensity Retail District: The High Intensity
Retail (H.I.R.) district is established to support and encourage
concentrated retail development along major road corridors where
most types of public infrastructure and services are already
present. Shopping and dining are among the main activities in this
district, and a primary goal for this zone is to stimulate
retail-oriented economic activity and the accompanying generation
of sales tax revenues. Mixed use developments and certain
14-52
non-retail uses that are compatible with the retail uses may also
be allowed in the district, subject to specific locational criteria.
(b) These districts are established for the purposes of: (1)
implementing the Maryville Comprehensive Plan; (2) defining specific
area of the City of Maryville, each requiring different standards of
development to meet different circumstances present within the district,
and (3) serving the purposes, objectives and intent of this ordinance as
outlined in the Introduction.
(2) Zoning districts - table of allowable uses. The table of allowable
uses which follows lists those uses allowable or prohibited in each district. The
list includes general categories of land use. Categories of allowable land uses
include:
(a) Those uses which are allowable by right with no additional
requirement.
(b) Those uses which may be considered as special exceptions
after review of an impact assessment, and imposition of additional
requirements for development.
(c) Those uses which are prohibited.
(3) Zoning districts - Impact Overlay Districts. (a) The planning
commission may recommend, and the board of zoning appeals may
approve as a special exception, the establishment of one or more impact
overlay districts. The purpose of the district(s) thus established is to
address in a more specific way the potential adverse impact of proposed
development on natural conditions and surrounding land uses, including
transportation facilities.
(b) The following criteria shall be employed by the
administrator in determining what development proposals are to be
administered as impact overlay districts.
CRITERIA FOR IMPACT OVERLAY DISTRICT
PROJECT AREA: Ten (10) acres or more in a single site plan
and/or subdivision plat.
TRAFFIC DEMAND: Generation of an average number of trips per
day (based on ITE standards) which will result
in a traffic demand in excess of the present
functional capacity of local and/or collector
roads serving the project. Present traffic
demand will be established using ITE
procedures and/or using ADT data provided by
either the Tennessee Department of
Transportation or the city director of
engineering and public works.
14-53
TOTAL DWELLING UNITS: Sixty (60) or more dwelling units. (Residential
uses)
TOTAL FLOOR AREA: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross
(Commercial uses) leaseable area.
INCREASE IN DENSITY: (Proposed vs. existing): Twenty-five (25)
percent or greater increase over the existing
average development density within a one
thousand foot radius of the site.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: Proposed development which creates a demand
exceeding the present capacity of any of the
public facilities serving that development.
[Note: If an improved facility is
programmed/budgeted, the city must take into
consideration the timing of that improvement
and the proposed timing of the development.]
(c) Forms to be used in recording project data and in
determining overall project impact(s) will be available in the planning
department office.
(d) The procedure for review of an impact overlay district
development proposal shall be that prescribed for Special Exception
Permits.
(e) The following are hereby established as impact overlay
districts, meaning that these districts are overlaid upon other districts
and the land so encumbered may be used in a manner permitted in the
underlying district only if and to the extent such use is also permitted in
the impact overlay district.
(i) The floodway and floodplain district,
(ii) The greenbelt district, and
(iii) The parkway district, subject to the following:
(A) The parkway district is established as an
impact overlay district in order to protect the natural
beauty of approaches to the Great Smoky Mountains and
other scenic attractions of the community and its environs.
It is intended that uses of the underlying districts be
developed at such scale and in such a manner as to blend
unobtrusively with nature thereby enhancing the scenic
attraction of the district and of Blount County. Provisions
of the district are intended to expedite the free flow of traffic
and reduce the hazards arising from unnecessary points of
ingress and egress and cluttered roadside development.
14-54
(B) Parkway district boundaries shall be
established on the official zoning map, and may include any
highway which is deemed appropriate and its adjacent
properties, to a distance of generally not more than one
thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest edge of pavement of
the highway. The Maryville City Council may apply the
Parkway District to any highway corridor upon concluding
that:
(1) The highway corridor has scenic
qualities and natural beauty that should be
preserved and protected;
(2) A major purpose of the highway is to
carry through traffic; and
(3) Development along the highway in the
absence of parkway district provisions could have an
adverse impact on its level of service, increase danger
and/or congestion in the street, impair the public
health, safety, convenience, welfare and/or impede
the maintenance or creation of a convenient,
attractive, and harmonious community.
(C) All uses are subject to the following conditions:
(1) No structure may exceed thirty-five (35)
feet in height.
(2) A site plan is required to be submitted
for review and approval for the development of any
parcel within the parkway district. Planning
commission review and approval shall also be
required for any site plan for the development of any
parcel within the parkway district. A site plan shall
be submitted prior to development. The purpose of
the site plan review is to ensure that all development
in the corridor furthers the purpose and intentions of
the parkway district. Quality of design, preservation
of open space, provision of buffers and plantings,
provision of adequate parking well separated from
the roadway, and minimization of direct access points
to the highway shall be major considerations of the
Planning Commission in their review of the site plan.
(3) The minimum distance between all
driveways, curb cuts, or access points of any kind
onto the highway shall be as follows:
Minimum spacing of
Highway speed limit access points
14-55
Under 35 mph 150 feet
35-50 mph 250 feet
55 mph (2-4 lanes, undivided highway) 400 feet
55 mph (4 or more lanes, divided highway) 600 feet
The minimum distance between all driveways,
curb cuts, or access points of any kind onto a service
road, frontage road, or unified access road to the
main highway shall be not less than one hundred
(100) feet.
The distance between adjacent one-way
driveways with the inbound drive upstream from the
outbound drive shall not be less than one hundred
(100) feet.
(4) For each parcel which fronts onto the
highway right-of-way, the minimum lot frontage
shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet.
(5) Individual parcels which front onto the
highway right-of-way are permitted to construct one
(1) temporary driveway onto the highway until joint
driveways or alternate means of access can be
constructed. The distance between a temporary
driveway and all other curb cuts shall be not less
than one hundred (100) feet.
(6) No loading or unloading of materials
shall take place in any front or corner side yard of
any parcel which fronts on the highway right-of-way.
Buildings are expected to provide service entrances at
the rear.
(7) No parking shall be permitted on the
highway right-of-way. All parcels shall be expected
to provide sufficient off-street parking to meet their
individual needs, or shall coordinate with adjacent
parcels or with the city to meet combined parking
needs.
(D) Land within the parkway district may be used
as permitted in the underlying district in which located,
subject to the above conditions and with the following
exceptions:
(1) Uses of the advertising subgroup are
prohibited.
(2) Junkyards are prohibited.
(3) Outdoor storage areas located outside of
a structure shall be screened.
14-56
(4) Drive-in banks, other drive-in
establishments, fast food restaurants, souvenir and
curio shops, quick service food stores, and filling
stations shall be subject to the following use
limitations.
(i) Such a use shall be designed so
that pedestrian and vehicular circulation is
coordinated with that on adjacent properties.
(ii) Such a use shall have access
designed so as not to impede traffic on a public
street intended to carry through traffic. To
such end, access via the following means shall
be given favorable consideration in site plan
review.
1) Access to the site is
provided by a public street other than
one intended to carry through traffic,
and/or
2) Access to the site is
provided via the internal circulation of
a shopping center, which center
contains at least six (6) other
commercial uses, or in an office complex
having a limited num ber of
well-designed access points to the public
street system and no additional direct
access is provided to the site from a
public street over and above those
entrances which may exist to provide
access to the shopping center, and/or
3) Access to the site is
provided by a functional service drive,
frontage road, or joint driveway which
provides controlled access to the site
and/or to several adjacent sites and/or
4) Acceleration/deceleration
lanes, turning lanes, and/or stacking
lanes are provided to improve access to
the site and/or several adjacent sites.
(iii) Filling stations shall not be used
for the performance of major repairs, and shall
not include the outdoor storage of more than
two (2) abandoned, wrecked, or inoperable
vehicles on the site for more than seventy-two
14-57
(72) hours, subject to the limitation that there
shall be no dismantling, wrecking, or sale of
said vehicles or parts thereof. In addition, in
no event shall any abandoned, wrecked, or
inoperable vehicle be stored outdoors for a
period exceeding seventy-two (72) hours.
(iv) All such uses are required to
provide at least one (1) regular-sized garbage
container outside of the establishment.
(v) All such uses are required to
provide and maintain a tastefully landscaped
buffer strip or berm of at least ten (10) feet in
width along the length of their frontage with
the highway or service road right-of-way
(excluding points of egress and ingress).
(E) Signs shall be subject to general regulations
and conditions as stated in the section of this ordinance
dealing specifically with signs. In addition, the following
conditions shall apply to all signs within a Parkway
District:
(1) Signs shall pertain only to uses
conducted on the premises where they are located.
The purposes of all signs shall be to inform the public
of the business conducted on that premises, and
wording shall be kept simple and informational.
Signs are expected to be tastefully designed.
Favorable consideration may be given to signs which
combine information for two (2) or more adjacent
businesses.
(2) Signs on buildings shall not exceed more
than twelve (12) inches above the roof ridge line of
the building, shall be limited to a vertical height of
three (3) feet and shall be limited in length to not
exceed twenty (20) feet or fifty (50) percent
(whichever is less restrictive) of the horizontal length
of the building face.
(3) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a
maximum overall height of twenty (20) feet above the
road surface of the highway. Said signs height shall
be measured from the highway road surface closest to
the sign. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a
surface area prescribed in the section in this
ordinance specifically addressing signs; however, in
14-58
no case shall a sign exceed seventy-five (75) square
feet per face or twenty (20) feet in length.
(4) No freestanding signs shall be erected or
altered unless a use permit is first secured.
(5) No exterior signs, including freestanding
signs, shall be flashing, oscillating, intermittently lit,
moving, or otherwise animated, except for
time/temperature displays.
(6) No sign shall project more than twelve
(12) inches into or be placed within the right-of-way
of any public street.
(7) No portable signs shall be permitted in
the district.
(4) Zoning districts - Central Business District. The Central Business
District is the civic and cultural center of Maryville. In order to maintain the
appropriate and expected atmosphere of a traditional downtown, it is very
important to provide an intimate scale of the urban spaces. The level of detail
must be sufficiently matched by new developments. Size and quantity of
fenestration must be maintained. Ornate cornices and other features should be
maintained and replicated. New buildings should be designed in the base and
capital streetscape style typical of the older shops. New elements such as
colorful canvas awnings or theme lights can be added to the facades to create a
contemporary visual unity. Design of these elements must be carefully detailed
to ensure common themes. The following regulations will encourage the
redevelopment and expansion of a traditional, thriving, and charming
Downtown Maryville.
(a) Lot dimensions:
(i) Lot size: no minimum.
(ii) Lot width: no minimum.
(b) Setbacks: Setback from existing utility easements must be
observed, otherwise:
(i) Front: 10 ft. maximum setback from edge of sidewalk.
Building setback preferably should line flush with existing
buildings.
(ii) Side: 10 ft. maximum; no minimum. Building setback
preferably should line flush with existing buildings.
(iii) Rear: No minimum, maximum variable, depending
upon placement of parking as determined by the Downtown
Maryville Design Review Board.
(c) Parking: Parking: total coverage cannot exceed ten percent
(10%) of the entire lot. Parking shall be placed in the back of the building
(opposite from the facade) and if adjoining the street, must be
supplemented by an eight (8) foot opaque wall made of appropriate
materials, including brick, stone, and other natural materials to create
14-59
a visual edge for pedestrians and motorists. Appropriate landscaping in
and around parking lots, including trees may be required.
(d) Height:
(i) All new buildings shall not have street facades that
exceed forty-five (45) feet in height as measured from the mean
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point on the façade.
(ii) Stories above forty-five (45) feet shall be subject to a
one (1) foot setback for every additional foot in height above the
first forty-five (45) feet in height.
(iii) Maximum overall building height shall not exceed
sixty-five (65) feet. To account for the variation in topographic
elevations downtown, the height shall be measured from the upper
elevation.
(e) Windows and doors:
(i) Spacing and size of fenestration shall match that of
the other buildings on the same block that were built before 1950;
(ii) Windows shall be square or vertical in orientation;
(iii) All fenestration, including doors and windows above
grade shall be indicative of the period of construction of the
building;
(iv) Sill and lentils for windows are encouraged;
(v) True divided light or simulated divided light units are
permissible only;
(vi) Aluminum "storefront" glazing systems are allowable
at street level only and must be approved by the Downtown
Maryville Design Review Board as compatible with the original
building facade.
(f) Facades:
(i) Facades shall be "pedestrian scale." Pedestrian scale
is defined as a size (of building, space) that a pedestrian perceives
as not dominating or overpowering;
(ii) Substantial removal, alteration, or covering of
original facades shall not be permitted;
(iii) Facades composed of brick or masonry must be
re-pointed and cleaned to a condition indicative of their original
finish;
(iv) In cases of extreme deterioration, facades may be
repaired and painted; paint colors must be of historic precedent,
compatible with adjacent properties and approved by the
Downtown Maryville Design Review Board. Applicants must
submit paint chips, brick samples, awning fabric samples, etc. to
the Review Board for all proposed new paint projects, building
construction and facade alteration; and
14-60
(v) Awnings, may be applied and are encouraged, but
must be solid or two-color, angled or scalloped type only and
compatible with the architecture and color palette.
(g) Materials:
(i) Natural stone, brick, wood, and fiber-cement siding
that resembles horizontal lap siding should be used for all
buildings in the Central Business District. Cut stone is allowed
while river rock and stacked stone are not allowed as they are not
considered consistent with the buildings downtown;
(ii) Veneer materials are not allowed (i.e., vinyl siding,
metal facade covering, stucco and synthetic stucco).
(iii) Synthetic materials and stucco may only be allowed
on a limited basis for accent, trim and cornices.
(h) Signs: Except as stated herein, this section shall supersede
§ 14-218 of this ordinance regarding signs in this zoning district.
(i) Sign area allowed:
(A) Single story buildings: Total signage is based
on twenty-five percent (25%) of the side of the property on
which the entrance is located. Properties with frontage
having fifty (50) feet or less shall be allowed a maximum
sign area of twelve (12) square feet. The entrance shall be
the door(s) used by customers rather than entrances for
purposes of rear deliveries or fire exits.
(B) Two-story and taller buildings: The maximum
area of signage is calculated above, however, two story
buildings double the allowed maximum sign area, three
story buildings triple the allowed maximum area, etc. The
maximum allowed sign area devoted to one property shall
not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, regardless of the
number of stories and property frontage. While being
limited to the calculations above, no individual sign and no
combination of multiple signs on one side of a building shall
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. If a building
includes multiple uses, only the frontage and stories
attributed to the subject sign may be counted. For example,
a building with one story of retail and two stories of
residential may only count the retail story for the respective
retail signs.
(ii) Sign area allowances: Businesses may add signs, in
addition to the maximum allowed sign area as calculated above,
using no more than two of the following sign allowances. All signs
using these allowances will require review and approval by
Planning Staff.
14-61
(A) Window sign allowance. Each business may
have six (6) square feet of signs applied to glass
doors/windows.
(B) Awning sign allowance: Imprints of a signage
and/or logo shall be allowed on an awning which shall not
exceed either: the equivalent of the total twenty-five percent
(25%) signage calculation above, or twenty (20) square feet,
whichever is less. For example, if the property is allowed to
have a ten square foot sign using the twenty-five percent
(25%) sign area calculation above, then the property may
also have a ten square foot sign or logo printed on an
awning. If a building can receive a forty (40) square foot
sign using the twenty-five percent (25%) rule, it may have
also have signage and/or logo on an awning not to exceed
twenty (20) square feet.
(C) Projecting sign square footage allowance: Each
business may hang one perpendicular sign not to exceed six
(6) square feet. Creativity and artwork in the sign design
and composition are encouraged. This sign allowance is not
trying to create a fake colonial era style of sign or recreate
an artificial historical past. Sign designs are encouraged to
be compatible to the business's trade or wares. They may be
designed as historic, contemporary, cutting edge, futuristic,
fun or conservative as the business Owners' intend to
convey. The underside of the sign must be at least eight (8)
feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign must
not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Such
signs must be constructed of wood or a material, such as
sign foam, that replicates wood. Signs must have: either, at
least fifty percent (50%) of the surface area sandblasted; or
have a combination of sandblasted features and three
dimensional artwork embellishments covering up to at least
fifty percent (50%) of the sign area. Signs may be metal if
the sign includes sufficient thickness, at least one-half (½)
inch, not including framing. Thin, flat plastic and metal
signs with vinyl lettering and/or decals are NOT acceptable.
Signs must be painted and colors are encouraged. Sign
shapes must vary from other hanging signs on the same
block to encourage variety. Signs that exceed the six (6)
square foot allowance may be allowed if the overage is due
to artistic embellishments. Sign brackets used to support
the hanging signs also require review and approval by the
city. The bracket and the sign cannot project so far as to be
a danger to passing pedestrians and vehicles. A
14-62
professional sign company or artisan experienced with wood
construction, carving and painting must fabricate signs.
(iii) Directory signs:
(A) Building mounted directory signs. Where
several businesses share a building, a directory sign (listing
tenant names) may be installed on the building, not to
exceed six (6) square feet. The sign area of directory signs
will not be subtracted from the property's allowable sign
area.
(B) Freestanding directory signs. Where a single
or multiple tenant business' entrance(s) do not front a public
street or the entrance door is significantly obscured due to
topographic, existing landscape, or other orientation of the
building making it difficult for motorists to see the entrance,
a freestanding directory sign (listing tenant name(s)) may
be installed on the same parcel of property. Such sign shall
not be taller than three (3) feet to the top of the sign and
shall not exceed four (4) square feet per tenant. When there
is more than one tenant in a building with the same
difficulty of entrance visibility, the tenants must combine
their directory signs into a single freestanding directory
sign, while still maintaining a maximum of four (4) square
feet per tenant. However, such freestanding directory signs
shall not exceed a total of twenty-five (25) square feet and
shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet. The sign area of
directory signs will not be subtracted from the property's
allowable sign area.
(iv) Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs of not taller
than five (5) feet and not greater than twenty-five (25) square feet
are allowed. Only indirect/exterior illumination is permissible.
Properties that have frontage on Lamar Alexander Parkway may
have freestanding signs eight (8) feet tall, but such signs can only
be located on the Parkway side of the property.
(v) Window signs. Window signs are permissible;
however signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
window area.
(vi) Building mounted signs. Signs can be attached to
building facades at street level and shall not be roof mounted.
(vii) Perpendicular signs. Perpendicular signs must be at
least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the
sign must not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk.
Only one perpendicular sign may be installed per business and
such signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. If the property
14-63
originally had a theater marquis, similar marquis signs may be
installed if based on pictorial evidence.
(viii) Prohibited signs. Neon signs, flashing signs, signs
with intermittent lights, rotating signs, LED signs and internally
lit signs, are prohibited;
(ix) Sign sighting. Only indirect/external lighting is
allowed. Light directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it
illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly on
public right-of-way or residential premises.
(x) Awning signs. Imprints of a sign or logo shall be
allowed on an awning and will be included in the total signage
calculation, with the exception of applicants whom use the awning
sign allowance set forth in (4)(i)(ii)(B);
(xi) Sandwich board sign allowance. Each business may
have one sandwich board sign. Sandwich board signs shall be
constructed of wood in an "A" shape and be heavy enough so that
strong winds do not allow it to blow over. Sandwich boards shall
not be left outside of the building when the business closes, or the
city may remove and dispose of the sign. Sandwich board signs
cannot exceed a height of forty two (42) inches and shall not exceed
seven square feet (per side).
(xii) Materials: Sign materials shall be of natural surfaces
such as wood, brick, stone, etched glass or constructed of materials
that successfully replicate these natural materials. However,
professional painted metal signs are also acceptable provided they
have a finished thickness of at least one-half inch (1/2") achieved
by mounting the metal sign on a substrate or by having a frame.
Metal signs must have three-dimensional artwork embellishments
covering up to at least fifty percent (50%) of the sign area.
(xiii) Sign colors: Excessively bright, fluorescent, or glaring
colors are prohibited on signs.
(xiv) Sign review and permitting. Any new sign
application in the downtown zones must be submitted to the
planning department staff for review then forwarded to the sign
inspector for issuance of a sign permit.
(xv) Signs prohibited in rights-of-way. Permanent or
temporary signs shall not be installed in the road right-of-way.
"sandwich board" signs may be installed on sidewalks as long as
they comply with the "sandwich board" sign allowance above and
do not block a clear path along the sidewalk of thirty six (36)
inches.
(xvi) Accessory signage installed to glass. Strobe lights,
rotating and/or flashing emergency vehicle - type lights , neon
lights strips or window outlines installed within the business and
14-64
visible to the public, even if not affixed to the glass, is prohibited.
Holiday lights installed seasonally are exempt from this
requirement.
(xvii) Non-conforming sign. All sign-related provisions set
forth in § 14-218(17), "nonconforming signs," in the City of
Maryville Land Development Regulations, and as later amended,
are applicable within the downtown zones, unless otherwise
addressed in this chapter.
(xviii) Amortization of non-conforming sign.
(A) A non-conforming sign that exceeds the size
and height by more than ten percent or that is
nonconforming in some other way shall, within one (1) year
after the effective date of this chapter, be altered to comply
with the provisions of this article or be removed.
(B) If the nonconformity consists of too many
freestanding signs on a single lot or an excess of total sign
area on a single lot, the person responsible for the violation
may determine which sign or signs need to be altered or
removed to bring the development into conformance.
(xix) Reconstruction of previous signs. Property owners
whom propose to reconstruct signs that are clearly documented
through photographic evidence or other documentation may occur
on their original location. Such reconstructed signs shall be
constructed with materials, design detailing and decorative
features to match or closely approximate the original sign. If signs
proposed to be reconstructed do not comply with sign regulations
of this chapter, the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board will
review the applicant's proposal.
(xx) Signs excluded from regulation. The following signs
are exempt from regulation under this ordinance.
(A) Address numbers, signs posted on private
property relating to private parking or warning the public
against trespassing or danger from animals.
(B) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to
the authorization of a governmental body, including legal
notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic,
directional, or regulatory signs.
(C) Official signs of a non-commercial nature
erected by public utilities.
(xxi) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. All
sign-related provisions set forth in § 14-218 (4), (5) (13) (except
signs prohibited as set forth in number viii above; no internally lit
signs, see number ix above), (14) (15) (16) and (18) of this
14-65
ordinance as later amended, are applicable within the downtown
zones, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance.
(i) Zoning districts - accessories/details:
(i) Details such as shutters, balconies, overhangs,
exterior lighting, security lighting, etc. must be reviewed and
approved by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board as
compatible with the original building facade;
(ii) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired
rather than replaced. The new material should match the material
being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other
visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural
features should be based on accurate duplication of features
substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence; and
(iii) Blank walls are discouraged. Painted murals and
other wall decorations on elevations may be appropriate as
reviewed by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board.
(iv) Ancillary structures and equipment: HVAC
equipment, above ground grease traps, electric generators, fuel
tanks, trash compactors, dumpsters, garbage containment areas,
storage bins and similar ancillary structures and equipment shall
be screened from public roads with landscaping, walls or fences.
Proposed screening, ancillary structures and equipment shall be
submitted for board review before installation.
(j) Zoning districts - demolition: The distinguishing original
qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment
shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material
or distinctive architectural feature should be avoided when possible.
Demolition shall not occur unless one or the more following conditions are
met:
(i) If a building has lost its architectural and historical
integrity and importance and its removal will not result in a more
negative, less appropriate visual effect on the district;
(ii) If the denial of the demolition will result in an
unreasonable economic hardship on the applicant as determined
by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board;
(iii) If the public safety and welfare requires the removal
of a structure or building;
(iv) If the structural instability or deterioration of a
property is demonstrated through a report by a structural engineer
or architect. Such a report must clearly detail the property's
physical condition, reasons why rehabilitation is not feasible, and
cost estimates for rehabilitation versus demolition. In addition to
this report, there shall be a separate report that details future
action of this site.
14-66
(k) Zoning districts - land uses: Regardless of use: the central
business district is the civic and cultural heart of the City of Maryville.
As this zone develops, the continuous 'rhythm,' spacing, and aesthetics of
central business district structures will become vital in maintaining and
enhancing a vibrant small town setting.
(i) Residential: Attached homes including apartments,
condominiums, and lofts above storefronts are permitted.
Single-family detached housing is not appropriate in this zone.
(ii) Mixed uses: Appropriate uses should accommodate
a variety of needs, especially those of residents who live nearby
and tourists who visit downtown. Most types of land uses are
encouraged in the central business district including those for
entertainment, employment, service, shopping, liquor stores and
light manufacturing are permitted if the building they are housed
in structures meeting all design standards. Scale of proposed
developments in comparison to other individual developments in
the zone is most important when considering whether or not a use
shall be appropriate.
(iii) Prohibited uses: Adult establishments, heavy
manufacturing, mini-storage, landfill or mining, mobile home
parks, hazardous occupancies or storage of hazardous materials,
or any uses not determined to be compatible with the function,
character, and intent of the central business district.
(5) Washington Street Commercial Corridor. The Washington Street
corridor sets the impression of Maryville for thousands of motorists on their way
to the Smoky Mountains. The district is to be an urban design with limited
direct access from the street, dense development that provides an edge to the
street, limited in-front parking, pedestrian accommodations, and landscaping
along edges. The Downtown Design Review Board must approve building design
and site layout.
(a) Lot dimensions:
(i) Lot size: no minimum
(ii) Lot width: no minimum
(b) Building orientation: On lots that have frontage on
Washington Street, all buildings shall face Washington Street.
(c) Curb cuts: Curb cuts on Washington Street are limited to
one (1) per block. Additional curb cuts may be approved as a special
exception when there are no other reasonable means of access. Side street
curb cuts must be at least seventy (70) feet from Washington Street.
(d) Setbacks: Setback from existing utility easements must be
observed, otherwise:
(i) Front: For frontages on Washington Street, fifteen
(15) feet minimum. If a patio, drive lane, landscaped area, or other
aesthetic feature is placed between the sidewalk and building,
14-67
then a thirty (30) foot maximum setback measured from the back
of the curb is allowed. A fifty (50) foot maximum setback measured
from the back of the curb may be allowed if a drive lane and a
single row of parking is used in the site design. Any setback
greater than thirty (30) feet will require a special exception. Drive
lanes and front parking are subject to screening requirements
below.
For lots that do not front Washington Street, the front
setback shall be a ten (10) foot minimum and fifteen (15) foot
maximum.
(ii) Side: No minimum. All setbacks from street rightsof-
way shall use the "front" setback.
(iii) Rear: no minimum
(e) Sidewalks: Along Washington Street, a six (6) foot
landscaped buffer between the curb and sidewalk, a six (6) foot sidewalk,
and a minimum three (3) foot landscaped buffer between the sidewalk
and the beginning of development is required. On all other streets, a five
(5) foot sidewalk is required against the curb and a minimum five (5) foot
buffer area is required between the sidewalk and the beginning of
development.
(f) Parking: Parking shall be placed to the rear of the building.
If the site cannot accommodate adequate parking at the rear of the
building, side parking is allowed if appropriately screened (see screening
requirements below). A single row of angled parking may be allowed
between the building and the sidewalk for lots that front Washington
Street.
(g) Screening: Vehicle movement areas must be screened from
sidewalks with a brick or stone wall (not cinderblock), a wrought iron
fence (or other fence materials that are visually similar to wrought iron),
and/or landscaping. This is required to establish/maintain an edge to the
street consistent with the rest of the district. This barrier shall be placed
against the required three (3) foot landscaped buffer. The brick or stone
portion of the wall or fence may not be taller than forty (40) inches.
Fences and walls with fences on top shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
(h) Height: Buildings shall not exceed three (3) stories or
forty-five (45) feet. Taller buildings may be allowed by special exception,
but may not exceed sixty-five (65) feet.
(i) Facades and elevations:
(i) Facades shall provide fenestration toward pedestrian
areas for purposes of safety and aesthetics.
(ii) Facades must not be monolithic; any of the following,
or similar, design features may be used:
- Changes in surface planes
- Porches
14-68
- Awnings
- Entry stairs
- Doors
- Windows
- Chimneys
- Changes in construction materials
- Landscaping
- Horizontal and vertical sun-shading devices,
such as walls, canopies, and similar devices,
that extend a minimum of three (3) feet
beyond the wall of adjacent walls.
(iii) Facades may be repainted and shall be in good repair.
Paint colors must be subdued and approved by the Downtown
Design Review Board. Colors that are equivalent to Benjamin
Moore's "Historical Collection" palette are pre-approved.
Applicants must submit paint chips, brick samples, awning fabric
samples, etc. to the review board for all proposed new paint
projects, building construction and facade alteration.
(j) Materials:
(i) Natural stone, brick, wood and fiber-cement siding
that resembles horizontal lap siding shall be used for all buildings
in the Washington Street Commercial Corridor.
(ii) Veneer materials are not allowed (i.e., vinyl siding,
metal facade covering, stucco, and synthetic stucco).
(iii) Synthetic materials and stucco may only be allowed
on a limited basis for accent, trim, and cornices.
(k) Accessories/details:
(i) Facilities are encouraged to use natural materials,
colors, and scale compatible with those of other downtown zones.
Details such as shutters, balconies, overhangs, exterior lighting,
security lighting, etc. must be reviewed and approved by the
Maryville Downtown Design Review Board as compatible with the
design guidelines of the zone.
(ii) In properties of historical significance, deteriorated
architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, when
feasible. The new material shall match the material being replaced
in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities.
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features shall be
based on accurate duplication of features substantiated by historic,
physical, or pictorial evidence.
(iii) Painted murals and other wall decorations on
elevations may be appropriate as reviewed by the Downtown
Maryville Design Review Board.
14-69
(iv) Ancillary structures and equipment: HVAC
equipment, above ground grease traps, electric generators, fuel
tanks, trash compactors, dumpsters, garbage containment areas,
storage bins, and similar ancillary structures and equipment shall
be screened from public roads with landscaping, walls, or fences.
Proposed screening, ancillary structures, and equipment shall be
submitted for board review before installation.
(l) Demolition: The distinguishing original qualities or
character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not
be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or
distinctive architectural feature shall be avoided when possible.
Demolition shall not occur unless one or the more following conditions are
met:
(i) A building has lost its architectural and historical
integrity and importance and its removal will not result in a more
negative, less appropriate visual effect on the district;
(ii) The denial of the demolition will result in an
unreasonable economic hardship on the applicant as determined
by the Downtown Design Review Board;
(iii) The public safety and welfare requires the removal of
a structure or building;
(iv) The structural instability or deterioration of a
property is demonstrated through a report by a structural engineer
or architect. Such a report must clearly detail the property's
physical condition, reasons why rehabilitation is not feasible, and
cost estimates for rehabilitation versus demolition. In addition to
this report, there shall be a separate report that details future
action of this site.
(m) Land uses: Washington Street, through a mixed urban
pattern, serves pedestrians and motorists but shall not develop as a
suburban/highway commercial strip with deep setbacks and large upfront
parking. The district shall promote connectivity between businesses for
both pedestrian and vehicles.
(i) Residential: Attached homes including apartments,
condominiums, and lofts above storefronts are permitted.
Single-family detached housing is not allowed.
(ii) Mixed uses: Appropriate uses will accommodate a
variety of needs, especially those of residents who live nearby and
tourists who visit downtown. Light manufacturing for local
consumption and distribution may be allowed by special exception.
(iii) Prohibited uses: Adult establishments, large-scale
manufacturing, mini-storage, landfill or mining, hazardous
occupancies or storage of hazardous materials, or any uses not
14-70
determined to be compatible with the function, character, and
intent of the Washington Street Commercial Corridor.
(n) Special exceptions: The evaluation of a special exception
must consider the exception's impact on pedestrian movement, traffic
flow, and general aesthetics of the district.
(o) Signs: Except as stated herein, this section shall supersede
§ 14-218 of this ordinance regarding signs in this zoning district.
(i) Sign area allowed.
(A) Single story buildings: Total signage is based
on twenty-five percent (25%) of the side of the property on
which the entrance is located. Properties with frontage
having fifty (50) feet or less shall be allowed a maximum
sign area of twelve (12) square feet. The entrance shall be
the door(s) used by customers rather than entrances for
purposes of rear deliveries or fire exits. The total sign
surface allowance for parcels along Washington Street shall
be calculated based on fifty percent (50%) of the frontage
along each public street. Properties along Washington
Street with total frontage of fifty feet (50') or less shall be
allowed a maximum sign area of twenty-five (25) square
feet.
(B) Two-story and taller buildings: The maximum
area of signage is calculated above, however, two (2) story
buildings double the allowed maximum sign area, three (3)
story buildings triple the allowed maximum area, etc. The
maximum allowed sign area devoted to one (1) property
shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, regardless
of the number of stories and property frontage. While being
limited to the calculations above, no individual sign and no
combination of multiple signs on one (1) side of a building
shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. If a
building includes multiple uses, only the frontage and
stories attributed to the subject sign may be counted. For
example, a building with one (1) story of retail and two (2)
stories of residential may only count the retail story for the
respective retail signs.
(ii) Sign area allowances. Businesses not on Washington
Street may add signs, in addition to the maximum allowed sign
area as calculated above, using no more than two (2) of the
following sign allowances. All signs using these allowances will
require review and approval by planning staff.
(A) Window sign allowance. Each business may
have six (6) square feet of signs applied to glass
doors/windows.
14-71
(B) Awning sign allowance: Imprints of a signage
and/or logo shall be allowed on an awning which shall not
exceed either: the equivalent of the total twenty-five percent
(25%) signage calculation above, or twenty (20) square feet,
whichever is less. For example, if the property is allowed to
have a ten (10) square foot sign using the twenty-five
percent (25%) sign area calculation above, then the property
may also have a ten (10) square foot sign or logo printed on
an awning. If a building can receive a forty (40) square foot
sign using the twenty-five percent (25%) rule, it may have
also have signage and/or logo on an awning not to exceed
twenty (20) square feet.
(C) Projecting sign square footage allowance: Each
business may hang one (1) perpendicular sign not to exceed
six (6) square feet. Creativity and artwork in the sign design
and composition are encouraged. This sign allowance is not
trying to create a fake colonial era style of sign or recreate
an artificial historical past. Sign designs are encouraged to
be compatible to the business's trade or wares. They may be
designed as historic, contemporary, cutting edge, futuristic,
fun or conservative as the business owners intend to convey.
The underside of the sign must be at least eight (8) feet
above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign must not
be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Such
signs must be constructed of wood or a material, such as
sign foam, that replicates wood. Signs must have either at
least fifty percent (50%) of the surface area sandblasted, or
have a combination of sandblasted features and three
dimensional artwork embellishments covering up to at least
fifty percent (50%) of the sign area. Signs may be metal if
the sign includes sufficient thickness of at least one-half
(1/2) inch, not including framing. Thin, flat plastic and
metal signs with vinyl lettering and/or decals are NOT
acceptable. Signs must be painted and colors are
encouraged. Sign shapes must vary from other hanging
signs on the same block to encourage variety. Signs that
exceed the six (6) square foot allowance may be allowed if
the overage is due to artistic embellishments. Sign brackets
used to support the hanging signs also require review and
approval by the city. The bracket and the sign cannot
project so far as to be a danger to passing pedestrians or
vehicles. A professional sign company or artisan experienced
with wood construction, carving and painting must fabricate
signs.
14-72
(iii) Directory signs:
(A) Building-mounted directory signs. Where
several businesses share a building, a directory sign (listing
tenant names) may be installed on the building, not to
exceed six (6) square feet. The sign area of directory signs
will not be subtracted from the property's allowable sign
area.
(B) Freestanding directory signs. Where a single or
multiple tenant business entrance(s) does not front a public
street, or the entrance door is significantly obscured due to
topographic, existing landscape, or other orientation of the
building, making it difficult for motorists to see the
entrance, a freestanding directory sign (listing tenant
name(s)) may be installed on the same parcel of property.
Such signs shall not be taller than three (3) feet to the top
of the sign and shall not exceed four (4) square feet per
tenant. When there is more than one (1) tenant in a
building with the same difficulty of entrance visibility, the
tenants must combine their directory signs into a single
freestanding directory sign, while still maintaining a
maximum of four (4) square feet per tenant. However, such
freestanding directory signs shall not exceed a total of
twenty-five (25) square feet and shall not exceed a height of
five (5) feet. The sign area of directory signs will not be
subtracted from the property's allowable sign area.
(iv) Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs of not taller
than twelve (12) feet and not greater than sixty (60) square feet
are allowed. For parcels along Washington Street, the maximum
height of a freestanding sign is twenty feet (20'). Changeable
message signs are allowable within the total maximum sixty (60)
square foot area and shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. The
changeable message sign may not be installed as a separate
freestanding sign nor may it be installed as a portable sign.
(v) Window signs. Window signs are permissible;
however signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
window area.
(vi) Building mounted signs. Signs can be attached to
building facades at street level and shall not be roof mounted.
(vii) Perpendicular signs. Perpendicular signs must be at
least (8) feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign
must not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Only
one (1) perpendicular sign may be installed per business and such
signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. If the property
14-73
originally had a theater marquis, similar marquis signs may be
installed if based on pictorial evidence.
(viii) Changeable message signs. Along Washington Street,
changeable message signs are allowed and may be in addition to
the maximum allowable total signage. Only one (1) changeable
message sign is allowed. Changeable message signs, which include
electronic message center signs, shall be no larger than twenty (20)
square feet, except for gasoline product signs which shall be no
larger than twenty-five (25) square feet. Changeable message signs
can only be on the building or on a freestanding sign.
(ix) Sign lighting. Only indirect/external lighting is
allowed except along Washington Street. Light directed toward a
sign shall be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the
sign and does not shine directly on public right-of-way or
residential premises. "Neon signs, flashing signs, signs with
intermittent lights, and rotating signs are prohibited."
(x) Awning signs. Imprints of a sign or logo shall be
allowed on an awning and will be included in the total signage
calculation, with the exception of applicants whom use the awning
sign allowance set forth in subsection 2(b).
(xi) Sandwich board sign allowance. Each business may
have one (1) sandwich board sign. Sandwich board signs shall be
constructed of wood in an "A" shape and be heavy enough so that
strong winds do not allow it to blow over. Sandwich boards shall
not be left outside of the building when the business closes, or the
city may remove and dispose of the sign. Sandwich board signs
cannot exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches and shall not exceed
seven (7) square feet (per side).
(xii) Materials: Sign materials shall be of natural surfaces
such as wood, brick, stone, etched glass or constructed of materials
that successfully replicate these natural materials. However,
professionally painted metal signs are also acceptable provided
they have a finished thickness of at least one-half inch (1/2")
achieved by mounting the metal sign on a substrate or by having
a frame. Metal signs must have three-dimensional artwork
embellishments covering up to at least fifty percent (50%) of the
sign area.
(xiii) Sign colors: Excessively bright, fluorescent, or glaring
colors are prohibited on signs.
(xiv) Sign review and permitting. Any new sign application
in the downtown zones must be submitted to the planning
department staff for review then forwarded to the sign inspector
for issuance of a sign permit.
14-74
(xv) Signs prohibited in rights-of-way. Permanent or
temporary signs shall not be installed in the road right-of-way.
"Sandwich board" signs may be installed on sidewalks as long as
they comply with the "sandwich board" sign allowance above and
do not block a clear path along the sidewalk of thirty-six (36)
inches.
(xvi) Accessory signage installed to glass. Strobe lights,
rotating and/or flashing emergency vehicle-type lights, neon lights
strips or window outlines installed within the business and visible
to the public, even if not affixed to the glass, is prohibited. Holiday
lights installed seasonally are exempt from this requirement.
(xvii) Non-conforming sign. All sign-related provisions set
forth in § 14-218(17), in the City of Maryville Land Development
Regulations, and as later amended, are applicable within the
downtown zones, unless otherwise addressed in this chapter.
(xviii) Reconstruction of previous signs. Property owners
whom propose to reconstruct signs that are clearly documented
through photographic evidence or other documentation may occur
on their original location. Such reconstructed signs shall be
constructed with materials, design detailing and decorative
features to match or closely approximate the original sign. If signs
proposed to be reconstructed do not comply with sign regulations
of this chapter, the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board will
review the applicant's proposal.
(xix) Signs excluded from regulation. The following signs
are exempt from regulation under this chapter.
(A) Address numbers, signs posted on private
property relating to private parking or warning the public
against trespassing or danger from animals.
(B) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to
the authorization of a governmental body, including legal
notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic,
directional, or regulatory signs.
(C) Official signs of a non-commercial nature
erected by public utilities.
(xx) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. All signrelated
provisions set forth in § 14-218(4) (5) (13) (except signs
prohibited as set forth in number viii above; no internally lit signs,
see number ix above), (14) (15) (16) and (18) of this section as later
amended, are applicable within the downtown zones, unless
otherwise provided in this chapter.
(6) Zoning districts - Office Transition Zone. Serving as a the southern
fringe of Downtown Maryville, the office transition zone provides mixed use
opportunities in older homes and smaller scale commercial structures. The
14-75
zone's intent is to maintain and establish the charm of the older homes and
businesses, maintain the existing small town feel by requiring lower density
developments, and preserve the human scale of the area.
(a) Lot dimensions:
(i) Lot size: no minimum
(ii) Lot width: no minimum
(b) Setbacks: Setback from existing utility easements must be
observed, otherwise:
(i) Front: 20 foot maximum from street right of way.
Building setback preferably should line flush with existing
buildings in the district.
(ii) Side: 10 foot minimum
(iii) Rear: No minimum. Maximum variable depending
upon placement of parking as determined by the Downtown
Maryville Design Review Board.
(c) Parking: Total coverage cannot exceed thirty percent (30%)
of the entire lot. Parking must be placed in the rear of the building. If
rear parking is impossible, parking may be placed on one side. Parking
shall not be allowed in the front. In those cases where parking adjoins a
street, a six (6) foot opaque wall made of appropriate materials, including
brick, stone, and other natural materials must be appropriately placed to
create a visual edge for pedestrians and motorists. Appropriate
landscaping in and around parking lots, including trees may be required.
(d) Height: The maximum height for all new buildings shall not
exceed either two stories, or thirty (30) feet.
(e) Windows and doors:
(i) Spacing and size of fenestration shall match that of
the other buildings on the same block that were built before 1950;
(ii) Windows shall be square or vertical in orientation;
(iii) All fenestration, including doors and windows above
grade shall be indicative of the period of construction of the
building; and
(iv) Sill and lentils for windows are encouraged.
(v) True divided light or simulated divided light units are
permissible only.
(f) Facades:
(i) Substantial removal, alteration, or covering of
original facades is not allowed;
(ii) Facades composed of brick or masonry shall be
re-pointed and cleaned to a condition indicative of their original
finish; and
(iii) In cases of extreme deterioration, facades may be
repaired and painted. Paint colors must be of historic precedent
compatible with adjacent properties and approved by the
14-76
Downtown Maryville Design Review Board. Applicants must
submit paint chips, brick samples, awning fabric samples, etc. to
the review board for all proposed new paint projects, building
construction and facade alteration.
(g) Materials:
(i) Exterior materials shall be natural stone, wood, brick,
or fiber-cement siding with residential scale fenestration. Cut
stone is allowed while river rock and stacked stone are not allowed
as they are not considered consistent with the buildings downtown.
(ii) Veneer materials (i.e., vinyl siding, stucco, and
synthetic stucco) are not allowed.
(iii) Synthetic materials and stucco may only be allowed
on a limited basis for accent, trim and cornices.
(h) Signs: Except as stated herein, this section shall supersede
§ 14-218 of this chapter regarding signs in this zoning district.
(i) Sign Area Allowed.
(A) Single story buildings: Total signage is based
on twenty-five percent (25%) of the side of the property on
which the entrance is located. Properties with frontage
having 50 feet or less shall be allowed a maximum sign area
of twelve (12) square feet. The entrance shall be the door(s)
used by customers rather than entrances for purposes of
rear deliveries or fire exits.
(B) Two-story and taller buildings: The maximum
area of signage is calculated above, however, two story
buildings double the allowed maximum sign area, three
story buildings triple the allowed maximum area, etc. The
maximum allowed sign area devoted to one property shall
not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, regardless of the
number of stories and property frontage. While being
limited to the calculations above, no individual sign and no
combination of multiple signs on one side of a building shall
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. If a building
includes multiple uses, only the frontage and stories
attributed to the subject sign may be counted. For example,
a building with one story of retail and two stories of
residential may only count the retail story for the respective
retail signs.
(ii) Sign area allowances. Businesses may add signs, in
addition to the maximum allowed sign area as calculated above,
using no more than two of the following sign allowances. All signs
using these allowances will require review and approval by
planning staff.
14-77
(A) Window sign allowance. Each business may
have six (6) square feet of signs applied to glass
doors/windows.
(B) Awning sign allowance: Imprints of a signage
and/or logo shall be allowed on an awning which shall not
exceed either: the equivalent of the total twenty-five percent
(25%) signage calculation above, or twenty (20) square feet,
whichever is less. For example, if the property is allowed to
have a ten (10) square foot sign using the twenty-five
percent (25%) sign area calculation above, then the property
may also have a ten (10) square foot sign or logo printed on
an awning. If a building can receive a forth (40) square foot
sign using the 25% rule, it may have also have signage
and/or logo on an awning not to exceed twenty (20) square
feet.
(C) Projecting sign square footage allowance: Each
business may hang one perpendicular sign not to exceed six
(6) square feet. Creativity and artwork in the sign design
and composition are encouraged. This sign allowance is not
trying to create a fake colonial era style of sign or recreate
an artificial historical past. Sign designs are encouraged to
be compatible to the business's trade or wares. They may be
designed as historic, contemporary, cutting edge, futuristic,
fun or conservative as the business owners' intend to
convey. The underside of the sign must be at least eight (8)
feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign must
not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Such
signs must be constructed of wood or a material, such as
sign foam, that replicates wood. Signs must have: either, at
least fifty percent (50%) of the surface area sandblasted; or
have a combination of sandblasted features and three
dimensional artwork embellishments covering up to at least
fifty percent (50%) of the sign area. Signs may be metal if
the sign includes sufficient thickness, at least one-half (½)
inch, not including framing. Thin, flat plastic and metal
signs with vinyl lettering and/or decals are NOT acceptable.
Signs must be painted and colors are encouraged. Sign
shapes must vary from other hanging signs on the same
block to encourage variety. Signs that exceed the six (6)
square foot allowance may be allowed if the overage is due
to artistic embellishments. Sign brackets used to support
the hanging signs also require review and approval by the
city. The bracket and the sign cannot project so far as to be
a danger to passing pedestrians and vehicles. A
14-78
professional sign company or artisan experienced with wood
construction, carving and painting must fabricate signs.
(iii) Directory signs:
(A) Building mounted directory signs. Where
several businesses share a building, a directory sign (listing
tenant names) may be installed on the building, not to
exceed six (6) square feet. The sign area of directory signs
will not be subtracted from the property's allowable sign
area.
(B) Freestanding directory signs. Where a single
or multiple tenant business' entrance(s) do not front a public
street or the entrance door is significantly obscured due to
topographic, existing landscape, or other orientation of the
building making it difficult for motorists to see the entrance,
a freestanding directory sign (listing tenant name(s)) may
be installed on the same parcel of property. Such sign shall
not be taller than three (3) feet to the top of the sign and
shall not exceed four (4) square feet per tenant. When there
is more than one tenant in a building with the same
difficulty of entrance visibility, the tenants must combine
their directory signs into a single freestanding directory
sign, while still maintaining a maximum of four (4) square
feet per tenant. However, such freestanding directory signs
shall not exceed a total of twenty-five (25) square feet and
shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet. The sign area of
directory signs will not be subtracted from the property's
allowable sign area.
(iv) Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs of not taller
than five (5) feet and not greater than twenty-five (25) square feet
are allowed. Only indirect/exterior illumination is permissible.
Properties that have frontage on Lamar Alexander Parkway may
have freestanding signs eight (8) feet tall, but such signs can only
be located on the parkway side of the property.
(v) Window signs. Window signs are permissible;
however signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
window area.
(vi) Building mounted signs. Signs can be attached to
building facades at street level and shall not be roof mounted.
(vii) Perpendicular signs. Perpendicular signs must be at
least (8) feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign
must not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Only
one perpendicular sign may be installed per business and such
signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. If the property
14-79
originally had a theater marquis, similar marquis signs may be
installed if based on pictorial evidence.
(viii) Prohibited signs. Neon signs, flashing signs, signs
with intermittent lights, rotating signs, LED signs and internally
lit signs, are prohibited.
(ix) Sign lighting. Only indirect/external lighting is
allowed. Light directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it
illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly on
public right-of-way or residential premises.
(x) Awning signs. Imprints of a sign or logo shall be
allowed on an awning and will be included in the total signage
calculation, with the exception of Applicants whom use the awning
sign allowance set forth in subsection ii(B).
(xi) Sandwich board sign allowance. Each business may
have one sandwich board sign. Sandwich board signs shall be
constructed of wood in an "A" shape and be heavy enough so that
strong winds do not allow it to blow over. Sandwich boards shall
not be left outside of the building when the business closes, or the
city may remove and dispose of the sign. Sandwich board signs
cannot exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches and shall not exceed
seven (7) square feet (per side).
(xii) Materials: Signs shall be constructed of natural
materials such as wood, brick or stone, etched glass or constructed
of materials that successfully replicate these natural materials.
However, professional painted metal signs are also acceptable
provided they have a finished thickness of at least one-half inch
(1/2") achieved by mounting the metal sign on a substrate or by
having a frame. Metal signs must have three-dimensional artwork
embellishments covering up to at least fifty percent (50%) of their
sign area.
(xiii) Sign colors: Excessively bright, fluorescent, or glaring
colors are prohibited on signs.
(xiv) Sign review and permitting. Any new sign
application in the downtown zones must be submitted to the
planning department staff for review then forwarded to the sign
inspector for issuance of a sign permit.
(xv) Signs prohibited in rights-of-way. Permanent or
temporary signs shall not be installed in the road right-of-way.
"Sandwich board" signs may be installed on sidewalks as long as
they comply with the "sandwich board" sign allowance above and
do not block a clear path along the sidewalk of thirty six (36)
inches.
(xvi) Accessory signage installed to glass. Strobe lights,
rotating and/or flashing emergency vehicle - type lights , neon
14-80
lights strips or window outlines installed within the business and
visible to the public, even if not affixed to the glass, is prohibited.
Holiday lights installed seasonally are exempt from this
requirement.
(xvii) Non-conforming sign. All sign-related provisions set
forth in § 14-218(17), in the City of Maryville Land Development
Regulations, and as later amended, are applicable within the
downtown zones, unless otherwise addressed in this chapter.
(xviii) Amortization of non-conforming sign.
(A) A non-conforming sign that exceeds the size
and height by more than ten percent or that is
nonconforming in some other way shall, within one (1) year
after the effective date of this chapter, be altered to comply
with the provisions of this article or be removed.
(B) If the nonconformity consists of too many
freestanding signs on a single lot or an excess of total sign
area on a single lot, the person responsible for the violation
may determine which sign or signs need to be altered or
removed to bring the development into conformance.
(xix) Reconstruction of previous signs. Property owners
whom propose to reconstruct signs that are clearly documented
through photographic evidence or other documentation may occur
on their original location. Such reconstructed signs shall be
constructed with materials, design detailing and decorative
features to match or closely approximate the original sign. If signs
proposed to be reconstructed do not comply with sign regulations
of this chapter, the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board will
review the applicant's proposal.
(xx) Signs excluded from regulation. The following signs
are exempt from regulation under this chapter.
(A) Address numbers, signs posted on private
property relating to private parking or warning the public
against trespassing or danger from animals.
(B) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to
the authorization of a governmental body, including legal
notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic,
directional, or regulatory signs.
(C) Official signs of a non-commercial nature
erected by public utilities.
(xxi) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. All
sign-related provisions set forth in § 14-218 (4), (5), (13) (except
signs prohibited as set forth in number xiii above; no internally lit
signs, see number ix above), (14), (15), (16), and (18) of this chapter
14-81
as later amended, are applicable within the downtown zones,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(i) Accessories/details:
(i) New buildings shall have porches with columns to
match the character and detail of the area;
(ii) Roof shall be pitched at least 4:12 with gables facing
the streetscape;
(iii) All new construction shall match the single-family
residential scale of the zone;
(iv) Details such as shutters, balconies, overhangs,
exterior lighting, security lighting, etc. must be reviewed and
approved by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board as
compatible with the original building facade;
(v) Paint colors must be of historic precedent, compatible
with adjacent properties and approved by the Downtown Maryville
Design Review Board;
(vi) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired
rather than replaced. The new material should match the
material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and
other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of
features substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence;
(vii) Blank walls are discouraged. Painted murals and
other wall decorations on elevations may be appropriate as
reviewed by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board; and
(viii) Ancillary structures and equipment: HVAC
equipment, above ground grease traps, electric generators, fuel
tanks, trash compactors, dumpsters, garbage containment areas,
storage bins and similar ancillary structures and equipment shall
be screened from public roads with landscaping, walls or fences.
Proposed screening, ancillary structures and equipment shall be
submitted for board review before installation.
(j) Demolition: The distinguishing original qualities or
character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not
be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or
distinctive architectural feature should be avoided when possible.
Demolition shall not occur unless one or the more following conditions are
met:
(i) If a building has lost its architectural and historical
integrity and importance and its removal will not result in a more
negative, less appropriate visual effect on the district;
(ii) If the denial of the demolition will result in an
unreasonable economic hardship on the applicant as determined
by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board;
14-82
(iii) If the public safety and welfare requires the removal
of a structure or building; and
(iv) If the structural instability or deterioration of a
property is demonstrated through a report by a structural engineer
or architect. Such a report must clearly detail the property's
physical condition, reasons why rehabilitation is not feasible, and
cost estimates for rehabilitation versus demolition. In addition to
this report, there shall be a separate report that details future
action of this site.
(k) Land uses: Regardless of use: new developments shall
benchmark the existing historic single-family residences and associated
small scale businesses.
(i) Residential: Attached homes including single family
residential, apartments, condominiums, and lofts above storefronts
are permitted.
(ii) Mixed uses: Appropriate uses should accommodate
a variety of needs, especially those of residents who live nearby
and tourists who visit downtown. Most types of land uses are
encouraged in the office transition zone including those for
entertainment, employment, service, shopping, and light
manufacturing are permitted if the building they are housed in
structures meeting all design standards. Scale of proposed
developments in comparison to other individual developments in
the zone is most important when considering whether or not a use
shall be appropriate.
(iii) Prohibited uses: Adult establishments, heavy
manufacturing, mini-storage, landfill or mining, hazardous
occupancies or storage of hazardous materials, or any uses not
determined to be compatible with the function, character, and
intent of the office transition zone.
(7) Zoning districts - Heritage Development Zone. The Heritage
Development Zone's proximity to the original site of Ft. Craig, the central
business district, and its location on the Greenbelt shall provide opportunities
for festivals, festive retail, cultural and heritage-related uses such as museums,
craft shops, antiques, or any appropriate use that will attract locals and tourists
to the area. In an effort to expand development opportunities for vacant lots and
buildings within the Heritage Development Zone, all lots within the district that
have frontage along E. Church Avenue shall be afforded the right to develop
under the same standards as outlined in the Central Business District zone.
Allowing this flexibility will ensure a more cohesive development pattern along
both sides of E. Church Avenue.
(a) Lot dimensions:
(i) Lot size: no minimum
(ii) Lot width: no minimum
14-83
(b) Setbacks:
(i) Front: 20 foot maximum setback to the street right of
way or greenbelt. Building setback preferably should line flush
with existing buildings in the district.
(ii) Side: No minimum unless adjacent to residential use;
ten (10) foot minimum if adjacent to residential use.
(iii) Rear: No minimum. Maximum variable depending
upon placement of parking as determined by the Downtown
Maryville Design Review Board.
(c) Parking: Total coverage cannot exceed thirty percent (30%)
of the entire lot. Parking must be placed in the rear of the building. If
rear parking is impossible, parking may be placed on one side. Parking
shall not be allowed in front. In those cases where parking adjoins a
street, a six-foot opaque wall made of appropriate materials, including
brick, stone, and other natural materials must be appropriately placed to
create a visual edge for pedestrians and motorists. Appropriate
landscaping in and around parking lots, including trees may be required.
Due to the variety of land uses allowed within the downtown districts and
the fact that not all uses are specifically identified within the parking
standards and regulations table, the land use administrator is hereby
authorized to use the parking table as a guide in determining an
adequate number of parking spaces for projects within the Heritage
Development Zone. When land uses have specific needs or provide special
services, the land use administrator shall use discretion in calculating
and determining the number of spaces needed and the parking lot
coverage to be constructed on-site, and may also consider public and
satellite parking that may be available to a specific site in the final
design of the parking needed for a particular project.
(d) Height: The maximum height for all new buildings shall not
exceed three+ stories, or forty five (45) feet.
(e) Windows and Doors:
(i) Spacing and size of fenestration shall match that of
the other buildings on the same block that were built before 1950;
(ii) Windows shall be square or vertical in orientation;
(iii) All fenestration, including doors and windows above
grade shall be indicative of the period of construction of the
building; and
(iv) Sill and lentils for windows are encouraged.
(v) True divided light or simulated divided light units are
permissible only.
(f) Facades:
(i) Substantial removal, alteration, or covering of
original facades is not allowed;
14-84
(ii) Facades composed of brick or masonry shall be
re-pointed and cleaned to a condition indicative of their original
finish; and
(iii) In cases of extreme deterioration, facades may be
repaired and painted. Paint colors must be of historic precedent,
compatible with adjacent properties and approved by the
Downtown Maryville Design Review Board. Applicants must
submit paint chips, brick samples, awning fabric samples, etc. to
the review board for all proposed new paint projects, building
construction and facade alteration.
(g) Materials:
(i) Exterior materials shall be wood, stone, brick or
fiber-cement siding that resembles horizontal lap siding with
residential scale fenestration. Cut stone is allowed while river rock
and stacked stone are not allowed as they are not considered
consistent with the buildings downtown; and
(ii) Veneer materials (i.e., vinyl siding, stucco, and
synthetic stucco) are not allowed.
(iii) Synthetic materials and stucco may only be allowed
on a limited basis for accent, trim and cornices.
(h) Signs: Except as stated herein, this section shall supersede
§ 14-218 of this chapter regarding signs in this zoning district.
(i) Sign Area Allowed.
(A) Single story buildings: Total signage is based
on twenty-five percent (25%) of the side of the property on
which the entrance is located. Properties with frontage
having fifty (50) feet or less shall be allowed a maximum
sign area of twelve (12) square feet. The entrance shall be
the door(s) used by customers rather than entrances for
purposes of rear deliveries or fire exits.
(B) Two-story and taller buildings: The maximum
area of signage is calculated above, however, two story
buildings double the allowed maximum sign area, three
story buildings triple the allowed maximum area, etc. The
maximum allowed sign area devoted to one property shall
not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, regardless of the
number of stories and property frontage. While being
limited to the calculations above, no individual sign and no
combination of multiple signs on one side of a building shall
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. If a building
includes multiple uses, only the frontage and stories
attributed to the subject sign may be counted. For example,
a building with one story of retail and two stories of
14-85
residential may only count the retail story for the respective
retail signs.
(ii) Sign area allowances. Businesses may add signs, in
addition to the maximum allowed sign area as calculated above,
using no more than two of the following sign allowances. All signs
using these allowances will require review and approval by
planning staff.
(A) Window sign allowance. Each business may
have six (6) square feet of signs applied to glass
doors/windows.
(B) Awning sign allowance: Imprints of a signage
and/or logo shall be allowed on an awning which shall not
exceed either: the equivalent of the total twenty-five percent
(25%) signage calculation above, or twenty (20) square feet,
whichever is less. For example, if the property is allowed to
have a ten square foot sign using the twenty-five percent
(25%) sign area calculation above, then the property may
also have a ten square foot sign or logo printed on an
awning. If a building can receive a forty (40) square foot
sign using the twenty-five percent (25%) rule, it may have
also have signage and/or logo on an awning not to exceed
twenty (20) square feet.
(C) Projecting sign square footage allowance: Each
business may hang one perpendicular sign not to exceed six
(6) square feet. Creativity and artwork in the sign design
and composition are encouraged. This sign allowance is not
trying to create a fake colonial era style of sign or recreate
an artificial historical past. Sign designs are encouraged to
be compatible to the business's trade or wares. They may be
designed as historic, contemporary, cutting edge, futuristic,
fun or conservative as the business owners' intend to
convey. The underside of the sign must be at least eight (8)
feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign must
not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Such
signs must be constructed of wood or a material, such as
sign foam, that replicates wood. Signs must have: either, at
least fifty percent (50%) of the surface area sandblasted; or
have a combination of sandblasted features and three
dimensional artwork embellishments covering up to at least
fifty percent (50%) of the sign area. Signs may be metal if
the sign includes sufficient thickness, at least one-half (½)
inch, not including framing. Thin, flat plastic and metal
signs with vinyl lettering and/or decals are NOT acceptable.
Signs must be painted and colors are encouraged. Sign
14-86
shapes must vary from other hanging signs on the same
block to encourage variety. Signs that exceed the six square
foot allowance may be allowed if the overage is due to
artistic embellishments. Sign brackets used to support the
hanging signs also require review and approval by the city.
The bracket and the sign cannot project so far as to be a
danger to passing pedestrians and vehicles. A professional
sign company or artisan experienced with wood
construction, carving and painting must fabricate signs.
(iii) Directory signs:
(A) Building mounted directory signs. Where
several businesses share a building, a directory sign (listing
tenant names) may be installed on the building, not to
exceed six (6) square feet. The sign area of directory signs
will not be subtracted from the property's allowable sign
area.
(B) Freestanding directory signs. Where a single
or multiple tenant business' entrance(s) do not front a public
street or the entrance door is significantly obscured due to
topographic, existing landscape, or other orientation of the
building making it difficult for motorists to see the entrance,
a freestanding directory sign (listing tenant name(s)) may
be installed on the same parcel of property. Such sign shall
not be taller than three (3) feet to the top of the sign and
shall not exceed four (4) square feet per tenant. When there
is more than one tenant in a building with the same
difficulty of entrance visibility, the tenants must combine
their directory signs into a single freestanding directory
sign, while still maintaining a maximum of four (4) square
feet per tenant. However, such freestanding directory signs
shall not exceed a total of twenty-five (25) square feet and
shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet. The sign area of
directory signs will not be subtracted from the property's
allowable sign area.
(iv) Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs of not taller
than five (5) feet and not greater than twenty-five (25) square feet
are allowed. Only indirect /exterior illumination is permissible.
Properties that have frontage on Lamar Alexander Parkway may
have freestanding signs eight (8) feet tall, but such signs can only
be located on the parkway side of the property.
(v) Window signs. Window signs are permissible;
however signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
window area.
14-87
(vi) Building mounted signs. Signs can be attached to
building facades at street level and shall not be roof mounted.
(vii) Perpendicular signs. Perpendicular signs must be at
least (8) feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign
must not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Only
one perpendicular sign may be installed per business and such
signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. If the property
originally had a theater marquis, similar marquis signs may be
installed if based on pictorial evidence.
(viii) Prohibited signs. Neon signs, flashing signs, signs
with intermittent lights, rotating signs, LED signs and internally
lit signs, are prohibited.
(ix) Sign lighting. Only indirect/external lighting is
allowed. Light directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it
illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly on
public right-of-way or residential premises.
(x) Awning signs. Imprints of a sign or logo shall be
allowed on an awning and will be included in the total signage
calculation, with the exception of applicants whom use the awning
sign allowance set forth in subsection ii(B);
(xi) Sandwich board sign allowance. Each business may
have one sandwich board sign. Sandwich board signs shall be
constructed of wood in an "A" shape and be heavy enough so that
strong winds do not allow it to blow over. Sandwich boards shall
not be left outside of the building when the business closes, or the
city may remove and dispose of the sign. Sandwich board signs
cannot exceed a height of forty two (42) inches and shall not exceed
seven (7) square feet (per side).
(xii) Materials: Signs shall be constructed of natural
materials such as wood, brick, stone, etched glass or constructed
of materials that successfully replicate these natural materials.
However, professional painted metal signs are also acceptable
provided they have a finished thickness of at least one-half inch
(1/2") achieved by mounting the metal sign on a substrate or by
having a frame. Metal signs must have three-dimensional artwork
embellishments covering up to at least fifty percent (50%) of the
sign area.
(xiii) Sign colors: Excessively bright, fluorescent, or glaring
colors are prohibited on signs;
(xiv) Sign review and permitting. Any new sign
application in the downtown zones must be submitted to the
planning department staff for review then forwarded to the sign
inspector for issuance of a sign permit.
14-88
(xv) Signs prohibited in rights-of-way. Permanent or
temporary signs shall not be installed in the road right-of-way.
"Sandwich board" signs may be installed on sidewalks as long as
they comply with the "sandwich board" sign allowance above and
do not block a clear path along the sidewalk of thirty six (36)
inches.
(xvi) Accessory signage installed to glass. Strobe lights,
rotating and/or flashing emergency vehicle - type lights , neon
lights strips or window outlines installed within the business and
visible to the public, even if not affixed to the glass, is prohibited.
Holiday lights installed seasonally are exempt from this
requirement.
(xvii) Non-conforming sign. All sign-related provisions set
forth in § 14-218(17), in the City of Maryville Land Development
Regulations, and as later amended, are applicable within the
downtown zones, unless otherwise addressed in this chapter.
(xviii) Amortization of non-conforming sign:
(A) A non-conforming sign that exceeds the size
and height by more than ten percent (10%) or that is
nonconforming in some other way shall, within one (1) year
after the effective date of this chapter, be altered to comply
with the provisions of this article or be removed.
(B) If the nonconformity consists of too many
freestanding signs on a single lot or an excess of total sign
area on a single lot, the person responsible for the violation
may determine which sign or signs need to be altered or
removed to bring the development into conformance.
(xix) Reconstruction of previous signs. Property owners
whom propose to reconstruct signs that are clearly documented
through photographic evidence or other documentation may occur
on their original location. Such reconstructed signs shall be
constructed with materials, design detailing and decorative
features to match or closely approximate the original sign. If signs
proposed to be reconstructed do not comply with sign regulations
of this chapter, the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board will
review the applicant's proposal.
(xx) Signs excluded from regulation. The following signs
are exempt from regulation under this section:
(A) Address numbers, signs posted on private
property relating to private parking or warning the public
against trespassing or danger from animals.
(B) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to
the authorization of a governmental body, including legal
14-89
notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic,
directional, or regulatory signs.
(C) Official signs of a non-commercial nature
erected by public utilities.
(xxi) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. All
sign-related provisions set forth in § 14-218 (4), (5), (13) (except
signs prohibited as set forth in number viii above; no internally lit
signs, see number ix above), (14), (15), (16) and (18) of this chapter
as later amended, are applicable within the downtown zones,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(i) Accessories/details:
(i) New construction should be sensitive to the historic
quality and restored nature of adjacent zones. Details such as
shutters, balconies, overhangs, exterior lighting, security lighting,
etc. must be reviewed and approved by the Downtown Maryville
Design Review Board as compatible with the original building
facade.
(ii) Where applicable, deteriorated architectural features
shall be repaired rather than replaced. The new materials should
match the material being replaced in composition, design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of
missing architectural features should be based on accurate
duplication of features substantiated by historic, physical, or
pictorial evidence.
(iii) Blank walls are discouraged. Painted murals and
other wall decorations on elevations may be appropriate as
reviewed by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board.
(iv) Ancillary structures and equipment: HVAC
equipment, above ground grease traps, electric generators, fuel
tanks, trash compactors, dumpsters, garbage containment areas,
storage bins and similar ancillary structures and equipment shall
be screened from public roads with landscaping, walls or fences.
Proposed screening, ancillary structures and equipment shall be
submitted for board review before installation.
(j) Demolition: The distinguishing original qualities or
character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not
be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or
distinctive architectural feature should be avoided when possible.
Demolition shall not occur unless one or more of the following conditions
are met:
(i) If a building has lost its architectural and historical
integrity and importance and its removal will not result in a more
negative, less appropriate visual effect on the district;
14-90
(ii) If the denial of the demolition will result in an
unreasonable economic hardship on the applicant as determined
by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board;
(iii) If the public safety and welfare requires the removal
of a structure or building; and
(iv) If the structural instability or deterioration of a
property is demonstrated through a report by a structural engineer
or architect. Such a report must clearly detail the property's
physical condition, reasons why rehabilitation is not feasible, and
cost estimates for rehabilitation versus demolition. In addition, to
this report, there shall be a separate report that details future
action of this site.
(k) Land uses: The Heritage development zone shall provide
opportunities for festivals, heritage-related businesses, and greenbelt
uses to attract tourists and local residents to the area.
(i) Residential: Attached homes including apartments,
condominiums, and lofts above storefronts are permitted.
Single-family detached housing is not appropriate in this zone.
(ii) Mixed uses: Most types of land uses in the Heritage
development zone are encouraged including those for
entertainment, employment, service, shopping, light
manufacturing, cultural, heritage oriented activities, museums
and tourist types of development.
(iii) Prohibited uses: Adult establishments, heavy
manufacturing, mini-storage, landfill or mining, hazardous
occupancies or storage of hazardous materials, or any uses not
determined to be compatible with the function, character, and
intent of the Heritage Development zone.
(8) Zoning districts - Central District Support Zone. The central
business district support zone is the zone of contrast between the urban
intimacy on Harper Avenue and the open spaces of the north side of the
Greenbelt. This zone takes full advantage of the benefits of the Greenbelt by
providing mixed use development along its periphery. Businesses locating in
the CBD support zone are encouraged to spill their services out onto the
pathways and open areas of the Greenbelt.
(a) Lot Dimensions:
(i) Lot size: no minimum
(ii) Lot width: no minimum
(b) Setbacks: Setback from existing utility easements must be
observed, otherwise:
(i) Front: 20 foot maximum setback to the street or
greenbelt.
(ii) Side: 10 ft. maximum; no minimum.
14-91
(iii) Rear: no minimum, maximum variable, depending
upon placement of parking as reviewed by the Maryville Design
Review Board.
(c) Parking: Total coverage cannot exceed thirty percent (30%)
of the entire lot. Parking must be placed on the side of the building that
is determined to be most out of the public view by the Downtown
Maryville Design Review Board. Parking shall not be allowed to impede
the beauty of Greenbelt views, nor destroy the potential for an "edge" on
downtown streets. In those cases where parking must adjoin a street, an
eight-foot opaque wall built of appropriate materials, including brick,
stone, and other natural materials shall be appropriately placed to create
a visual edge for pedestrians and motorists. Appropriate landscaping in
and around parking lots, including trees, may be required.
(d) Height: The maximum height for all new buildings shall not
exceed either three stories or forty-five (45) feet.
(e) Windows and doors:
(i) Spacing and size of fenestration shall match that of
the other buildings on the same block that were built before 1950;
(ii) Windows shall be square or vertical in orientation;
(iii) All fenestration, including doors and windows above
grade shall be indicative of the period of construction of the
building; and
(iv) Sills and lentils for windows are encouraged.
(v) True divided light or simulated divided light units are
permissible only.
(f) Facades:
(i) Facades shall be "pedestrian scale." Pedestrian scale
is defined as a size (of building, space) that a pedestrian perceives
as not dominating or overpowering;
(ii) Substantial removal, alteration, or covering or
original facades shall not be permitted;
(iii) Facades composed of brick or masonry must be
re-pointed and cleaned to a condition indicative of their original
finish;
(iv) In cases of extreme deterioration, facades may be
repaired and painted; paint colors must be of historic precedent,
compatible with adjacent properties and approved by the
Downtown Maryville Design Review Board. Applicants must
submit paint chips, brick samples, awning fabric samples, etc. to
the review board for all proposed new paint projects, building
construction and facade alteration; and
(v) Awnings, may be applied and are encouraged, but
must be solid or two-color, angled or scalloped type only and
compatible with the architecture and color palette.
14-92
(g) Materials:
(i) Natural stone, brick, wood and fiber-based siding that
resembles horizontal lap siding should be used for all buildings in
the Central Business District Support Zone;
(ii) Veneer materials are not allowed (i.e., vinyl siding,
metal facade covering, stucco, and synthetic stucco.).
(iii) Synthetic materials and stucco may only be allowed
on a limited basis for accent, trim and cornices.
(h) Signs: Except where stated herein, the following restrictions
and rules supersede the provisions of the general sign ordinance found in
§ 14-218 of this ordinance in this zoning district.
(i) Sign area allowed.
(A) Single story buildings: Total signage is based
on twenty-five percent (25%) of the side of the property on
which the entrance is located. Properties with frontage
having fifty (50) feet or less shall be allowed a maximum
sign area of twelve (12) square feet. The entrance shall be
the door(s) used by customers rather than entrances for
purposes of rear deliveries or fire exits.
(B) Two-story and taller buildings: The maximum
area of signage is calculated above, however, two story
buildings double the allowed maximum sign area, three
story buildings triple the allowed maximum area, etc. The
maximum allowed sign area devoted to one property shall
not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, regardless of the
number of stories and property frontage. While being
limited to the calculations above, no individual sign and no
combination of multiple signs on one side of a building shall
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. If a building
includes multiple uses, only the frontage and stories
attributed to the subject sign may be counted. For example,
a building with one story of retail and two stories of
residential may only count the retail story for the respective
retail signs.
(ii) Sign area allowances. Businesses may add signs, in
addition to the maximum allowed sign area as calculated above,
using no more than two of the following sign allowances. All signs
using these allowances will require review and approval by
planning staff.
(A) Window sign allowance. Each business may
have six (6) square feet of signs applied to glass
doors/windows.
(B) Awning sign allowance: Imprints of a signage
and/or logo shall be allowed on an awning which shall not
14-93
exceed either: the equivalent of the total twenty-five percent
(25%) signage calculation above, or twenty (20) square feet,
whichever is less. For example, if the property is allowed to
have a ten square foot sign using the twenty-five percent
(25%) sign area calculation above, then the property may
also have a ten square foot sign or logo printed on an
awning. If a building can receive a forty (40) square foot
sign using the twenty-five percent (25%) rule, it may have
also have signage and/or logo on an awning not to exceed
twenty (20) square feet.
(C) Projecting sign square footage allowance: Each
business may hang one perpendicular sign not to exceed six
(6) square feet. Creativity and artwork in the sign design
and composition are encouraged. This sign allowance is not
trying to create a fake colonial era style of sign or recreate
an artificial historical past. Sign designs are encouraged to
be compatible to the business's trade or wares. They may be
designed as historic, contemporary, cutting edge, futuristic,
fun or conservative as the business Owners' intend to
convey. The underside of the sign must be at least eight (8)
feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign must
not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Such
signs must be constructed of wood or a material, such as
sign foam, that replicates wood. Signs must have: either, at
least fifty percent (50%) of the surface area sandblasted; or
have a combination of sandblasted features and three
dimensional artwork embellishments covering up to at least
fifty percent (50%) of the sign area. Signs may be metal if
the sign includes sufficient thickness, at least one-half (½)
inch, not including framing. Thin, flat plastic and metal
signs with vinyl lettering and/or decals are NOT acceptable.
Signs must be painted and colors are encouraged. Sign
shapes must vary from other hanging signs on the same
block to encourage variety. Signs that exceed the six (6)
square foot allowance may be allowed if the overage is due
to artistic embellishments. Sign brackets used to support
the hanging signs also require review and approval by the
city. The bracket and the sign cannot project so far as to be
a danger to passing pedestrians and vehicles. A
professional sign company or artisan experienced with wood
construction, carving and painting must fabricate signs.
(iii) Directory Signs
(A) Building mounted directory signs. Where
several businesses share a building, a directory sign (listing
14-94
tenant names) may be installed on the building, not to
exceed six (6) square feet. The sign area of directory signs
will not be subtracted from the property's allowable sign
area.
(B) Freestanding directory signs. Where a single
or multiple tenant business' entrance(s) do not front a public
street or the entrance door is significantly obscured due to
topographic, existing landscape, or other orientation of the
building making it difficult for motorists to see the entrance,
a freestanding directory sign (listing tenant name(s)) may
be installed on the same parcel of property. Such sign shall
not be taller than three (3) feet to the top of the sign and
shall not exceed four (4) square feet per tenant. When there
is more than one tenant in a building with the same
difficulty of entrance visibility, the tenants must combine
their directory signs into a single freestanding directory
sign, while still maintaining a maximum of four (4) square
feet per tenant. However, such freestanding directory signs
shall not exceed a total of twenty-five (25) square feet and
shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet. The sign area of
directory signs will not be subtracted from the property's
allowable sign area.
(iv) Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs of not taller
than five (5) feet and not greater than twenty-five (25) square feet
are allowed. Only indirect /exterior illumination is permissible.
Properties that have frontage on Lamar Alexander Parkway may
have freestanding signs eight (8) feet tall, but such signs can only
be located on the parkway side of the property.
(v) Window signs. Window signs are permissible;
however signs shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
window area;
(vi) Building mounted signs. Signs can be attached to
building facades at street level and shall not be roof mounted.
(vii) Perpendicular signs. Perpendicular signs must be at
least (8) feet above the sidewalk, but the underside of the sign
must not be more than twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk. Only
one (1) perpendicular sign may be installed per business and such
signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. If the property
originally had a theater marquis, similar marquis signs may be
installed if based on pictorial evidence.
(viii) Prohibited signs. Neon signs, flashing signs, signs
with intermittent lights, rotating signs, LED signs and internally
lit signs, are prohibited;
14-95
(ix) Sign lighting. Only indirect/external lighting is
allowed. Light directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it
illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly on
public right-of-way or residential premises.
(x) Awning signs. Imprints of a sign or logo shall be
allowed on an awning and will be included in the total signage
calculation, with the exception of applicants whom use the awning
sign allowance set forth in subsection ii(B);
(xi) Sandwich board sign allowance. Each business may
have one sandwich board sign. Sandwich board signs shall be
constructed of wood in an "A" shape and be heavy enough so that
strong winds do not allow it to blow over. Sandwich boards shall
not be left outside of the building when the business closes, or the
city may remove and dispose of the sign. Sandwich board signs
cannot exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches and shall not exceed
seven (7) square feet (per side).
(xii) Materials: Signs shall be constructed of natural
materials such as wood, brick, or stone, etched glass or constructed
of materials that successfully replicate these natural materials.
However, professional painted metal signs are also acceptable
provided they have a finished thickness of at least one-half inch
(1/2") achieved by mounting the metal sign on a substrate or by
having a frame. Metal signs must have three-dimensional artwork
embellishments covering up to at least fifty percent (50%) of the
sign area.
(xiii) Sign colors: Excessively bright, fluorescent, or glaring
colors are prohibited on signs;
(xiv) Sign review and permitting. Any new sign
application in the downtown zones must be submitted to the
planning department staff for review then forwarded to the sign
inspector for issuance of a sign permit.
(xv) Signs prohibited in rights-of-way. Permanent or
temporary signs shall not be installed in the road right-of-way.
"Sandwich board" signs may be installed on sidewalks as long as
they comply with the "Sandwich board" sign allowance above and
do not block a clear path along the sidewalk of thirty-six (36)
inches.
(xvi) Accessory signage installed to glass. Strobe lights,
rotating and/or flashing emergency vehicle - type lights , neon
lights strips or window outlines installed within the business and
visible to the public, even if not affixed to the glass, is prohibited.
Holiday lights installed seasonally are exempt from this
requirement.
14-96
(xvii) Non-conforming sign. All sign-related provisions set
forth in § 14-218(17), in the City of Maryville Land Development
Regulations, and as later amended, are applicable within the
downtown zones, unless otherwise addressed in this chapter.
(xviii) Amortization of non-conforming sign.
(A) A non-conforming sign that exceeds the size
and height by more than ten percent or that is
nonconforming in some other way shall, within one (1) year
after the effective date of this chapter, be altered to comply
with the provisions of this article or be removed.
(B) If the nonconformity consists of too many
freestanding signs on a single lot or an excess of total sign
area on a single lot, the person responsible for the violation
may determine which sign or signs need to be altered or
removed to bring the development into conformance.
(xix) Reconstruction of previous signs. Property owners
whom propose to reconstruct signs that are clearly documented
through photographic evidence or other documentation may occur
on their original location. Such reconstructed signs shall be
constructed with materials, design detailing and decorative
features to match or closely approximate the original sign. If signs
proposed to be reconstructed do not comply with sign regulations
of this chapter, the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board will
review the applicant's proposal.
(xx) Signs excluded from regulation. The following signs
are exempt from regulation under this section.
(A) Address numbers, signs posted on private
property relating to private parking or warning the public
against trespassing or danger from animals.
(B) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to
the authorization of a governmental body, including legal
notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic,
directional, or regulatory signs.
(C) Official signs of a non-commercial nature
erected by public utilities.
(xxi) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. All
sign-related provisions set forth in § 14-218 (4), (5) (13) (except
signs prohibited as set forth in number xiii above; no internally lit
signs, see number ix above), (14), (15), (16) and (18) of this chapter
as later amended, are applicable within the downtown zones,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(i) Accessories/details:
(i) Details such as shutters, balconies, overhangs,
exterior lighting, security lighting, etc. must be reviewed and
14-97
approved by the Maryville Downtown Design Review Board as
compatible with the design guidelines of the zone and its
compatibility with adjacent properties;
(ii) An "edge" must be created for all properties with
street planting and/or walls where deemed appropriate by the
Maryville Downtown Design Review Board;
(iii) New construction shall be sensitive to the historic
quality and restored nature of adjacent zones;
(iv) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired
rather than replaced. The new material should match the
material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and
other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of
features substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence;
and
(v) Blank walls are discouraged. Painted murals and
other wall decorations on elevations may be appropriate as
reviewed by the Downtown Maryville Design Review Board.
(vi) Ancillary structures and equipment: HVAC
equipment, above ground grease traps, electric generators, fuel
tanks, trash compactors, dumpsters, garbage containment areas,
storage bins and similar ancillary structures and equipment shall
be screened from public roads with landscaping walls or fences.
Proposed screening, ancillary structures and equipment shall be
submitted for board review before installation.
(j) Demolition: The distinguishing original qualities or
character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not
be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or
distinctive architectural feature should be avoided when possible.
Demolition shall not occur unless one or the more following conditions are
met:
(i) If a building has lost its architectural and historical
integrity and importance and its removal will not result in a more
negative, less appropriate visual effect on the district;
(ii) If the denial of the demolition will result in an
unreasonable economic hardship on the applicant as determined
by the design review board;
(iii) If the public safety and welfare requires the removal
of a structure or building; and
(iv) If the structural instability or deterioration of a
property is demonstrated through a report by a structural engineer
or architect. Such a report must clearly detail the property's
physical condition, reasons why rehabilitation is not feasible, and
cost estimates for rehabilitation versus demolition. In addition to
14-98
this report, there shall be a separate report that details future
action of this site.
(k) Land uses: Because of the immense scale and proximity to
the "big" side of the greenbelt, a wide variety of developments will be
appropriate, including larger buildings.
(i) Residential: Attached homes including apartments,
condominiums, and lofts above storefronts are permitted.
Single-family detached housing is not appropriate in this zone.
(ii) Mixed uses: Appropriate uses should accommodate
a variety of needs, especially those of residents who live nearby
and tourists who visit downtown. Most types of land uses are
encouraged in the central business district support zone including
those for entertainment, employment, service, shopping, liquor
stores and light manufacturing are permitted if the building they
are housed in structures meeting all design standards. New
developments should take full advantage of the close proximity to
the Greenbelt and the proximity of the central business district.
Scale of proposed developments in comparison to other individual
developments in the zone is most important when considering
whether or not a use shall be appropriate.
(iii) Prohibited uses: Adult establishments, heavy
manufacturing, mini-storage, landfill or mining, hazardous
occupancies or storage of hazardous materials, or any uses not
determined to be compatible with the function, character, and
intent of the central business district support zone.
(9) Zoning districts - College Hill Historic District The College Hill
Historic District has the largest concentration of extant historic structures in
the City of Maryville. Since the 1940s, new construction has been limited in the
district and it retains much of its original character. In order to preserve and
enhance the integrity of this important area of Maryville, design guidelines
specific to this district are in place to ensure historically appropriate and
compatible construction. Land use controls allow only single-family residential
uses, and prohibit further conversion of homes into duplexes or multiplexes. All
provisions set forth regarding this district are in § 14-209(11).
(a) Lot dimensions:
(i) Minimum lot area: All lots shall be at least fourteen
thousand (14,000) square feet in area.
(ii) Setbacks shall be consistent with the maintenance of
existing setbacks of adjacent structures, and compatible with the
massing, scale, size and architectural features of such structures.
(iii) Lot frontage: Every lot shall be provided with a
minimum of sixty (60) feet of frontage on an existing or new
public/private street as provided in § 14-214(7).
14-99
(iv) Flag lots: Creation of flag lots, as defined in
§ 14-202(beer board) may not be permitted within the College Hill
Historic District, unless a continuous width along the narrow
(access) portion of the lot is at least sixty (60) feet wide.
(b) The "College Hill Historic District Design Guidelines" were
adopted to regulate the following items in the College Hill Historic
District: Landscaping, driveways, parking lots, fencing, lighting, signs,
foundation walls, porch location, porch flooring, porch columns, porch
railing, exterior stairs, exterior staircases, handicap ramps, entrances,
entrance elements, screen and storm doors, windows, storm window,
exterior shutters and blinds, siding, roof forms, roof materials, chimney,
ornamentation, paint awnings, HVAC, satellite dishes, solar panels,
recreational structures, new construction, reconstruction, height, porch
configuration, doors and windows, setbacks, rhythm, building materials,
entrances, additions, roof forms, relocation and demolition.
(c) Land uses: Single-family only. In order to maintain the
integrity and to recognize the fragility of the college hill historic district,
there must not be further conversion of homes from single family to
duplexes or multiplexes.
(i) Residential: Existing duplexes and apartments at the
time of this ordinance's passage may be grand fathered uses.
Otherwise, only single-family residential uses will be allowed
within the entirety of the College Hill Historic District.
(ii) Mixed uses: Mixed use development is prohibited in
the College Hill Historic District.
(iii) Prohibited uses: All uses except single family
residential uses.
(10) Zoning districts - College Hill Historic Overlay Zone. The College
Hill Historic Overlay Zone has been created and the "Design Guidelines for the
College Hill Historic District" in order to preserve the historic character through
the application of design guidelines. Any construction requiring a building
permit must apply for a certificate of appropriateness at the planning
department and have their building plans reviewed by the historic zoning
commission.
(11) Zoning districts - High Intensity Commercial District. The High
Intensity Commercial District is a highly visible commercial zone which will
accommodate large scale conglomerate developments consisting of at least
twelve (12) stores or parcels and at least 5 (five) acres in area. The district
encourages mixed use developments including department stores, multifamily
residential, assisted living, family entertainment uses, specialty stores, and
theme or fast food restaurants. The district will serve both local and regional
markets, and shall be located only where traffic can be absorbed on or along
major arterial highways.
(a) Lot Dimensions:
14-100
(i) Lot size: no minimum
(ii) Lot width: no minimum
(b) Setbacks: Setback from existing utility easements must be
observed, otherwise:
(i) Front: 40 ft. minimum SETBACK from property line.
(ii) Side: no minimum unless abutting residential uses;
25 ft. if abutting residential uses.
(iii) Rear: 10 ft. minimum if not abutting residential uses;
25 ft. if abutting residential uses.
(c) Parking: Parking: total coverage cannot exceed forty-five
(45%) of the entire lot.
(d) Height: The maximum height for all new buildings shall not
exceed either three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet.
(e) Signs. Shared Tenant Sign: A sign shared by some or all
occupants in the development. Each development in the HIC zone may
have a shared tenant sign installed on each street frontage with the
following maximum dimensions:
(i) One (1) sign with a thirty (30) ft. maximum
height/three hundred (300) sq. feet maximum area (if located
outside the Parkway District Overlay Zone) shall be allowed for
the entire development.
(ii) Up to three (3) signs with a twenty (20) ft. maximum
height/one hundred (100) sq. feet maximum area (if located outside
the Parkway District Overlay Zone) shall be allowed along each
street frontage on the exterior of the development (if bounded by
four or more streets, only three (3) signs will be allowed, one for
each street frontage).
(iii) Within Parkway District Overlay Zone, twenty (20)
ft. maximum height/seventy-five (75) sq. feet maximum area for all
shared tenant signs.
Conditions:
(i) Each shared tenant sign must observe the minimum
setback of ten (10) feet from the property line/right of way line.
(ii) Flashing or intermittent lights other than time and
temperature shall not be permitted.
(iii) The developer or property owner will determine which
business signage will be attached to such sign provided that the
maximum surface area and height are not exceeded;
(iv) Changeable copy (message signs) shall not be allowed.
Shared Tenant Signs located off premises:
(v) May be allowed if an easement has direct access to
the development.
Freestanding Signs:
14-101
(i) Shall only be allowed for individual lots inside the
high intensity development.
(ii) One (1) freestanding monument signs not exceeding
five (5) ft. in height and twenty-five (25) square feet in area
(monument style) shall be allowed on individual lots.
Building signs:
(i) If business has one side of street frontage: Square
footage allowed for building signs shall be determined by
multiplying the number of linear feet of frontage of the lot by 1.0
feet, not to exceed a total of 200 square feet.
(ii) If a business has two (2) sides of street frontage:
Square footage allowed for building signs shall be determined by
multiplying the number of linear feet of frontage of the lot by one
(1.0) feet, not to exceed a total of one hundred fifty (150) square
feet for each side of street frontage.
(f) Land uses:
Conditions:
Property must already be zoned business transportation;
property must have more than twelve individual businesses
within the lot or development and at have least five (5)
acres; and road frontage connected to development must be
at least four hundred (400) feet.
(i) Residential: Attached homes including apartments,
condominiums and lofts above storefronts are encouraged.
Single-family detached housing is prohibited in this zone.
(ii) Mixed uses: Because of the large scale of
development, appropriate land uses should accommodate a variety
of regional needs, especially those for employment, liquor stores
(retail, dining, shopping, etc. and other high-visibility/high
intensity commercial uses.
(iii) Prohibited uses: Adult establishments, heavy
manufacturing, mini-storage, landfill or mining, mobile home
parks, hazardous occupancies or storage of hazardous materials,
or any uses not determined to be compatible with the function and
intent of the High Intensity Commercial Zone.
This section shall supersede all other City of Maryville
ordinances related to planning signs and land use control.
(12) Zoning districts - Oak Park Historic District. The Oak Park
Historic District has a large concentration of extant historic structures in the
City of Maryville. Since the 1940s, new construction has been limited in the
district and it retains much of its original character. In order to preserve and
enhance the integrity of this important area of Maryville, design guidelines
specific to this district are in place to ensure historically appropriate and
compatible construction.
14-102
(a) Land uses: The Oak Park Historic District shall not change
adopted underlying zoning district categories at the time of the Oak Park
Historic District's passage, nor preclude property owners from seeking
future variances, rezonings and/or special exceptions available by law.
At the time of the Oak Park Historic District's passage, the historic
district includes property zoned residential, office and business and
transportation. Within Zone I, "residential," further conversion of single
family hones into duplexes and multi-family uses shall be prohibited and
new development is restricted to allow only single family homes. The
Oak Park Historic District Design Guidelines shall apply to Zone I,
"residential." Within Zone II, "business and transportation: and Zone VI,
"office," all applicable land development regulations set forth in the
Maryville Land Development Regulations shall apply to property and
their respective zoning districts within the historic district boundaries
with the addition of the Oak Park Historic District Design Guidelines.
In instances where the land development regulations conflict with the
Oak Park Historic District Design Guidelines, the design guidelines shall
prevail.
(b) Lot dimensions: The lot sizes shall be a minimum of sixteen
thousand (16,000) square feet if used for residential purposes, regardless
of the underlying zoning category. The minimum lot sizes of property
within the Oak Park Historic District used for non-residential uses shall
comply with § 14-214(1). In addition, all lot dimensions shall be
consistent with the maintenance of existing setbacks of adjacent
structures and shall be compatible with the massing, scale, size and
architectural features of such structures.
(c) The "Oak Park Historic Design Guidelines" were adopted to
regulate the following items in the Oak Park Historic District:
landscaping, driveways, parking lots, fencing, lighting, signs, foundation
walls, porch location, porch flooring, porch columns, porch railing,
exterior stairs, exterior staircases, handicap ramps, entrances, entrance
elements, screen and storm doors, windows, storm windows, exterior
shutters and blinds, siding, roof forms, roof materials, chimneys,
ornamentation, paint, awnings, HVAC, satellite dishes, solar panels,
recreational structures, new construction, reconstruction, height, and
demolition. The "Oak Park Historic Design Guidelines" are incorporated
herein by reference.
(13) Zoning districts - Oak Park Historic Overlay Zone. The Oak Park
Historic Overlay Zone has been created and the "Design Guidelines for the Oak
Park Historic District" are hereby adopted by reference in order to recognize and
enhance the character of the neighborhood through the application of design
guidelines. Any construction requiring a building permit must apply for a
certificate of appropriateness at the planning department and have their
building plans reviewed by the historic zoning commission.
14-103
(14) Zoning districts - Estate Zone. The Estate Zone is the most
restrictive residential district intended to be used for single-family residential
areas with low population densities. This district is created and intended to be
protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to
the single-family residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness,
order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and
open space for dwellings and accessory facilities found within this district.
(a) Lot dimensions: All newly created lots shall have a
minimum lot size of one acre (43,560 square feet) regardless of the
availability of a sanitary sewer system provided by the public. All private
sewer systems shall meet the same minimum lot size.
(b) Setbacks:
(i) Front: All structures shall be no less than thirty (30)
feet from any public right-of-way.
(ii) Side: Single story dwellings shall be no less than ten
(10) feet from the side yard. For dwellings of more than one story,
there shall be a side yard requirement of not less than fifteen (15)
feet.
(iii) Rear: Primary structures shall be no less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
(iv) Unattached accessory buildings shall not be located
closer to any rear or side lot line than ten (10) feet. In no case
shall an accessory building be located in the front yard. Where the
high point of the roof exceeds twelve (12) feet in height, the
accessory building shall be setback from the lot boundary lines an
additional two feet for every foot of height exceeding twelve (12)
feet.
(c) Land uses:
(i) Permitted uses. Single-family residential structures
are permitted but this use does not include mobile homes as
defined by § 14-202 of this document. Home occupations uses are
permitted in the estate zone if they meet with criteria set forth in
§ 14-202 thereof.
(ii) Prohibited uses. Uses not listed in the permitted
section are prohibited.
(iii) Special uses. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
uses authorized and protected by state and federal legislation as
an example churches, synagogues, or temples shall be considered
a special exception use and shall be subject to the provision found
in § 14-204(9) special exceptions permits.
(d) Height: The maximum height for all new structures shall be
thirty-five feet. All other height provisions and regulations found in this
ordinance shall apply where applicable.
14-104
(e) Lot width: There shall be a minimum lot width of one
hundred fifty (150) feet at the front building line.
(15) Zoning districts - High Density Residential. The High Density
Residential zone classification is a residential district established to provide
areas for apartments and condominium developments at thirteen dwelling units
per gross acre where it is determined high densities of populations can be
accommodated. Quality of building materials and design, and efficiency of land
is encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for
apartments and condominiums found within this district.
(a) Lot size and location: All newly created High Density
Residential district lots or tracts shall contain a minimum of ten (10)
acres and either have:
(i) Frontage along U.S. Highway 321 West or U.S.
Highway 411 South between Foothills Mall Drive to the corporate
limits; or
(ii) Have frontage along a collector street, as defined by
the city's 2006 major road plan, between Foothills Mall Drive and
the corporate limits and connect to or intersect with U.S. Highway
321 West or U.S. Highway 411 South with a minimum
classification of a collector street that is eight hundred (800) linear
feet or less.
All lots shall be available to public sanitary sewer systems and
water systems.
(b) Setbacks and height requirements:
(i) Front: All structures shall be no closer than one
hundred feet (100') from any public right-of-way or proposed
right-of-way fifty feet (50') in width or greater.
(ii) Side: No structure shall be built within fifty feet (50')
of any property line regardless of height, except where interior lot
lines are common to parcels each zoned High Density Residential,
in which case the side yard setback may be reduced to twenty-five
feet (25').
(iii) Height: Multi family residential buildings containing
four (4) or more dwelling units may not exceed thirty-five feet (35')
unless the fire chief or his designee certifies to the permit issuing
authority that such a building is designed to provide adequate
protection against the dangers of fire. In the event that the
property or a portion of the property is within the Parkway
Overlay District, that portion of the property shall be limited to a
maximum height of thirty-five feet (35').
(iv) Chimneys shall be allowed to exceed the height
limitation.
(b) Lot frontage and lot width: There shall be a minimum
requirement of one hundred fifty feet (150') at the building width and
14-105
each lot shall front a public right-of-way with a minimum lot frontage of
no less than one hundred feet (100').
(c) Total gross floor area and open space:
(i) The total developed gross floor area of all primary and
accessory uses and structures shall not exceed forty percent (40%)
of the total site area.
(ii) A total of 1.5 acres shall be set aside for useable play
area for all residents of the high density residential district.
Enclosed sauna and exercise rooms, meeting or activity rooms, and
clubhouses are recreational areas that shall not satisfy the open
space requirements. Unenclosed recreational facilities such as
tennis courts, racquet ball courts, and swimming pools are uses
that will satisfy this requirement.
(iii) All open space shall be maintained in one of the
following methods: (1) by the developer or management authority
of the development or by (2) a homeowner's association established
by deed restriction.
(iv) All common space within the high density residential
development shall be maintained by the developer or management
authority of the development.
(d) Land uses:
(i) Permitted uses: All multi-family apartments and
multi-family residences as defined in 14-202(1) of this document.
Accessory structures normally associated with large acreage
developments, which may include but not limited to swimming
pools, laundry rooms, clubhouses, etc. All proposed commercial
and retail activities shall be reviewed and approved by the board
of zoning appeals. All signage pertaining to the commercial area
shall be regulated by the board of zoning appeals and not subject
to the city's general ordinance regarding signs.
(ii) Prohibited uses: All uses not listed in the permitted
section are prohibited and have been determined to be
incompatible with the function, character and intent of the High
Density Residential district.
(e) Density: The minimum building site area for dwellings shall
be one (1) lot or parcel of ten (10) acres or greater. The maximum density
permitted shall not exceed thirteen (13) units per acre.
(f) Conditions and other performance requirements: If deemed
necessary by the planning commission a detailed analysis and study of
the public and private infrastructure serving the parcel shall be
performed by the developer's engineer and consultants prior to any
request to rezone or designate any property High Density Residential.
14-106
(g) Design standards: The following standards shall apply to the
design of attached multi-family, accessory commercial uses and accessory
structures within high-density residential zones.
(i) Wall and roof planes and materials: No flat-faced
concrete block is allowed on exterior walls of any structure that
face adjacent single family uses or public roads. No flat roofs are
allowed if the structure exceeds more than one story, except for
portions of roofs constructed as parapet walls to conceal HVAC
equipment.
(ii) Any of the following elements shall repeat no less
than thirty (30) feet, both horizontally and vertically: changes of
wall and roof planes with at least a three (3) foot projection or
recess; patios; porches; awnings; stairwells, entrances; color
change; construction material change; chimney; or bay-style
windows that project at least two feet. Elements that are not
acceptable as a means to comply with the requirement above
include: gutter downspouts; garage doors; retaining walls; common
hallways parallel to outside walls not including stairwells; window
and door frames; shutters; structural or decorative columns; or
narrow extensions (less than three feet wide) of fire walls. Garage
doors shall be flush or recessed back from walls that contain living
space.
(iii) Dumpsters: Dumpsters shall be required for
developments containing more than three units. All dumpsters
must be screened but flat-faced block is not allowed.
(iv) Stairs: Stairwells shall be covered and integrated
within the building envelope.
(v) HVAC equipment: HVAC equipment shall meet the
building setback dimensions. If wall mounted HVAC are proposed
to serve multifamily units above the ground floor level, screening
shall be incorporated into the wall to conceal the equipment.
Large ground mounted HVAC condensers shall be located or
mitigated through construction of a sound absorption enclosure to
minimize noise to abutting single family residential uses.
(vi) Roof vents: Roof vents shall be painted to match the
roofing material color.
(vii) External wall and roof mounted lights: External wall
or roof mounted flood lights shall not be installed on walls that
face abutting single family residential uses.
(viii) Perimeter fences: Fences constructed along property
lines that abut single family uses and public roads shall not be
constructed of unfinished concrete block, chain link or other
similar metal material and shall not have a continuous plane of
more than one hundred (100) feet. Reveals or projections (at least
14-107
two (2) foot deep and two (2) feet wide), wall offsets of at least
three feet, or evergreen trees (at least eight (8) feet tall at planting
within the property line) shall be used at least every one hundred
(100) feet on the outside of the fence. The exterior material, color
and structural integrity of perimeter fences and landscaping shall
be maintained by the developer or management authority of the
development or by a homeowner's association established by deed
restriction.
(ix) Landscaping: Development of multi-family units
must provide a landscape buffer around all property lines except
the main frontage road. Such landscape buffer shall meet the
landscaping and lighting specifications set forth in § 14-213(6) . In
addition, all development of multi-family units in a High Density
Residential districts shall provide and maintain an area or areas
of landscaping at least 10 percent (10%) of the parcel's gross area.
Such landscaped area shall be comprised with a minimum planting
of grass and storm water detention/retention areas shall not be
applied toward this requirement. In addition, at least one,
two-inch caliper tree shall be planted anywhere on the parcel for
every two thousand square feet of paved area (paved areas include
private streets, parking spaces, driveways, and paved storage
areas. Preservation of existing trees may be applied toward this
requirement. Areas of landscaping that are planted in order to
satisfy the landscape buffer requirements noted above, may be
applied toward the minimum 10 percent (10%) landscape area
requirement.
(h) Road access: If the property abuts two or more roads, the
development shall provide access to at least two of the roads. If the
property only abuts one road, the main road integral to the project shall
be looped.
(16) Zoning districts - Industrial. The Industrial Zone is established to
provide areas in which the principal uses are manufacturing, processing,
creating, repairing, assembly of goods, merchandise and equipment,
warehousing and distribution operations, commercial operations and offices for
research and services not necessarily related to manufacturing or industrial
uses. Other uses which may be found within the Industrial Zone are
educational and recreational facilities, miscellaneous public and semi-public
facilities, public utilities and associated structures and other uses which in the
opinion of the Maryville Board of Appeals are appropriate uses.
(a) Dimensions: All newly created lots shall have a minimum
lot size of one acre (43,560 square feet) regardless of the availability of a
sanitary sewer system provided by the public. All private sewer systems
shall meet the same minimum lot size.
14-108
(b) Setbacks: All setback provisions are found in § 14-213(7) of
this document.
(c) Lot width: There shall be a minimum lot width of one
hundred (100) linear feet at the front building line.
(d) Height: The maximum height for all new structures shall
have a fifty-five (55) foot height limitation. All other height provisions
and regulations found in § 14-213(8) shall apply where applicable.
(e) Land uses:
(i) Permitted uses. Without limiting the generality of
the following list, the following uses are examples of businesses,
operations, and facilities within the Industrial Zone: general
warehousing and storage; lumber yard and building materials,
storage; scrap and salvage operations; incinerators; production and
storage of chemicals and associated products; petroleum bulk
storage distribution facilities and operations; assembly; processing
manufacturing; production; fabrication; creating of merchandise,
products, and goods for assembly or sale, or uses determined
compatible by the board zoning appeals. Auto body shops for
damage and collision repair shall be permitted within the
Industrial districts. Said uses shall be in accordance with
commercial design guidelines, commercial fencing regulations and
all other applicable regulations found within this document.
(ii) Prohibited uses. All uses that are not listed in the
permitted section or determined by the land use administrator or
board of zoning appeals to be incompatible with the function,
character, and intent of the Industrial zone.
(17) Zoning districts - Institutional. The Institutional zone is
established and designed to provide an area in which the principal use of land
is for traditional academic and educational institutions and for complimentary
and accessory uses associated with a college campus and environment. Other
uses which may be found within the Institutional zone are recreational facilities,
residential uses such as dormitories, support structures and facilities, offices,
training and educational facilities, and limited retail outlets. This section does
not address nor regulate whether personnel and facilities are managed by the
college personnel or independent contractors.
(a) Size and location. All newly created Institutional districts
shall have a minimum area of two hundred (200) acres and have and
maintain approximately thirty percent (30%) open space. Institutional
districts shall have a minimum frontage of at least four hundred feet
(400') along U.S. Highway 321 and every approved district shall be
available to sanitary sewer systems provided by the public or have a
private sewer system approved by the local health department. Water
and power services must be provided by a public utility.
14-109
(b) Setbacks. All setback provisions found in § 14-215, density
and dimensional regulations, subsection (7): building setback
requirements of this document shall apply.
(c) Height. The maximum height for all new structures in this
district shall have a fifty-five foot (55') height limitation. All other height
provisions and regulations found in § 14-215 Density and dimensional
regulations, subsection (8): building height requirements shall apply
when applicable.
(d) Land uses. (i) Permitted uses. Without limiting the
generality of the following list the following uses are examples of
activities within an Institutional district: auditoriums, cemeteries,
civic, cultural or community facilities, health clinic facilities,
colleges, and other schools and institutions for academic or
recreational instruction, research and testing laboratories,
libraries, museums, reading rooms, classrooms both indoor and
outdoors, art galleries, conference and training facilities,
commercial restaurants not designed to attract off campus clients,
dining facilities, dormitories, and residential uses for college
students, staff, faculty, and visitors in support of academic setting,
indoor recreational facilities, outdoor recreational facilities
including stadiums, tennis courts, swimming pools, soccer fields or
similar uses, religious buildings and structures, storage and
maintenance or similar uses, retail outlets for the sale of
traditional college materials, automatic teller machines, satellite
dishes, and college owned and operated telecommunications tower,
office facilities and similar uses both centralized and within each
of the uses listed above.
(ii) Prohibited uses. All uses that are not listed in the
permitted section or determined by the land use administrator or
board of zoning appeals to be incompatible with the function, and
intent of the Institutional zone.
(18) Zoning districts - High Intensity Retail District. The High
Intensity Retail (H.I.R.) District is established to support and encourage
concentrated retail development along major road corridors where most types
of public infrastructure and services are already present. Shopping and dining
are among the main activities in this district, and a primary goal for this zone
is to stimulate retail-oriented economic activity and the accompanying
generation of sales tax revenues. Mixed use developments and certain non-retail
uses that are compatible with the retail uses may also be allowed in the district,
subject to specific locational criteria.
(a) Land uses: As noted above, the purpose of the High
Intensity Retail district is to stimulate retail-oriented economic activity
within certain major road corridors. In order to accomplish this goal, the
primary uses permitted in the zone consist of retail establishments,
14-110
restaurants and hotels (Group "A"). These uses are intended to locate in
the prime commercial sites within the district(s), and may front upon or
face major roadways. Certain non-retail uses (Group "B") which are
compatible with the retail uses are allowed if they are located on
"collector" or "local" streets, or in the interior of a mixed use development.
Any land use not listed in Group "A" or Group "B" shall be prohibited in
the High Intensity Retail district.
GROUP "A" USES GROUP "B" USES
Retail uses, including, but not
limited to:
Department stores
Apparel stores
Shoe stores
Sporting goods stores
Communication, computer stores,
and electronic outlets and retailers
Big box retailers
Outlet stores
Home furnishing stores
Office supply stores
Pharmacies
Jewelry stores
Appliance stores
Pet and pet supply stores
Liquor stores
Health food stores
Supermarkets
Meat markets
Ice cream shops
Bakeries
Restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, etc.
Hotels
Movie theaters
Offices
Banks, savings and loans, credit
unions, retail brokerage offices and
other financial institutions
Personal services
Second story residences
Attached or multi-family residential
housing units, as a part of a mixed
use or planned unit development
Medical offices
Medical laboratories
*Group "B" uses shall not front, adjoin or directly face streets classified as
"arterials." Such uses may be located along lower classified streets or in the
interior of a mixed use development.
(b) Lot dimensions:
(i) Lot size: Lots containing a single building and a
single tenant shall have a minimum lot size of thirty thousand
14-111
(30,000) square feet. A single building with two (2) or more tenants
shall be on a lot of at least one (1) acre. For a unified development
having two (2) or more buildings and tenants, and which is under
common design, construction and management, the size of the
overall development must be at least one and one-half (1 1/2) acres,
but there shall be no minimum lot size requirement for the
individual buildings. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
condominium form of ownership of any portion of a building in the
HIR zone.
(ii) Lot width: For individual lots which are not within
a unified development, the ratio of lot depth to lot width shall be
no more than 3:1.
(c) Setbacks: Building setbacks from existing utility easements
must be observed, otherwise:
(i) Front: As per § 14-214(7) of the Maryville Municipal
Code ("Building setback requirements");
(ii) Side and rear: No minimum if not abutting
residential uses; twenty-five feet (25) foot if abutting residential
uses.
(d) Parking and access:
(i) Parking lots shall be designed to connect with
adjoining properties unless the engineering department
determines that such cross connections (whether current or future)
would be unfeasible due to topographic considerations, safety
concerns or internal or external traffic circulation issues. A large
scale, unified development may propose a frontage road to provide
access to and between individual lots. Such frontage road would be
dedicated to and accepted for public use, and would go through the
standard platting and site plan approval processes.
(ii) Each commercial lot shall be allowed at least one (1)
access point where it is determined by the engineering department
that such driveway is safe and in accordance with any applicable
master plan of the development. Driveways onto public roads shall
be spaced a minimum of one hundred feet (100') apart measured
from the centerlines of the driveways.
(e) Height: The maximum height for all new buildings shall not
exceed seventy-five feet (75'). The "height of a structure" definition, as
found in Article II of this document shall apply to this provision.
(f) Signs: The High Intensity Retail zone is subject to all other
existing sign regulations found in chapter 2 of the municipal code, titled,
"Zoning and Land Use Control," § 14-218 Signs. In addition to the
existing sign regulations, the following sign standards will apply to the
High Intensity Retail zone.
14-112
(i) Total sign surface area for all signs: Subject to the
provisions of this section, the maximum sign surface area on any
lot, for a single tenant building, in the High Intensity Retail
district shall be determined by multiplying the number of linear
feet of street frontage of the lot by one and one-half feet (1.5'). For
multiple tenant buildings, the maximum sign area for each tenant
space shall be determined by multiplying the width of each
storefront by a factor of one and one-half feet (1.5').
(ii) The sign surface area for a marquee or changeable
copy sign within the High Intensity Retail zoning district may not
exceed thirty (30) square feet. For Electronic Message Center
(EMC) signs, see § 14-218(13)(f). Only one (1) such sign per
development will be allowed, regardless of the number of tenants
or owners within the project.
(iii) Free-standing sign surface area: In no case may a
single side of a free-standing sign exceed seventy-five (75) square
feet if the lot on which the sign is located has less than two
hundred feet (200') of frontage on the street toward which the sign
is primarily oriented; one hundred (100) square feet on lots with
two hundred (200) or more but less than four hundred feet (400')
of frontage; and one hundred fifty (150) square feet on lots with
four hundred (400) or more feet of frontage.
In the High Intensity Retail zone, all free-standing signs
shall be either a monument or pylon style. Pole covers must be
attached to the pole of a pylon type sign. A pole cover is defined as
being an enclosure for concealing poles or other structural supports
of a ground sign.
(iv) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions: In the
High Intensity Retail zone, directional signs may not exceed ten
(10) square feet in size, be no more than four feet (4') in height, and
do not have to meet the required ten feet (10') setback from the
right-of-way line and/or property line. In the High Intensity Retail
zone, all directional signs shall be either a monument or pylon
style. Pylon dress covers must be attached to the pole of a pylon
type directional sign.
(v) In the High Intensity Retail zone, no permanent sign
face shall be constructed of plywood, Oriented Strand Board (OSB),
masonite, coroplast (corrugated plastic), or similar material. All
signs shall be fabricated and installed in a professional manner.
(g) Performance standards for drive-through facilities: The
following criteria shall apply to drive-through facilities within the High
Intensity Retail district:
(i) No structure shall have more than two (2) queuing
drive-through lanes.
14-113
(ii) All developments with drive-through facilities shall
provide an unobstructed emergency access around the
drive-through facility and structure.
(iii) All drive-through facilities shall place drive-through
lanes in the rear of the structure or away from the main road or
access. Any deviation from this requirement shall be approved by
the board of zoning appeals.
(iv) All drive-through facilities shall be screened with
grade changes, fences, walls or materials so as to minimize the
visual impact from the street.
(h) Article XI, part I, section 5: "Commercial Design Criteria 
City Wide" shall be applicable to the High Intensity Retail District, with
the following incentives available only in the H.I.R. zone to encourage the
use of brick, stone or a material that successfully simulates these
materials as an exterior building material, and to encourage the use of
landscaped berms between roads and parking lots.
(i) Buildings designed to incorporate at least fifty
percent (50%) of unpainted brick, stone or materials that
successfully simulate these materials as an exterior wall material
shall be allowed to extend required offsets of wall and roof planes
from thirty feet (30') to no less than every forty-five feet (45').
(ii) Sites designed with three foot (3') tall landscaped
berms between roads and parking lots shall be allowed to reduce
the required thirty percent (30%) open space requirement to
twenty-five percent (25%).
(iii) The landscaped berms are not intended to create a
solid wall of screening landscaping. Instead the combination of the
berm and vertical landscaping (trees, shrubs, boulders, etc.)
interspersed along the berm are intended to screen the view of
parked vehicles and help create an attractive defined edge between
roads and parking lots to avoid continuous pavement. The berms
shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
(iv) All other criteria of Section 5(a) 1 shall remain
applicable to this zone.
(i) The specific provisions of this section shall supersede all
other City of Maryville ordinances relating to land use control. Unless
otherwise provided for in this section, however, all other applicable
provisions of the zoning and land use ordinance shall apply to the High
Intensity Retail District.
(19) Zoning map - official zoning ,map. (a) There shall be a map
known and designated as the official zoning map, which shall show the
boundaries of all zoning districts within the city's planning jurisdiction.
This map shall be drawn on acetate or other durable material from which
14-114
prints can be made, shall be dated, and shall be kept in the planning
department.
(b) The official zoning map dated June 15, 2006 is adopted and
incorporated herein by reference. Amendments to this map shall be made
and posted in accordance with 14-209(18).
(c) Should the official zoning map be lost, destroyed, or
damaged, the administrator may have a new map drawn on acetate or
other durable material from which prints can be made. No further
council authorization or action is required so long as no district
boundaries are changed in this process.
(20) Zoning map- amendments to official zoning map. (a) Amendments
to the official zoning map are accomplished using the same procedures
that apply to other amendments to this ordinance.
(b) The administrator shall update the official zoning map as
soon as possible after amendments to it are adopted by the council. Upon
entering any such amendment on the map, the administrator shall
change the date of the map to indicate its latest revision. New prints of
the updated map may then be issued.
(c) No unauthorized person may alter or modify the official
zoning map.
(d) The planning department shall keep copies of superseded
prints of the zoning map for historical reference. (as added by
Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and amended by Ord. #2007-32, Nov. 2007,
Ord. #2007-33, Nov. 2007, Ord. #2008-47, Oct. 2008, Ord. #2008-48, Oct.
2008, Ord. #2008-61, Dec. 2008, Ord. #2010-05, Jan. 2010, Ord. #2010-14,
May 2010, Ord. #2011-03, Feb. 2011, 2011-10, March 2011,
Ord. #2013-17, Sept. 2013, Ord. #2016-07, March 2016, Ord. #2016-12,
April 2016, Ord. #2017-01, Feb. 2017, Ord. #2017-25, July 2017, Ord.
#2017-26, July 2017, Ord. #2017-27, July 2017, Ord. # 2018-02, Feb. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19, and Ord. #2019-03, Feb. 2019 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-210. Permissible uses. (1) Table of permissible uses. The table of
permissible uses should be read in close conjunction with the definitions of
terms set forth in this ordinance and the other interpretative provisions set
forth in the ordinance.
ZONING DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS
I. Residential
II. Business and Transportation
III. Environmental Conservation
IV. Central Community
V. Single Family
VI. Office
VII. Neighborhood
14-115
(Numbers denote: 1 - allowed by right, 2 - special exception, 3 - prohibited
TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
RESIDENTIAL
Single-family detached,
one dwelling unit per lot
Site-built and modular structures
Very low density (to 1.0 per acre) 1 3 1 3 1 3 1
Low density (to 4.0 per acre) 3
Low density (to 5.0 per acre) 2 2 3 1 3 1 1
Single-family detached, more than
one dwelling unit per lot
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
Site-built and modular structures
Low density (to 5.0 per acre) 2 3 3 1 3 1 1
Medium density (to 8.0 per acre) 2 3 3 2 3 2 2
Mobile Homes (mobile home park) 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Two-family Residences
Duplex 2 1 3 1 3 2 2
Primary residence with
accessory apartment 1 1 3 1 3 2 2
Two-family conversion 2 1 3 1 3 2 2
Multi-family Residences
Multi-family apartments 3 2 3 2 3 2 2
Multi-family townhouses 2 2 3 2 3 2 2
Multi-family conversion 2 2 3 2 3 2 2
Homes with special services
14-116
treatment, or supervision
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
Home for handicapped for infirmed** 2 2 3 2 3 3 3
Nursing care, intermediate care
homes 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Independent Living and Care Facility 2 1 3 1 3 3 3
Assisted living housing 2 2 2
Child care homes 2 2 3 2 3 3 3
Continuing Care Retirement
Community 2 2 3 2 3 3 3
Halfway houses 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Adult day care 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
**Group homes which meet the definition of same in the Tennessee Code
Annotate are allowed by right in the Residential zoning districts.
Miscellaneous, rooms for rent situations
Hotels, motels 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Rooming and boarding houses 3 1 3 1 3 2 3
Home occupations 1 3 1 2 1 1 1
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
Planned residential developments 2 3 2 2 2 2 2
Gathering place 2 2 3 2 3 3 2
Home occupations 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
SALES AND RENTAL OF GOODS,
MERCHANDISE AND EQUIPMENT
No storage of display of goods
outside fully enclosed building
High-volume traffic* 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Convenience stores 3 1 3 2 3 3 1
Wholesale sales 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Low-volume traffic generation 3 1 3 1 3 3 1
14-117
Storage and display of goods
outside fully enclosed building
allowed
High-volume traffic 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Low-volume traffic generation 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Wholesale sales 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
*Based on current ITE standards.
OFFICE, CLERICAL, RESEARCH AND
SERVICES NOT PRIMARILY RELATED
TO GOODS OR MERCHANDISE
All operations conducted entirely
within fully enclosed building
Operations designed to attract and
serve clients on the premises, e.g. office of attorneys,
physicians, and other professional offices and
land uses and personal care services and
providers of such services including cosmetologists
and barbers, licensed massage therapists, and
other trades that require a state license to practice
said employment 3 1 3 2 3 1 1
Operations designed to attract little or no
client traffic other than employees of the
entity operating the principle use 3 1 3 1 3 1 1
Body piercing, tattoo artists, and tattoo
parlors 3 1 3 3 3 3 3
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
Offices or clinics of physicians or dentists
with not more than 10,000 square feet of
floor area 3 1 3 1 3 1 1
Operations conducted within or outside fully
enclosed building
14-118
Operations designed to attract and
serve clients on the premises 3 1 3 2 3 2 2
Operations designed to attract little
or no client traffic other than the
employees of the entity operating the
principle use 3 1 3 1 3 2 2
Banks including those with
drive-in windows 3 1 3 2 3 2 2
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURING,
PROCESSING, CREATING, REPAIRING,
RENOVATING, PAINTING, CLEANING,
ASSEMBLY OF GOODS, MERCHANDISE
AND EQUIPMENT
All operations conducted entirely within
fully enclosed building
Majority of business volume done
with walk-in trade 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Majority of business volume done
with other than walk-in trade 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Operations conducted within or
Outside fully enclosed building 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Incinerator 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
Animal or poultry slaughter
Stockyards and rendering 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
EDUCATION, CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS,
PHILANTHROPIC, SOCIAL, FRATERNAL USES
Schools
Elementary and secondary 2 2 2 2 2 2 3
Trade or vocational 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Colleges, universities, community
colleges 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Churches, synagogues, and temples
1. Previously approved location for
a place of worship by the board
of appeals (See § 14-211(27)) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
14-119
2. Storefront locations (See § 14-211(27)) 3 1 3 1 3 1 1
Libraries, museums, art galleries
and similar uses 2 1 2 1 3 3 3
Social, fraternal clubs and lodges,
union halls and similar uses 3 1 2 2 3 3 3
Conference/training center 3 1 3 2 3 3 2
RECREATION, AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT
Activity conducted entirely within
building or substantial structure
Bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor
tennis and racquetball courts,
indoor athletic facilities and
similar uses 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Billard halls 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Movie theaters 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Coliseums, stadiums and similar
facilities designed to seat or
accommodate more than 1,000 people
simultaneously 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Activity conducted primarily outside
enclosed buildings or structure
Privately owned outdoor recreational 2
facilities (golf and country clubs,
swimming or tennis clubs or other uses,
when not associated with a residential
development) (i.e., not part of an
overall development the primary
land use of which is residential)
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
Subject to criteria found in article XI,
part 1. general provisions, section 10 3 2 2 2 3 3 3
Publicly owned and operated outdoor
recreational facilities (athletic fields,
tennis courts, swimming pools, parks,
golf courses when not associated
14-120
with a public institutional use, such
as schools 2 2 2 2 2 3 3
Golf driving ranges no accessory to
golf courses, miniature golf courses,
skateboard parks, water slides and
similar uses 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Horseback riding:
stables, when not associated with
residential development 2 3 2 3 3 3 3
Automobile and motorcycle racing
tracks 3 2 3 3 3 3 3
Drive-in movie theaters 3 2 3 3 3 3 3
Adult entertainment 3 1 3 3 3 3 3
INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENCE OR CARE OR
CONFINEMENT FACILITIES
Hospitals, clinic, other medical (including
mental health treatment facilities in access
of 10,000 square feet or floor area) 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Nursing care institutions, intermediate care
institutions, child care institutions 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
Institutions (other than halfway houses)
where mentally ill persons are confined 3 2 2 3 3 3 3
Penal and correctional facilities 3 2 2 3 3 3 3
RESTAURANTS, BARS, NIGHTCLUBS
No substantial carry-out or delivery service,
no service or consumption outside fully
enclosed structure 3 1 3 3 3 3 2
No substantial carry-out or delivery service,
no drive-in service, service or consumption
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
Outside fully enclosed allowed 3 1 3 3 3 3 2
Carry-out and delivery service, consumption
Outside fully enclosed structure allowed 3 1 3 3 3 3 2
Carry-out and delivery service, drive-in
service, service or consumption outside fully
14-121
enclosed structure allowed 3 1 3 3 3 3 2
No substantial carry out or delivery service,
and consumption outside and inside fully
enclosed allowed 3 1 3 2 3 3 2
Tearoom/café no substantial carry out or
delivery service, and consumption outside
and inside fully enclosed allowed 3 1 3 2 3 2 2
MOTOR VEHICLE-RELATED SALES AND
SERVICE OPERATIONS
Motor vehicle sales or rental 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Sales with installation of motor vehicle
parts or accessories 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Mobile home and motor home sales 3 1 3 3 3 3 3
Motor vehicle repair and maintenance,
including body work subject to the
provisions found elsewhere in this document
and specifically § 14-211 3 1 3 3 3 3 3
Gas sales 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Car wash 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
STORAGE AND PARKING
Automobile parking garages and lots not located
on a lot on which there is another principle
use to which the parking is related and required
shall be a special exception and in accordance
with Paragraph (e) of (9) of § 14-219, 2 1 3 3 3 3 3
Storage of goods not related to sale or use
of those goods on the same lot where they
are stored
Storage inside or outside completely
enclosed structures
Bulk petroleum storage 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
14-122
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
Liquefied petroleum gas storage
Freight and truck terminal 3 2 3 3 3 3 3
All storage within completely enclosed
Structures 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Storage inside or outside completely enclosed
Structures 3 1 3 3 3 3 3
Parking of vehicles or storage of equipment
outside enclosed structures where: (i) vehicles or
equipment are owned and used by the person
making use of the lot, and (ii) parking
or storage is more than a minor and incidental
part of the overall use made of the lot 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
SCRAP MATERIALS, SALVAGE
YARDS, JUNKYARDS, AUTOMOBILE
GRAVEYARDS 3 2 3 3 3 3 3
SERVICES RELATED TO ANIMALS
Veterinarian 3 1 3 2 3 2 2
Kennel 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Police stations 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Fire stations 2 1 3 1 3 3 3
Rescue squad, ambulance service 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Civil defense operation 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
AGRICULTURAL, SILVICULTURAL, MINING,
QUARRYING OPERATIONS
Agricultural operations, farming
Excluding livestock 2 3 2 3 3 3 3
Including livestock 3 3 2 3 3 3 3
Silvicultural operations 3 3 2 3 3 3 3
Mining or quarrying operations, including
on-site sales of products 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
14-123
Reclamation landfill 3 2 2 3 3 3 3
ZONES
LAND USE
I II III IV V VI VII
Leased Garden Area 3 2 2 2 3 3 3
MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC
FACILITIES
Post office 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
Sanitary landfill 3 2 2 3 3 3 3
Military Reserve, National Guard Centers 3 2 3 2 3 3 3
DRY CLEANER, LAUNDROMAT 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
UTILITY FACILITIES
Neighborhood 2 2 2 1 3 3 3
Community or Regional 2 2 2 2 3 3 3
TOWERS AND RELATED STRUCTURES
Towers, antennas 50 feet tall or less* 2 1 1 2 3 3 3
Towers, antennas more than 50 feet tall
and receive only earth station 3 1 2 2 3 3 3
FARMERS' MARKETS AND
HORTICULTURAL SALES
Farmers' markets 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
Horticultural sales with outdoor display 3 1 3 1 3 3 3
FUNERAL HOME 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
CEMETERY AND CREMATORIUM
Cemetery 3 2 2 2 3 3 3
Crematorium 3 2 2 3 3 3 3
NURSERY SCHOOLS; DAY CARE
CENTERS 2 1 3 1 3 3 3
14-124
ZONES
LAND USE I II III IV V VI VII
BUS STATION 3 1 3 3 3 3 3
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE
No on-premise sales 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
On-premise sales permitted 3 1 3 2 3 3 3
OFF-PREMISE SIGNS 3 2 3 3 3 3 3
SUBDIVISIONS
Major 1 2 2 2 1 1 1
Minor 1 2 2 2 1 1 1
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 2 2 3 2 2 2 2
ZONES
I. Residential
II. Business and Transportation
III. Environmental Conservation
IV. Central Community
V. Single Family
VI. Office
VII. Neighborhood
(2) Use of the designations 1, 2, 3 in table of permissible uses.
(a) Subject to (3), when used in connection with a particular use
in the table of permissible uses (1), the designation "1" means that the
use is permissible in the indicated zoning district with a zoning permit
issued by the administrator. The number "2" means a special exception
permit must be obtained from the Board of zoning appeals. The number
"3" indicates that the use is not permitted in the indicated zoning district.
(b) When the use proposed requires a special exception permit,
the process for review of the impact overlay zone shall be employed.
(3) Board of zoning appeals jurisdiction over uses otherwise
permissible with a zoning permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
ordinance, whenever the table of permissible uses provides that a use in a
non-residential zoning district or a non-conforming use in a residential zoning
district is permissible with a zoning permit, a special exception permit shall
nevertheless be required if the administrator finds that the proposed use would
14-125
have an extraordinary impact on neighboring properties or the general public.
In making this determination, the administrator shall consider, among other
factors, whether the use is proposed for an undeveloped or previously developed
lot, whether the proposed use constitutes a change from one principal use
classification to another, whether the use is proposed for a site that poses
peculiar traffic or other hazards or difficulties, and whether the proposed use is
substantially unique or is likely to have impacts that differ substantially from
those presented by other uses that are permissible in the zoning district in
question.
(4) Permissible uses and specific exclusions. (a) The list of
permissible uses set forth in (1) cannot be all inclusive; those uses that
are listed shall be interpreted liberally to include other uses that have
similar impacts to the listed uses.
(b) All uses that are not listed in (1), even given the liberal
interpretation mandated by subsection (a), are prohibited. (1) shall not
be interpreted to allow a use in one zoning district when the use in
question is more closely related to another specified use that is
permissible in other zoning districts.
(c) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the following uses are specifically prohibited in all districts:
(i) Any use that involves the manufacture, handling,
sale, distribution, or storage of any highly combustible or explosive
materials in violation of the city's fire prevention code,
(ii) Stockyards, slaughterhouses, rendering plants,
(iii) Use of travel trailer as a temporary or permanent
residence.
(iv) Short term rental units.
(5) Accessory uses. (a) The table of permissible uses classifies
different principal uses according to their different impacts. Whenever
an activity (which may or may not be separately listed as a principal use
in this table) is conducted in conjunction with another principal use and
the former use: (1) constitutes only an incidental or insubstantial part of
the total activity that takes place on a lot, or (2) is commonly associated
with the principal use and integrally related to it, then the former use
may be regarded as accessory to the principal use and may be carried on
underneath the umbrella of the permit issued for the principal use.
(Example: a swimming pool and/or tennis court complex is customarily
associated with and integrally related to a residential subdivision or
multi-family development and would be regarded as accessory to such
principal uses, even though such facilities if developed apart form a
residential development, would require a special exception permit.)
(b) For purposes of interpreting subsection (a):
14-126
(i) A use may be regarded as incidental or insubstantial
if it is incidental or insubstantial in and of itself or in relation to
the principal use.
(ii) To be "commonly associated" with a principal use it
is not necessary for an accessory use to be connected with such
principal use more times than not, but only that the association of
such accessory use with such principal use takes place with
sufficient frequency that there is common acceptance of their
relatedness.
(iii) Without limiting the generality of subsection (a) and
(b), the following activities, so long as they satisfy the general
criteria set forth above, are specifically regarded as accessory to
residential principal uses:
(A) Offices or studios within an enclosed building
and used by an occupant of a residence located on the same
lot as such building to carry on administrative or artistic
activities of a commercial nature, so long as such activities
do not fall within the definition of a home occupation.
(B) Hobbies or recreational activities of a
non-commercial nature.
(C) The renting out of one or two rooms within a
single-family residence (which one or two rooms do not
themselves constitute a separate dwelling unit) to not more
than two persons who are not part of the family that resides
in the single-family dwelling.
(D) Garage sales, so long as such activities conform
to the applicable Maryville Municipal Code provisions (see
§ 9-102).
(iv) Without limiting the generality of subsections (a) and
(b), the following activities shall not be regarded as accessory to a
residential principal use and are prohibited in residential districts.
(A) Storage outside of a substantially enclosed
structure of any motor vehicle that is neither licensed nor
operational.
(B) Parking outside a substantially enclosed
structure of more than four motor vehicles between the front
building line of the principal building and the street on any
lot used for purposes that fall within the following principal
use classifications:
Single-family residential
Two-family residential
Special residential
(v) A ''jumbotron" is an oversized video monitor that is
allowed as an accessory use for events at the Maryville High
14-127
School football stadium. A jumbotron shall be sited and oriented
so as to serve the audience at the event and to minimize its
visibility by persons who are off-site of the event. A jumbotron is
not a "billboard," a "digital billboard" or an "electronic message
center sign," as defined by § 14-218 "Signs" of this code.
(6) Permissible uses not requiring permits. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this ordinance, no zoning or special exception permit is
necessary for the following uses:
(a) Streets
(b) Electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, gas,
water and sewer lines, wires or pipes, together with supporting poles or
structures, located within a public right-of-way.
(c) Neighborhood utility facilities located within a public
right-of-way with the permission of the owner (state or city) of the
right-of-way.
(7) Change in use. (a) A substantial change in use of property occurs
whenever the essential character or nature of the activity conducted on
a lot changes. This occurs whenever:
(i) The change involves a change from one principal use
category to another.
(ii) If the original use is a planned unit development
(reviewed and approved through the Impact overlay provisions of
this ordinance), the relative proportion of space devoted to the
individual principal uses that comprise the planned unit
development changes to such an extent that the parking
requirements for the overall use are altered.
(iii) If the original used is a planned unit development
use, the mixtures of types of individual principal uses that
comprise the planned unit development use changes.
(iv) If the original use is a planned residential
development, the relative proportions of different types of dwelling
units change.
(v) If there is only one business or enterprise conducted
on the lot, that business or enterprise moves out and a different
type of enterprise moves in.
(b) A mere change in the status of property from unoccupied to
occupied or vice versa does not constitute a change in use. Whether a
change in use occurs shall be determined by comparing the two active
uses of the property without regard to any intervening period during
which the property may have been unoccupied, unless the property has
remained unoccupied for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days or has been abandoned.
(c) A mere change in ownership of a business or enterprise or
a change in the name shall not be regarded as a change in use.
14-128
(8) Combination uses. (a) When permitted uses are combined within
a development and include two or more principal uses that require
different types of permits (zoning, special exception), then the permit
authorizing the combination of uses shall be:
(i) A special exception permit if any of the principal uses
combined requires a special exception permit.
(ii) zoning permit in all other cases.
(b) When a combination of uses consists of a single-family
detached residential subdivision that is not integrally designed and
two-family or multi-family uses, the total density permissible on the
entire tract shall be determined by having the developer indicate on the
plans the portion of the total lot that will be developed for each purpose
and calculating the density for each portion as if it were a separate lot.
(c) When a combination use consists of a single-family detached,
integrally designed subdivision and two-family or multi-family uses, then
the total density permissible on the entire tract shall be determined by
dividing the area of the tract by the minimum area (in square feet) per
dwelling unit specified § 14-214.
(9) More specific use controls. Whenever a development could fall
within more than one use classification in the table of permissible uses, the
classification that most closely and most specifically describes the development
controls.
(10) Subject to all other applicable regulations found in this document
all applications for a privately owned recreational facility within a residential
district shall have a minimum of fifteen (15) acres and have direct access to a
public street with a street classification of minor collector or greater as
determined by the city's street classification system found in the Maryville Road
Plan.
(a) Proposed parking area(s) and any required landscaping
regulated either by the landscaping ordinance found herein or as part of
the approval process by the board.
(b) Hours of operation shall be between 8:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M.
(c) Proposed location of all outdoor facilities (including, but not
limited to such times as picnic tables, play areas, restroom, food
preparation areas, and refuse areas).
(d) Sanitary sewer/sub-surface sewer shall be placed into service
by the applicant in order to provided such services to users of the private
recreational facility.
(e) Commercial design guidelines shall apply.
(f) Site plan approval. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006,
and amended by Ord. #2006-42, Nov. 2006, Ord. #2007-18, June 2007,
Ord. #2007-32, Nov. 2007, Ord. #2008-47, Oct. 2008, Ord. #2009-18, May
2009, Ord. #2011-03, Feb. 2011, Ord. #2012-06, Feb. 2012, Ord. #2012-12,
May 2012, Ord. #2015-42, June 2015, Ord. #2015-69, Nov. 2015, Ord.
14-129
#2015-70, Nov. 2015, Ord. #2016-02, Jan. 2016, Ord. #2018-3, Feb. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19, and Ord. #2018-37, Nov. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-211. Supplemental use regulations. (1) General provisions -
planned residential developments. (a) Planned residential developments are
permissible only on tracts of at least five (5) acres located within a
Residential District or a Central Community District, when approved as
Special Exceptions in an Impact Overlay Zone.
(b) The overall density of a tract developed as a planned
residential development shall be determined as provided in § 14-214.
(c) Permissible types of residential uses within a planned
residential development include single-family detached dwellings,
two-family residences, and multi-family residences. At least fifty (50)
percent of the total number of dwelling units must be single-family
detached residences on lots of at least six thousand (6,000) square feet.
(d) A planned residential development shall be an integrally
designed subdivision.
(e) To the extent practicable, the two-family and multi-family
portions of a planned residential development shall be developed more
toward the interior than the periphery of the tract so that the
single-family detached residences border adjacent properties.
(f) In a planned residential development, the screening
requirements that would normally apply where a two-family or
multi-family development adjoins a single-family development shall not
apply within the tract developed as a planned residential development,
but all screening requirements shall apply between the tract so developed
and adjacent lots.
(2) General provisions - planned unit developments. (a) In a planned
unit development, the developer may make use of the land for any
purpose authorized in a particular PUD-impact overlay zoning district in
which the land is located, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Within any lot developed as a planned unit development, not
more than thirty-five (35) percent of the total lot area may be developed
for higher density residential purposes, not more than ten percent (10%)
of the total lot area may be developed for purposes that are permissible
only in a Central Community District, and not more than five (5) percent
of the total lot area may be developed for uses permissible only in the
Business and Transportation District (assuming the Planned Unit
Development - Impact overlay allows such uses).
(c) The plans for the proposed planned unit development shall
indicate the particular portions of the lot that the developer intends to
develop for higher density residential purposes, lower density residential
purposes, purposes permissible in the Central Community District (as
applicable), and purposes permissible only in a Business and
14-130
Transportation District (as applicable). For purposes of determining the
substantive regulations that apply to the planned unit development, each
portion of the lot so designated shall then be treated as if it were a
separate district, zoned to permit, respectively, higher density residential,
lower density residential, commercial or light industrial uses. However,
only one permit - a Special exception for planned unit development
impact overlay permit shall be issued for the entire development.
(d) The nonresidential portions of any planned unit
development may not be occupied until all of the residential portions of
the development are completed or their completion is assured by a bond
or like instrument to guarantee completion. The purpose and intent of
this provision is to ensure that the planned unit development - impact
overlay procedure is not used to create nonresidential uses in areas
generally zoned for residential uses except as part of an integrated and
well-planned, primarily residential development.
(3) General provisions - temporary residences used on construction
sites. (a) Temporary residences used on construction sites of nonresidential
premises shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the
project.
(b) Permits for temporary residences to be occupied pending the
construction, repair, or renovation of the permanent residential building
on a site shall expire within six (6) months after the date of issuance,
except that the administrator may renew such permit for one additional
period not to exceed three (3) months if he determines that such renewal
is reasonably necessary to allow the proposed occupants of the permanent
residential building to complete the construction, repair, renovation, or
restoration work necessary to make such building habitable.
(4) General provisions - sexually oriented businesses. (a) Sexually
oriented businesses as defined in Ord. #99-18, the terms of which by
reference are incorporated herein as fully as if set forth verbatim herein,
shall be permitted only within the business/transportation zone and shall
not be permitted on any property which is within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the following:
(i) a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities;
(ii) a public or private educational or child care facility,
including but not limited to day care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools,
intermediate schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, colleges, and the school grounds of any such facility,
provided that this requirement shall not apply to facilities used
primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
14-131
(iii) a boundary of any residential zoning district or the
property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, including single
family detached and attached dwellings, nursing homes and
assisted living facilities;
(iv) a public or private park or recreational area which
has been designated for park or recreational activities, including
but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming
pool, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle
paths, wilderness areas of other similar public land which is under
the control, operation or management of any government park and
recreation authority, private corporation or non-profit agency;
(v) an entertainment business which is oriented
primarily towards entertainment for children or families, including
but not limited to any business featuring movie theaters, game
rooms which include games intended primarily for children, or
other similar recreation or entertainment, or athletic facilities;
(vi) A funeral parlor, mausoleum or cemetery.
(b) For the purpose of subsection (a) of this section,
measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building
or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
use listed in subsection (a). The distance requirements of this section
shall only apply to properties within the city limits.
(c) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use shall not be rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the commencement of operations of the sexually
oriented business, of a use listed in subsection (a) within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business.
(d) No sexually oriented business may be established or
operated within one thousand (1,000) feet of a pre-existing sexually
oriented business. For the purpose of this subsection, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or
political boundaries, from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as the part of the premises where the pre-existing sexually oriented
business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises
proposed for the location of a sexually oriented business. No structure or
parcel that contains any sexually oriented business shall contain any
other kind of sexually oriented business.
(e) No sexually oriented business may be enlarged so as to
violate the provisions of this section.
(5) General provisions - commercial design criteria - city wide. (a) The
following items must be reviewed for compliance by the planning department
14-132
before a building permit is issued. These standards shall apply to the design of
all principal buildings and accessory structures. These guidelines shall not apply
to single family or duplex residential uses, nor do they apply in the downtown
zones, industrial zones, or the Central Village overlay zone.
(i) Landscaping:
(A) At least thirty percent (30%) of each lot must
be landscaped. Consideration will be given for
redevelopment sites. Landscaping shall be selected and
installed so that it will not block motorist visibility at time
of installation and at maturity. The majority of the
landscaped area must be visible from the road.
(B) At least one, two (2) inch caliper tree shall be
planted on the parcel for every two thousand (2,000) square
feet of building footprint and paved area (paved areas
include private streets, parking spaces, driveways, paved
storage areas). Preservation of existing trees may be applied
toward this requirement.
(ii) Parking:
(A) Large parking areas shall be organized into a
series of smaller modules with landscaped islands consisting
of trees and low shrubs separating them.
(B) Parking areas must provide safe, landscaped
pedestrian access.
(C) Entrance drives shall be landscaped and
continue existing sidewalks.
(iii) Facades and elevations:
(A) Facades shall provide fenestration toward
pedestrian areas and streets for purposes of safety and
aesthetics.
(B) Facades must not be monolithic; any of the
following, or similar, design features may be used:
(1) Changes in surface planes
(2) Porches
(3) Awnings
(4) Entry stairs
(5) Doors
(6) Windows
(7) Chimneys
(8) Changes in construction materials
(9) Landscaping
(10) Horizontal and vertical sun-shading
devices, such as walls, canopies, and similar devices,
that extend a minimum of three (3) feet beyond the
wall or adjacent walls.
14-133
(C) Exterior walls visible from public roads may
not be comprised of metal or flat-faced concrete block.
(iv) Lights:
(A) Light fixtures that permit light to project up
are prohibited. All outdoor light fixtures should be fullcutoff
fixtures which do not allow light to be emitted above
ninety degrees (90°) (see illustration below).
(B) Fixtures used for architectural lighting, such as
facade, feature, and landscape lighting, shall be aimed or directed
to preclude light projection beyond immediate objects intended to
be illuminated.
(C) External wall or roof-mounted floodlights shall
not be installed on walls that face abutting residential uses
unless landscaping or other means can be installed to shield
the view of such lights from residential properties.
(D) Neon and bare fluorescent light tubes in any
form on the exterior of a structure are prohibited.
(E) Light poles and fixtures shall be limited to a
thirty (30) foot maximum height.
(F) Photometric plans may be required by planning
staff to ensure lighting will not affect surrounding residential uses.
Light trespass may not exceed one (1.0) foot-candle at any property
line that adjoins residential uses or property zoned for residential
uses.
(v) Fences: Fences shall be regulated by § 14-222.
(vi) Ancillary structures and equipment: HVAC
equipment, above-ground grease traps, electric generators, fuel
tanks, trash compactors, dumpsters, garbage containment areas,
storage bins, trailers, elevated tanks, storage tanks, and similar
ancillary structures and equipment shall be screened from
14-134
adjacent residential uses and from public roads with landscaping,
walls or fences. Screening shall conform to the requirements of
§ 14-222(8)(d). Such ancillary structures and equipment shall also
meet building setbacks.
(vii) Personal storage developments: Personal storage or
"mini-storage" buildings shall be sited such that the garage doors
do not face roads unless developments are at an elevation
significantly lower than roads or are behind landscaping whereby
buildings are not visible from roadways. Such developments
located on a corner must install a landscape buffer on a least one
(1) property line to screen the row of storage buildings. The
landscape buffer shall be comply with the landscaping
requirements set forth in § 14-213.
(viii) Loading docks: Loading docks shall not be readily
visible from public roads.
(ix) Stored materiel shall not be visible from public roads.
(x) Drive-through equipment: There shall be no outdoor
drive-through menu boards, outdoor speaker equipment and drivethrough
windows located within one hundred sixty (160) feet from
adjacent residential land uses.
(xi) Drive-through equipment: Drive through windows
and outdoor speaker equipment shall not be located within one
hundred sixty feet (160') from adjacent residential land uses unless
noise levels are demonstrated to register not more than fifty (50)
dBA at the property line in common with the property with the
residential land use.
(6) General provisions - commercial design criteria - Central Village
Overlay Zone. (a) The following items must be reviewed for compliance by the
planning department before a building permit is issued. These standards
shall apply to the design of all principal buildings and accessory
structures used for non-residential land uses. These guidelines shall only
apply in the Central Village Overlay Zone.
(i) Massing: Individual buildings shall not exceed an
enclosed gross area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
(ii) Setbacks: Setbacks from existing utility easements
must be observed, otherwise:
(A) Front: For frontages on W. Broadway Avenue,
a fifteen (15) feet minimum measured from the back of the
curb is allowed, unless the right-of-way is greater than
fifteen (15) feet from the curb. In this instance, the right-ofway
would be the minimum setback. If a patio, drive lane,
landscaped area, or other aesthetic feature is placed
between the sidewalk and building, then a thirty (30) foot
maximum measured from the back of the curb is allowed. A
fifty (50) foot maximum setback measured from the back of
14-135
the curb may be allowed if a drive lane and a single row of
parking is used in the site design. Any setback greater than
thirty (30) feet will require a special exception. Drive lanes
and front parking are subject to screening requirements
below.
All setbacks from street rights-of-way shall use the
"front" setback.
(iii) Building height: Building height is limited to three (3)
stories, not to exceed forty five (45) feet.
(iv) Open space: The maximum lot coverage shall be
eighty percent (80%) with open space comprising the remaining
twenty percent (20%) of the site.
(v) Landscaping:
(A) At least twenty percent (20%) of each lot must
be landscaped. The majority of the landscaped area must be
visible from the road. Consideration will be given for
redevelopment sites.
(B) At least one (1), two (2) inch caliper tree shall
be planted on the parcel for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of building footprint and paved area (paved
areas include private streets, parking spaces, driveways,
paved storage areas). Preservation of existing trees may be
applied toward this requirement.
(vi) Parking: A single row of parking may be allowed
between the building and the sidewalk for lots that front Broadway
Avenue and shall be subject to screening requirements below.
Additional parking is allowed on the side or rear of the building.
(vii) Screening: Vehicular movement areas must be
screened from sidewalks with a brick or stone wall (not
cinderblock), a wrought iron fence (or other fence materials that
are visually similar to wrought iron), and/or landscaping. This is
required to establish/maintain an edge to the street consistent
with the rest of the district. The brick or stone portion of the wall
or fence may not be taller than forty (40) inches. Fences and walls
with fences on top shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
(viii) Facades and elevations:
(A) Facades shall provide fenestration toward
pedestrian areas and streets for purposes of safety and
aesthetics.
(B) Facades must not be monolithic; any of the
following, or similar, design features may be used:
(1) Changes in surface planes
(2) Porches
(3) Awnings
14-136
(4) Entry stairs
(5) Doors
(6) Windows
(7) Chimneys
(8) Changes in construction materials
(9) Landscaping
(10) Horizontal and vertical sun-shading
devices, such as walls, canopies, and similar devices,
that extend a minimum of three (3) feet beyond the
wall or adjacent walls. Excessive repetition of only
one (1) or two (2) architectural features above is
prohibited.
(ix) Materials:
(A) Natural stone, brick, wood and fiber-cement
siding that resembles horizontal lap siding should be used
for all buildings.
(B) Veneer materials are not allowed (i.e., vinyl
siding, metal facade covering, stucco, and synthetic stucco).
(C) Synthetic materials and stucco may only be
allowed on a limited basis for accent, trim and cornices.
(x) Site lighting:
(A) Light posts: Light posts that will be visible
from adjacent residential properties shall not exceed fifteen
(15) feet in height and shall have a dark finished paint color
such as dark gray, dark brown, dark green or black.
(B) Lights:
(1) Light fixtures that permit light to
project up are prohibited. All outdoor light fixtures
should be full-cutoff fixtures which do not allow light
to be emitted above ninety degrees (90°) (see
illustration below).
14-137
(2) Light fixtures used for architectural
lighting, such as facade, feature, landscape and sign
lighting, shall be aimed or directed to preclude light
projection beyond immediate objects intended to be
illuminated.
(3) External wall or roof mounted flood
lights shall not be installed on walls that face
abutting residential uses without landscaping or
other means to shield the view of such lights from
residential properties.
(4) Neon and bare fluorescent light tubes in
any form on the exterior of a building or any other
structure is prohibited.
(5) Animated lights: Flashing, blinking,
strobe, neon, and searchlights are prohibited. Neon
and other types of strings of lights that are located
either inside and/or outside of windows and doors are
prohibited.
(C) Photometric plans may be required by
planning staff to ensure lighting will not affect surrounding
residential uses. Light trespass may not exceed one (1.0)
foot-candle at any property line that adjoins residential uses
or property zoned for residential uses.
(xi) Fences: Fences shall be regulated by § 14-222.
(xii) Signs:
(A) Freestanding signs shall be no higher than
eight (8) feet.
(B) Signs attached to buildings shall be no higher
than twelve (12) feet.
(C) Signs shall be constructed of natural materials
(such as wood, brick, or stone) or constructed of materials
that successfully simulate these natural materials.
(D) Signs must not be internally lit and the bulb(s)
of proposed lighting must not be seen directly by motorists
or adjacent residential property owners.
(E) The maximum area of freestanding signs is
calculated as twenty-five percent (25%) of the property
frontage. Freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty (20)
square feet. Total signage area shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet regardless of property frontage.
(xiii) Ancillary structures and equipment: HVAC
equipment, above ground grease traps, electric generators, fuel
tanks, trash compactors, dumpsters, garbage containment areas,
14-138
storage bins, and similar ancillary structures and equipment shall
be screened from public roads and residential uses with
landscaping, walls, or fences. Proposed screening, ancillary
structures, and equipment shall be submitted for staff review
before installation.
(xiv) Storage developments: Personal storage or
"mini-storage" buildings are prohibited.
(xv) Loading docks: Loading docks that face public roads
must be screened using landscaping or architectural features.
(xvi) Stored materiel shall not be visible from public roads.
(xvii) Drive-through equipment: There shall be no outdoor
drive-through menu boards, outdoor speaker equipment, and drivethrough
windows.
(7) Adult day care as a special exception use and in existing health
care facilities. (a) The following items must be reviewed and approved by the
board of zoning appeals during the review of a special exception request
to locate an adult day care within the Central Community zoning district.
(i) All new construction for adult day care facilities shall
be subject to the commercial design guidelines and regulations
found in § 14-211(5) of this chapter. Existing facilities shall comply
with the requirements outlined in the commercial design
standards as closely as possible.
(ii) Proposed parking area(s) and any required
landscaping regulated either by the landscaping provisions found
herein or as part of the approval process by the board of appeals.
(iii) The total lot area shall not be less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet. No adult day care operation or
service shall be conducted in any accessory building to the primary
structure on the lot.
(iv) Off street parking for new construction of adult day
care facilities regulated in the parking provision of this chapter.
Existing structures renovated for an adult day care land use shall
provide parking, safe loading and unloading areas for clients, as
well as safe ingress and egress to the property. Ingress and egress
and circulation of vehicles on the property shall be reviewed by the
city's engineering department.
(v) Any approval of an adult day care facility shall state
the maximum number of clients to be kept at the facility structure.
(vi) Adult day care operations must be licensed by the
State of Tennessee Department of Human Services if the operation
provides a service for five (5) or more clients, for less than twentyfour
(24) hours.
(b) An existing health care facility may offer adult day care
regardless of the zoning district it is located in, as long as the care does
14-139
not exceed twenty-four (24) hours. Applicable building regulations may
apply to the adult day care if modifications, construction, or retrofitting
is necessary to accommodate the referenced use.
(8) General provisions - continuous care facility of community.
(a) Subject to other provisions and densities of this ordinance,
the overall density for all uses within the CCRC shall not exceed twelve
(12) units per acre. The minimum acreage for the entire development
must be fifteen (15) acres in size.
(b) Within any CCRC,
(i) The number of units for nursing care cannot exceed
the number of planned non-licensed and/or non-regulated
single-family residential units;
(ii) The total developed gross floor area of all
State-licensed facilities shall not exceed twenty-two percent (22%)
of the total site area;
(iii) Maximum ground floor area developed shall preserve
as open space seventy percent (70%) of the total site area (the
required open space can be used for landscaping, pedestrian
features, site circulation, parking, landscape screens, setbacks,
detention ponds, open-air recreation, and other similar uses); and
(iv) The total developed gross floor area of the CCRC shall
not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total site.
(c) Any detached non-residential portion of a continuing care
retirement community, as approved by the board of appeals, may not be
occupied until the approved phase of the development is eighty percent
(80%) constructed or completion of the approve phase is assured by
mechanisms provided for in § 14-204(13) to guarantee completion. The
foregoing limitation does not apply to the following uses: clubhouse,
maintenance or service buildings of the CCRC and not for the
community-at-large, and like uses. Accessory use buildings shall not
exceed five percent (5%) of the total ground floor area.
(d) No building over thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be built
within fifty (50) feet of a residential lot line of an adjacent residential lot.
Further, no building over thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be built
within 150' of any public right-of-way or proposed public right-of-way fifty
(50) feet in width or greater.
(9) General provisions - gathering place special exception. The
following items must also be reviewed by the board of zoning appeals in
reviewing a "gathering place" special exception request:
(a) Traffic volumes and associated turning movements at the
property and to be provided by the applicant's engineers.
(b) Proposed location of all outdoor facilities (including, but not
limited to, such items as picnic tables, play areas, restrooms, food
preparation areas, refuse areas).
14-140
(c) Hours of operation in no case shall any activity be conducted
beyond 12:00 A.M. on any night of the week.
(d) Proposed parking area(s) and any required landscaping
regulated either by the landscaping ordinance found herein or as part of
the approval process by the board.
(e) Setbacks of the proposed special exception.
(f) Height of all structures proposed and associated with the
special exception use being reviewed by the Board.
(g) Amplifying equipment located outside the structure is
allowed as long as it does not create a nuisance to adjacent property
owners or otherwise violate the anti-noise ordinance of the City of
Maryville.
(h) Any sign allowed for the proposed use must meet the
Maryville sign regulations. In no case shall an off-premise sign be
allowed. Any lighting of a sign for the on site business must illuminate
only the sign itself. No sign which is displayed on any vehicle may be
located near the entrance to the property on an intermittent or ongoing
basis.
(i) No flashing or blinking light, strobe lights, or search lights
shall be allowed.
(j) The driveway entrance to the property shall be landscaped
for at least the first fifty (50) feet (measured from the right-of-way).
(10) General provisions - tearoom/café in office district special exception
(a) The following items must be reviewed and approved by the
board of zoning appeals during review of a special exception to locate a
tearoom/café in the office district:
(i) Proposed location of all outdoor facilities, parking,
landscaping suitable to screen the view of parking from adjoining
existing single family and duplex land uses, existing trees and
landscaping to be removed, outdoor seating areas, and refuse
areas;
(ii) Proposed parking area(s). The number of required
paved parking spaces for non-residential use in the Oak Park
Historic District may be phased, if approved as a condition by the
board of zoning appeals, as follows. The property must provide a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required parking spaces and
circulation lanes with a paved non-erosive material and the
remainder of the required spaces must be stabilized with grass,
pavers or a combination thereof. However, gravel or other such
loose aggregates is not acceptable material for the parking area.
At any time the board of zoning appeals determines that the
non-paved areas become deteriorated beyond the point of a safe
and convenient condition, the property owner must pave such lots
within sixty (60) day of notice by the city;
14-141
(iii) Location of proposed new construction or additions;
and
(iv) Height of all proposed new structures or additions.
(b) Dumpsters are not required if the tearoom/café is able to use
a sufficient number of roll-out residential garbage containers. Proposed
dumpsters must be screened from public roads and adjacent single family
uses using architectural and landscape screening, but flat-faced block is
not allowed. The open end of the dumpster shall not be visible from
public view or from adjacent single-family uses.
(c) The majority of proposed tearoom/café activities shall be
provided within existing structures. Additions and outside dining areas
are permissible. However, such additions and outside dining shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the square footage of the original
structure used for a tearoom/café use.
(d) There shall be no amplifying equipment located outside of
the structures.
(e) No flashing or blinking lights, strobe lights, neon lights or
search lights shall be allowed.
(f) The driveway entrance to the property shall be reviewed by
the city director of engineering and public works and when deemed
necessary, shall be improved by the property owner.
(g) There shall be no outdoor drive-thru menu boards or speaker
equipment.
(h) The maximum ground floor area developed shall preserve as
open space thirty percent (30%) of the total site area (the required open
space does not include parking areas, but may include landscaping and
sidewalks).
(i) Additions, site modifications including new parking areas
and driveways are subject to the required landscaping buffer pursuant to
§ 14-213(10). However, property owners may propose alternative
landscape buffers for board review if the buffer meets or exceeds the
required screening opacity.
(j) Freestanding signs shall be no higher than eight feet and at
least eighteen feet from the sidewalk. Signs in residential and office
areas shall be no higher than twelve (12) feet when attached to buildings.
Signs shall be constructed of natural materials (such as wood, brick or
stone) or constructed of materials that successfully replicate these
natural materials. Signs must not be internally lit and the bulb(s) of
proposed lighting must not be seen directly by motorists or adjacent
residential property owners.
(k) There shall be no mechanical equipment located outside the
structure where sound produced by the equipment will be detected by
adjacent residential property owners.
14-142
(l) Bright lights shall not be installed on the side of buildings
that create direct bright light to be visible from adjacent residential
property owners. Such lights are commonly referred to as "pack lights"
and floodlights. Light posts that will be visible from adjacent residential
property owners shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall have
a dark finished paint color such as dark gray, dark brown, dark green or
black.
(m) Hours of operation in no case shall occur outside the hours
of 10:00 A.M. until 2:00 P.M. and 5:00 P.M. until 7:00 P.M. Occasional
dinners may be served to small parties of patrons not to exceed hours of
operation past 10:00 P.M.
(11) General provisions - auto body repair shop. The following items
shall apply to all auto body facilities and must be observed before any auto body
business begins operation.
(a) Auto body shops, specific to damage or collision repair of
motor vehicles, shall be allowed according to the land use table or
description of districts found within this document.
(b) All auto body repairs of damaged vehicles and like services
shall be conducted entirely within the confines of the structure.
(c) Damaged or partially disassembled vehicles, as well as
parts, replacement parts, tires, or similar materials shall be kept within
the structure or behind a screen or fence conforming to the commercial
fence regulations found in § 14-222 of Maryville Zoning and Land Use
Ordinance. No wrecked or damaged vehicle may be parked or stored upon
a trailer or a tow truck unless it is located behind said screen or fence.
(d) All new construction specific to auto body repair shops shall
be subject to these regulations and all commercial design guideline
requirements found within this document. Retrofitted structures or sites
for motor vehicle damage and collision repair shall be subject to fencing
guidelines and other applicable regulations.
(e) All auto body repair shops for damage and collision repair
shall be permitted within the acceptable zoning districts as long as such
uses are located along an arterial designated road as classified on the
city's official major road plan. This provision shall not apply to operations
located within designated industrial parks or properties zoned Industrial.
(f) For the purpose of this section only, body work, auto body
repair and motor vehicle repair shall not include the painting of vehicles
or vehicle parts on site.
(12) Standards for the development of new, expanded or upgraded park,
recreational and athletic facilities. Park, recreational and athletic facilities are
important to the quality of life in Maryville and their development should keep
pace with the needs of the community. These facilities can generally be located
in various zoning districts upon review as special exception uses by the board
of zoning appeals. When new facilities are planned or existing facilities are
14-143
expanded or upgraded, they will be reviewed by an ad hoc committee organized
by the city to ensure that these amenities will be compatible with, and
respectful of, their immediate surroundings.
(a) Lighted outdoor park, recreational and athletic facilities:
When these facilities are lighted for nighttime use, not only are the
daytime effects of the activities extended into the evening hours, but the
issue of "light trespass" must also be considered. Effective management
of this issue can take several forms, including planning for a physical
separation between new facilities and existing sensitive land uses,
providing buffering between activity centers and adjoining properties,
matching the height of the light poles to the needs of the activity being
lit, and using the full cut off (shielded) type of luminaries.
(b) The differing nature of individual sports and activities
dictates how tall the light poles should be in order to provide adequate
light on the field/court to safely accommodate the activity and to help
avoid glare and control light trespass onto adjoining properties. Most
sports require pole heights that exceed the city's general limit for specific
sports supercede the general standard found in § 14-211(5) of the
Maryville Municipal Code:
Type of Activity Not to Exceed*
Football, soccer, lacrosse, etc. 80 feet
Baseball (high school or college) 70 feet
Softball, little league baseball 60 feet
Tennis, basketball 40 feet
Track, swimming pools, playgrounds 30 feet
* If the circumstances at a specific site justify a taller pole(s), the board
of zoning appeals can hear and decide a variance request.
(c) All new luminaries shall be of the full cut (shielded) type,
specifically designed for athletic use. As the existing old style
(unshielded) luminaries are removed from service, they shall be replaced
with the modern full cut off type, if feasible from a budget standpoint.
(d) General city zoning regulations [MMC 14-213(6)(c)] require
landscaping and screening between "activity centers" (which include
athletic fields, etc.) and adjoining residential properties, and remain in
effect under this section of the municipal code.
(13) Bed and breakfast homestay facilities. (a) A Bed & Breakfast
(B&B) facility is defined as a private single-family residence that contains
no more than three (3) guest rooms and which offers sleeping
accommodations and breakfast to transient tenants only for
14-144
compensation. For the purposes of this section, a B&B facility is what
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 68-14-501, et seq. refers to as a "bed and
breakfast homestay," subject to the following local regulations:
(i) The proprietor of the B&B must be a permanent
resident of the structure, and maintain living quarters separate
from the guest rooms.
(ii) No more than two (2) non-residents may be employed
to work at the B&B.
(iii) Only one (1) sign, not to exceed (6) square feet in area
may be used to identify the B&B. If illuminated, the sign shall be
only externally illuminated and not internally illuminated.
(iv) One (1) off-street parking space must be provided for
each guest room. These space(s) must be in addition to the
required parking for the residence. These space(s) must not be
developed in the front yard of the residence, but may be located in
the existing driveway of the residence if adequate area is available.
City staff can require the B&B parking space(s) to be screened
from adjoining residences, if applicable, or if otherwise required by
the terms of the zoning ordinance.
(v) "Events" (weddings, receptions, meetings,
conferences, etc.) shall not be held at B&B locations unless it is
determined by staff that adequate parking is available and that
such events would not be incompatible with the surrounding
development.
(vi) The B&B must meet all other applicable city codes
and regulations including building codes and life safety
regulations.
(b) B&Bs may be developed by right in private single-family
residences located in the various zones in and immediately adjacent to
the downtown area, including:
(i) Central Business district;
(ii) Central Business Support district;
(iii) Washington Street Commercial Corridor district;
(iv) Heritage Development district;
(v) Office Transition district;
(vi) Central Community district.
(c) If the situation arises where the staff and an applicant
cannot agree upon the interpretation of any provision in this section,
either party may appeal the matter to the Maryville Board of Zoning
Appeals, following the established procedures of the board and the code.
(14) Manufacturing/processing performance standards - electrical
disturbance or interference. No manufacturing, processing or assembling use
may create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operation or
equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance, or otherwise
14-145
cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including
television and radio broadcasting transmissions) to the extent that the operation
of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely
affected.
(15) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - purpose. The
purpose of this ordinance is to establish general guidelines for the siting of
wireless communication towers and antennas. The goals of this ordinance are
to: (1) protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of
towers and antennas; (2) encourage the location of towers in non-residential
areas; (3) minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; (4)
strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary
option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; (5) encourage
users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas
where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; (6) encourage users of
towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse
visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting,
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; (7) enhance the
ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services
to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; (8) consider the public
health and safety of communication towers; and (9) avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting
of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the city council shall give due
consideration to the City of Maryville's master plan, zoning map, existing land
uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of
towers and antennas.
(16) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - definitions. As
used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
(a) "Alternative tower structure" means man-made trees, clock
towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
(b) "Antenna" means any exterior transmitting or receiving
device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in
communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital
signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals),
wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
(c) "Backhaul network" means the lines that connect a
provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching
offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone
network.
(d) "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration.
(e) "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
(f) "Height" means, when referring to a tower or other
structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to
14-146
the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad
and any antenna.
(g) "Tower" means any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas
for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including
self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The
term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any
support thereto.
(17) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - applicability.
(a) New Towers and Antennas. All new towers or antennas in
City of Maryville shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided
in 13(b) through (d), inclusive.
(b) Amateur radio station operator/receive only antennas.
§ 14-211 shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna,
that is under forty (40) feet in height and is owned and operated by an
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only
antennas. All other applicable regulations to towers forty (40) feet and
found within this ordinance shall continue to apply.
(c) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and
preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of
this ordinance, other than the requirements of sections 14(f) and 14(g).
(d) AM array. For purposes of implementing this ordinance, an
AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as on AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one (1) tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within
the perimeter of the AM array by right.
(18) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - general
requirements. (a) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be
considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of
an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(b) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements,
lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions
of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(c) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna
and/or tower shall provide to the zoning administrator an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas,
14-147
including specific information about the location, height, and design of
each tower, that are within the jurisdiction of the City of Maryville. The
zoning administrator may share such information with other applicants
applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this
ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the City of Maryville, provided, however that the zoning
administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way
representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable for
tower construction.
(d) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(i) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish
or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(ii) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and
related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them
into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(iii) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a
tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive
as possible.
(iv) The use of stealth type hidden/disguise antennas are
to be encouraged by any applicant and given preference for a tower
building permit in any area near a residential zone.
(e) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required,
the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views. Where lighting is required by FAA
such lighting shall be of the "dual lighting" provisions as defined by the
FAA (white during the day and red during the evening hours) or in the
alternative, the structure may be red lighted and marked (painted) as
prescribed by the FAA regulations. White flashing lighting at night is
strictly prohibited under this ordinance.
(f) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this
ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with
such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
14-148
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(g) Building codes: safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is
maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state
or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time
to time. If, upon inspection, the City of Maryville concludes that a tower
fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger
to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of
the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(h) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower
setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to
facilities located in the City of Maryville irrespective of municipal and
county jurisdictional boundaries.
(i) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas
shall certify that all franchises, authorizations, licenses, and/or permits
required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless
communication system in the City of Maryville have been obtained and
shall file a copy of all required franchises with the city.
(j) Public notice. For purposes of this ordinance, any special
use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved
used or special use shall require public notice to all abutting property
owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the
corresponding separation distance listed in section § 17(b) (5) (ii), Table
2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by the zoning ordinance.
(k) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower
except for any structure identification sign as may be required by the
FCC or the FAA. Such sign is not to exceed ten inches (10") by fifteen
inches (15") and is to be mounted at the base of the structure no higher
than ____ feet from the ground.
(l) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the
requirements of section 18.
(m) Multiple antenna/tower plan. The City of Maryville
encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single
application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites.
Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the
review process.
14-149
(19) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - exceptions.
(a) The provisions of this part shall not apply to:
(i) Antennas or towers located on property owned,
leased, or otherwise controlled by the city and under forty (40) feet
in height.
(ii) Antennas or towers located on property owned,
leased, or otherwise controlled by the city and over forty (40) feet
in height, and in accordance with (16)(a) and (b) of this part.
(20) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas administratively
approved uses. (a) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance
of administrative approvals for towers and antennas.
(i) The administrator may administratively approve the
uses listed in this section.
(ii) Each applicant for administrative approval shall
apply to the administrator providing the information set forth in
(17)(b)(1) and (17)(b)(3) of this ordinance and a nonrefundable fee
as established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the
City of Maryville for the costs of reviewing the application.
(iii) The administrator shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with (14)(17)(b)(4) and (17)(b)(5) of this ordinance.
(iv) The administrator shall respond to each such
application within sixty (60) days after receiving it by either
approving or denying the application. If the administrator fails to
respond to the applicant within said sixty (60) days, then the
application shall be deemed to be approved.
(v) In connection with any such administrative approval,
the administrator may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles,
administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to
monopole construction.
(vi) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant
shall file an application for a special use permit pursuant to vii of
this part and other applicable provisions of the special use permit
found in § 14-204.
(b) List of administratively approved uses. The following uses
may be approved by the administrator after conducting an administrative
review:
(i) Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement
of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna, in any
business/transportation zone (excluding the Parkway Overlay
District).
(ii) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers
consistent with the terms of subsections (a) and (b) below:
14-150
(A) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna
which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the
administrator as an accessory use to any commercial,
industrial, professional, institutional, or multi-family
structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided:
(1) The antenna does not extend more than
thirty (30) feet above the highest point of the
structure; and
(2) The antenna complies with all
applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and
(3) The antenna complies with all
applicable building codes.
(B) Antennas on existing towers. An antenna
which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by
the administrator and, to minimize adverse visual impacts
associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers,
collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing
towers shall take precedence over the construction of new
towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a
manner consistent with the following:
(1) A tower which is modified or
reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an
additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as
the existing tower, unless the administrator allows
reconstruction as a monopole.
(2) Height
(i) An existing tower may be
modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to
exceed thirty (30) feet over the tower's existing
height, to accommodate the collocation of an
additional antenna.
(ii) The height change referred to in
subsection (iii) (a) may only occur one time per
communication tower.
(iii) The additional height referred to
in subsection (iii)(a) shall not require an
additional distance separation as set forth in
(7). The tower's premodification height shall
be used to calculate such distance separations.
(3) Onsite location
(i) A tower which is being rebuilt to
accommodate the collocation of an additional
antenna may be moved onsite within fifty (50)
feet of its existing location.
14-151
(ii) After the tower is rebuilt to
accommodate collocation, only one tower may
remain on the site.
(iii) A relocated onsite tower shall
continue to be measured from the original
tower location for purposes of calculating
separation distances between towers pursuant
to (17)(b)(5). The relocation of a tower
hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause
a violation of (17)(b)(5).
(iv) The onsite relocation of a tower
which comes within the separation distances
to residential units or residentially zoned
lands as established in (17)(b)(5) shall only be
permitted when approved by the
administrator.
(iii) New towers in non-residential zoning districts.
Locating any new tower in a non-residential zoning district other
than Business/Transportation (excluding the Parkway District)
provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can
structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by
the applicant; the administrator concludes the tower is in
conformity with the goals set forth in (10) and the requirements of
(14); the tower meets the setback requirements in (17)(b)(4) and
separation distances in §(17)(b)(5) and all other provisions in (17);
and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria:
(A) for a single user, up to ninety (90) feet in
height;
(B) for two users, up to one hundred twenty (120)
feet in height; and
(C) for three or more users, up to one hundred fifty
(150) feet in height.
(iv) Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning
district other than industrial or heavy commercial that in the
judgment of the administrator is in conformity with the goals set
forth in (10) this ordinance.
(v) Installing a cable microcell network through the use
of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing
wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or
similar technology that does not require the use of towers.
(21) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - special use
permits.
14-152
(a) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance
of special use permits for towers or antennas by the board of zoning
appeals.
(i) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under
(15) of this ordinance or permitted to be approved administratively
pursuant to (16) of this ordinance, then a special use permit shall
be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an
antenna in all zoning district classifications.
(ii) Applications for special use permits under this section
shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of § 14-204 of
this ordinance, except as modified in this part.
(iii) In granting a special use permit, the board of zoning
appeals may impose conditions to the extent the board of zoning
appeals concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize
adverse effects of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(iv) Any information of an engineering nature that the
applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer under the guidelines
of the State of Tennessee for such certifications.
(v) An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the
information described in this section and a non-refundable fee as
established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the City
of Maryville for the costs of reviewing the application.
(b) Towers.
(i) Information required. In addition to any information
required for applications for special use permits pursuant to
§ 14-204 of this ordinance, applicants for a special use permit for
a tower shall submit the following information:
(A) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the
location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land
uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including
when adjacent to other municipalities), master plan
classification of the site and all properties within the
applicable separation distances set forth in (17)(b)(5),
adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and
any other structures, topography, parking, and other
information deemed by the administrator to be necessary to
assess compliance with this ordinance.
(B) Legal description of the parent tract and leased
parcel (if applicable).
The setback distance between the proposed tower and
the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
14-153
(C) The separation distance from other towers
described in the inventory of existing sites submitted
pursuant to (14)(c) shall be shown on an updated site plan
or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator
of the existing tower(s), if known.
(D) A landscape plan showing specific landscape
materials.
(E) Method of fencing, and finished color and, if
applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.
(F) A description of compliance with (14)(c), (d), (e),
(f), (g), (j), (l), and (m), (17)(b) (4), (17)(b) (5) and all
applicable federal, state or local laws.
(G) A notarized statement by the applicant as to
whether construction of the tower will accommodate
collocation of additional antennas for future users.
(H) A description of the suitability of the use of
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology
not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed new
tower.
(I) A description of the feasible location(s) of
future towers or antennas within the City of Maryville
based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or
geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is
erected.
(J) A copy of the stress analysis of the proposed
structure including reasonably anticipated loads of
additional users, and certified by a State of Tennessee
licensed professional engineer.
(ii) Factors considered in granting special use permits for
towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of special
use permit applications pursuant to § 14-204, the board of zoning
appeals shall consider the following factors in determining
whether to issue a special use permit, although the board of zoning
appeals may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or
more of these criteria if the board of zoning appeals concludes that
the goals of this ordinance are better served thereby:
(A) Height of the proposed tower;
(B) Proximity of the tower to residential structures
and residential district boundaries;
(C) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby
properties;
(D) Surrounding topography;
14-154
(E) Surrounding tree coverage and foilage;
(F) Design of the tower, with particular reference
to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(G) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(H) Availability of suitable existing towers, other
structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use
of towers or structures, as discussed in (17)(b)(3) of this
ordinance.
(iii) Availability of suitable existing towers, other
structures, or alternative technology. No new tower shall be
permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the board of zoning appeals that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology that does not require the use
of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the
board of zoning appeals related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
(A) No existing towers or structures are located
within the geographic area which meet applicant's
engineering requirements.
(B) Existing towers or structures are not of
sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(C) Existing towers or structures do not have
sufficient structural strength to support applicant's
proposed antenna and related equipment.
(D) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing
towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
(E) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions
required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or
structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for
sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(F) The applicant demonstrates that there are
other limiting factors that render existing towers and
structures unsuitable.
14-155
(G) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers or
structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple
low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline
system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that
exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be
presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
(H) Self supporting structures are to be encouraged
over guyed towers. Applicant must demonstrate that a
self-supported structure is not feasible before any guyed
tower will be approved.
(iv) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall
apply to all towers for which a special use permit is required;
provided, however, that the board of zoning appeals may reduce
the standard setback requirements if the goals of this ordinance
would be better served thereby:
(A) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at
least seventy-five percent (75%) of the height of the tower
from any adjoining lot line.
(B) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the
minimum zoning district setback requirements.
(v) Separation. The following separation requirements
shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use
permit is required; provided, however, that the board of zoning
appeals may reduce the standard separation requirements if the
goals of this ordinance would be better served thereby.
(A) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(1) Tower separation shall be measured
from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site
uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1,
except as otherwise provided in Table 1.
(2) Separation requirements for towers
shall comply with the minimum standards
established in Table 1.
Table 1:
Off-site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex residential units 200 feet or 300% height of
tower whichever is greater
14-156
Off-site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Vacant single-family or duplex residentially
zoned land which is either platted or has
preliminary subdivision plan approval which
is not expired
200 feet or 300% height of
tower whichever is greater
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands 200 feet or 200% height of
tower whichever is greater
Existing multi-family residential units
greater than duplex units
200 feet or 100% height of
tower whichever is greater
Non-residentially zoned lands or
non-residential uses
None; only setbacks apply
(B) Separation distances between towers.
(1) Separation distances between towers
shall be applicable for and measured between the
proposed tower and preexisting towers. The
separation distances shall be measured by drawing or
following a straight line between the base of the
existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a
site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation
distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in
Table 2.
Table 2:
Existing Towers - Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole 75
Ft in Height
or Greater
Monopole Less
Than 75 Ft in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 5,000 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 5,000 750
Monopole 75 Ft in
Height or Greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole Less Than
75 Ft in Height
750 750 750 750
(vi) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security
fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall also be
14-157
equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided
however, that the board of zoning appeals may waive such
requirements, as it deems appropriate.
(vii) Landscaping. The following requirements shall
govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use
permit is required; provided, however, that the board of zoning
appeals may waive such requirements if the goals of this ordinance
would be better served thereby.
(A) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of
the tower compound from property used for residences. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least
four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
(B) In locations where the visual impact of the
tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may
be reduced or waived.
(C) Existing mature tree growth and natural land
forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large,
wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter
may be sufficient buffer.
(22) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - buildings or
other equipment storage. (a) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops.
The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas
shall comply with the following:
(i) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than
100 square feet of gross floor area or be more than twelve (12) feet
in height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than sixty-five (65) feet in height, the related unmanned
equipment structure, if over one hundred (100) square feet of gross
floor area or twelve (12) feet in height, shall be located on the
ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(ii) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a
building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment
and structures shall not occupy more than 10 percent (10%) of the
roof area.
(iii) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply
with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The
equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall
be located in accordance with the following:
(i) In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or
structure may be located:
14-158
(A) In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or
structure is no greater than twelve (12) feet in height or one
hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area and the
cabinet/structure is located a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be
screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of
at least 42-48 inches and a planted height of at least 36
inches.
(B) in a rear yard provided the cabinet or structure
is no greater than twelve (12) feet in height or one hundred
(100) square feet in gross floor area. The cabinet/structure
shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate
height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least 36
inches.
(ii) In business/transportation districts the equipment
cabinet or structure shall be no greater than twenty (20) feet in
height or two hundred (200) square feet in gross floor area. The
structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with
an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least
36 inches. In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be
screened from view of all residential properties which abut or are
directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid
fence six (6) feet in height or an evergreen hedge with ultimate
height of twelve (12) feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(c) Equipment structures to be located on towers. The related
unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than one hundred
(100) square feet of gross floor area or be more than twelve (12) feet in
height, and shall be located no closer than forty (40) feet from all lot lines.
(d) Modification of building size requirements. The
requirements of 18(a) through (c) may be modified by the administrator
in case of administratively approved uses or by the board of zoning
appeals in case of uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation.
(23) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - removal of
abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for
a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and
the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within ninety (90)
days of receipt of notice from the City of Maryville notifying the owner of such
abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said
ninety (90) days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users abandon the tower.
(24) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - nonconforming
uses. (a) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
14-159
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this ordinance. Any expansion of an existing use shall
be reviewed and permitted according to the terms of this section.
(b) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
antennas. Notwithstanding (19), bona fide nonconforming towers or
antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having
to first obtain administrative approval or a special use permit and
without having to meet the separation requirements specified in Sections
(17)(b)(4) and (17)(b)(5). The type, height, and location of the tower onsite
shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then
applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the
date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if
said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in (19).
(25) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - severability.
The various parts, sections and clauses of this part are hereby declared to be
severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
(26) Wireless telecommunication towers and antennas - repealer. Any
ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict only as pertaining to the subject
matter of this section.
(27) Storefront churches. (a) Places of worship proposed to locate
within existing commercial structures, multi-tenant commercial
structures, and locations previously approved by the board of zoning
appeals shall be permitted uses and exempt from formal review by the
said board. However, such uses proposed within the city shall be subject
to all applicable rules, regulations, and policies enforced by various city
departments.
(b) Exemptions from the board of zoning appeals review and
approval process for places of worship shall be subject to the provisions
outlined in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-208. If a location for a place
of worship has been vacant or ceased operation for more than thirty (30)
continuous months then a new application to the city's board of zoning
appeals shall be submitted for a formal special exception review as
outlined within the city's zoning ordinance and Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 13-7-208(g).
(c) New construction for churches, synagogues, and places of
worship that are proposed to be located within the city as free standing
14-160
structures shall continue to be subject to the city's special exception
process outlined within the zoning and land use ordinance. This section
is not intended to create any undue burden on a religious institution
desiring to locate within the city, but rather to protect the community
from any significant adverse impacts that may occur at a specific location.
(d) The regulations outlined within this section shall also apply
to other zoning districts not listed within the table of land uses and shall
include the following: Central Business District; Washington Street
Commercial Corridor; Office Transition; Heritage Development Zone;
Central Business Support Zone; High Intensity Commercial; Industrial;
High Density Residential; Institutional; and High Intensity Retail
District. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and amended by Ord.
#2008-47, Oct. 2008, Ord. #2008-52, Nov. 2008, Ord. #2009-18, May 2009,
Ord. #2011-33, Dec. 2011, Ord. #2013-01, Jan. 2013, Ord. #2015-42, June
2015, Ord. #2016-01, Jan. 2016, Ord. #2017-05, March 2017, Ord.
#2018-02, Feb. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19, Ord. # 2018-11, June 2018
Ch17_2-5-19, and Ord. #2018-30, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-212. Site plan review process. (1) Definitions. For the purpose of
this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning assigned
below, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
(a) "Building." Any structure built for the support, shelter,
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
(b) "City." The City of Maryville, Tennessee.
(c) "Dwelling unit." A group of one or more rooms designed for
or intended for occupancy by a single family.
(d) "Flood plain." That area of a stream bed or its adjoining
land subject to recurrent overflow or inundation in time of flood.
(e) "Row dwelling." One of a service of three or more attached
dwelling units under a common roof with a common exterior wall and
separated from one another by continuance vertical party walls without
openings from basement to roof.
(f) "Single family dwellings." A detached building designed for
or intended to be occupied by one family.
(g) "Site plan." A plan delineating the overall scheme of
development of tract a of land, including but not limited to grading,
engineering design, construction details and survey data for existing and
proposed improvements, size, height, shape and location of buildings,
location and design of parking areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation
on site and circulation for emergency apparatus.
(h) "Site plan review team." The site plan review team shall
consist of the following persons or their representatives: superintendent
of public works, city building inspector, fire chief, fire marshal, city
14-161
planner, city director of engineering and public works, and the respective
superintendents of water and wastewater, and elective divisions of the
city and any additional members that the city manager elects to appoint
or are needed during a project.
(i) "Structure." Anything which is built or constructed, an
assembly of materials or any piece of work artificially built up or
composed or parts joined together in some definite manner.
(j) "Two family dwellings." A building designed for or intended
to be occupied by not over two families, living independently of each
other. This shall include both duplex (one dwelling unit above another)
and semi-detached (two dwelling units having a common vertical party
wall).
(k) "Dwelling." A building or portion thereof which is designed
or used exclusively for residential purposes.
(2) Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
(a) Single family dwellings, two family attached dwellings,
three family attached dwellings, four family attached dwellings, accessory
building thereto or to the land on which they are situated or proposed.
(b) Additions to buildings where the total gross floor area of the
proposed addition does not exceed one-third of the total gross floor area
of the existing building or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is
less.
(c) New buildings, with a height of two (2) stories or less, where
the total gross floor area does not exceed two thousand (2,000) square
feet; provided there is no alteration of drainage flow of land, the site is
not in a flood plain, and the site is not in excess of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
(d) Grading of open areas, either by excavation or fill for the
sole purpose of bringing the land to a grade compatible with the
surrounding area, provided the city director of engineering and public
works finds on an inspection of the site that such grading should have no
adverse effect on the land of surrounding property owners, should not
encroach on or impair existing drainage channels or flood plains and
should not cause problems of erosion, ponding and/or silting on adjoining
properties. However, approval of such work may be required from other
departments in the city as required by the director of engineering and
public works.
(3) Request for preliminary review of site. The owner or developer of
the parcel proposed for development may request that the site plan review team
conduct a preliminary review of the parcel prior to the submission of a site plan.
Certain requirements of this ordinance may be waived at the discretion of the
site review team based on this preliminary review.
(4) Approved site plan required to erect buildings. Except as
hereinafter provided in (2), it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
14-162
erect any building or structure on any land within the city until a site plan has
been submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Site plan submission and review. (a) A site plan may be prepared
under the direction and sealed by an engineer, architect, landscape
architect or land surveyor competent to design such plans. All drainage
and utility designs and structural elements such as but not limited to
retaining walls, engineered slopes, etc. shall be designed by an engineer.
(b) The owner, developer or a duly authorized agent of the
owner or developer shall submit ten complete copies of the site plan
before 5:00 P.M. on the Monday before a Friday site plan review meeting.
The plan will be reviewed on Tuesday morning for compliance with
minimum requirements before being placed on the agenda of the Friday
site plan review meeting. If the plan does not meet the minimum
requirements it shall be returned with a list of those items necessary to
meet the minimum requirements. If the plan meets the minimum
requirements it shall be placed on the agenda for the Friday site plan
review meeting at which time the site plan review team shall consider the
site plan in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and it shall be
approved or disapproved. If the plan is approved, it shall be stamped
approved and initialed by each member of the site plan review team and
two copies shall be returned to the owner, developer or his duly
authorized agent. It shall be the responsibility of that owner, developer
or agent to ensure that this approved plan shall be followed throughout
the construction process. A copy of the approval plan shall be kept on the
project during all phases of construction. If the plan is disapproved it
shall be returned along with a list of the requirements necessary to
complete the plan. The plan shall be corrected and resubmitted for
approval by all applicable departments.
(c) The owner, developer or the duly authorized agent of the
owner or developer shall be invited to attend the site review meeting in
order to expedite the resolution of and problem areas.
A building permit shall not be issued for any project except as
provided in (2) of this section unless the request is accompanied by an
approved site plan.
(d) Site plans shall expire after one year from the date of
approval unless ten percent of the development has been completed. If
a development is designed to be completed in stages, then the approved
site plan shall only apply to the phase under construction. If a site plan
exists for a non-conforming project then the site plan shall be updated
and in accordance with all applicable development regulations for the
remaining phases of a development as outlined in § 14-208(8) of this
ordinance.
(6) Site plan. (a) The site plan shall show the following:
(i) Location or vicinity map.
14-163
(ii) Name of development or address.
(iii) Name and address of owner of record and the
applicant.
(iv) Present zoning of the site and abutting property.
(v) Date, scale, and north point with reference to source
of meridian.
(vi) Courses and distances of center lines of all street and
alley rights-of-way and all property lines as per recorded plat.
(vii) All building restricting lines, highway setback lines,
utility easements, and covenants.
(viii) Topography of existing ground, and paved areas and
elevations of streets, alleys, utilities, sanitary and storm sewers
and buildings and structures. Topography to be shown by dashed
line illustrating two foot contours as required by the city director
of engineering and public works and by spot elevations where
necessary to indicate flat areas.
(ix) Benchmarks for all elevations shall be shown on the
site plan. The city director of engineering and public works may
require that this benchmark reference the Tennessee Grid System.
(b) The site plan shall show the location of the following when
existing on or adjacent to the site:
(i) Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities.
(ii) Building, structures and signs.
(iii) Public sewer systems.
(iv) Slopes, terraces and retaining walls.
(v) Driveways, entrances, exits and parking areas.
(vi) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(vii) Trees and shrubs.
(viii) Recreational areas and swimming pools.
(ix) Natural and artificial water courses.
(x) Limits of flood plains.
(c) The site plan shall show the location, dimensions, size and
height of the following when proposed:
(i) Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities.
(ii) Buildings, structures including the front (street)
elevation of proposed buildings, and signs.
(iii) Public sewer systems, refuse container pads, and
screening for pads.
(iv) Slopes, terraces, and retaining walls.
(v) Driveways, entrances, exits and parking areas.
(vi) Water mains, fire hydrants, service connect locations,
and internal sprinkler system connections.
(vii) Trees and shrubs.
(viii) Recreational areas.
14-164
(ix) Distances between buildings.
(x) Estimates of the following when applicable:
(A) Number of dwelling units
(B) Number of parking spaces.
(C) Number of loading spaces.
(D) Square feet of floor space.
(E) Number of commercial or industrial tenants
and employees.
(F) Plans for collecting storm water and methods
of treatment of natural and artificial water courses
including a delineation of limits or flood plains, if any.
(G) Proposed grading, surface drainage, terraces,
retaining wall heights, grades on paving areas, and ground
floor elevations of proposed buildings and structures,
proposed topography of site shall be shown by two (2) foot
contours with an elevation benchmark, as required by the
city director of engineering and public works. The city
director of engineering and public works may require that
this benchmark reference the Tennessee Grid System.
(7) Requirements, regulations and restrictions. (a) Any building or
structure erected or altered shall comply with the provisions of the Code
of the City of Maryville, Tennessee, 1968 as amended and any applicable
laws of the State of Tennessee.
(b) Any work or development on the site, including but not
limited to the following shall comply with the provisions of the Code of
the City of Maryville, Tennessee, 1968 as amended and any applicable
laws of the State of Tennessee. The grading of land, the installation of
utilities, the construction of street, alleys and retaining walls, the
construction of drains and sewers, the construction of off-street parking,
and the construction or erection of any improvement on the site.
(c) Any building or structures shall be reasonably accessible to
fire, police, emergency and service vehicles. When deemed necessary for
access by the fire chief, emergency vehicle easements shall be provided.
The access for fire, police and emergency vehicles shall be unobstructed
at all times.
(d) The width, grade, location, alignment and arrangement of
streets, sidewalks, and alleys shall conform to the master plan and/or
subdivision regulations of the city as near as is reasonably practicable.
(e) Off-street parking facilities shall have a reasonable slope
and be accessible, safe and properly drained.
(f) Streets, sidewalks, and alleys shall insofar as reasonably
practicable provide access and good traffic circulation to and from
adjacent lands, existing streets, alleys and sidewalks and proposed or
planned streets, alleys and sidewalks. Where deemed necessary by the
14-165
city director of engineering and public works commercial property
fronting on major or secondary thoroughfares (also known as arterials or
collectors) shall be required to provide a frontage access road, of no less
than 24 feet in pavement width, with permanent or temporary access to
the public thoroughfare to be provided at a location deemed desirable by
the city director of engineering and public works.
(g) Adequate water mains and fire hydrants shall be provided
in accessible places in accordance with good fire fighting and fire
prevention practice acceptable to the chief of the fire department.
(h) Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and
disposition of all on-site and off-site storm water and natural surface
water. Natural drainage ways shall be used when it is reasonably
practicable to do so, and improvements shall be made to said ways in
accordance with good engineering practice when in the opinion of the city
director of engineering and public works good engineering practice
indicates need for improvements.
(i) Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and
disposition of all on and off-site sanitary sewage.
(j) Adequate provision shall be made to control flooding.
(k) The obstruction of natural water courses shall be avoided.
(l) Adequate provision shall be made to control the slippage,
shifting, erosion, swelling or shrinking of soil.
(m) Adequate provision shall be made to control the slipping and
shifting of buildings and structures.
(n) Adequate provisions shall be made to protect other lands,
structures, persons and property.
(8) Inspections and supervision. (a) Inspections during the
installation of the required on-site and off-site improvements shall be
made by the city director of engineering and public works as required to
certify compliance with the approved site plan and applicable city
standards.
(b) The owner or developer shall notify the office of the city
director of engineering and public works five (5) days prior to the
beginning of all streets or storm sewer work shown to be constructed on
the site plan.
(c) The owner or developer shall provide adequate supervision
on the site during the installation of all required improvements and have
a responsible superintendent or foreman together with one set of
approved plans, profiles and specifications available at the site at all
times when the work is being performed.
(d) The installation of improvements as required by this
ordinance shall in no case serve to bind the city to accept such
improvements for the maintenance, repair or operation thereof, but such
14-166
acceptance shall be subject to the existing regulations concerning the
acceptance of each type of improvement.
(9) Final review and approval of site plan. (a) When the
development has been completed, as proposed on the site plan, the owner
or developer may apply for an occupancy permit. If the development has
been completed as proposed by the site plan an occupancy permit shall be
issued. If the site plan review team finds any discrepancies in the level
of improvements performed by the developer and the improvements
proposed on the site plan, no occupancy permit shall be issued until the
discrepancy is corrected.
(b) Permanent water and electrical service will not be provided
to the development if an occupancy Permit has not been issued for the
development.
(10) Appeals. If an applicant determines that his site plan has been
unjustly disapproved or that the site plan review team has made requests for
conformity to standards other than those set forth in this ordinance, he may
appeal the decision of the site plan review team to the board of zoning appeals.
(as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006)
14-213. Landscaping and screening. (1) Purpose and necessity.
(a) Purpose. Mission of the landscaping and screening
ordinance:
(i) To accommodate growth while providing protection to
established neighborhoods and property owners;
(ii) To encourage quality development by ensuring
attractive and complementary landscaping; and
(iii) To enhance the scenic beauty of Maryville.
(b) Because of projected growth in the city, a landscaping and
screening ordinance is necessary for the following reasons:
(i) To lessen the impact of high intensity land uses that
adjoin lower intensity land uses. commercial development
sometimes encroaches on residential neighborhoods. This
ordinance is a law requiring that a strip of trees, bushes, and/or
fences act as a buffer between high intensity land uses (such as a
shopping center or convenience store) and low intensity land uses
(such as residential housing). This helps ensure that development
can occur around established areas with minimal impacts.
(ii) To create adequate screening within residential zones
to protect existing residential properties. Sometimes new
developments have the potential to decrease privacy for existing
residential areas, especially when new 'activity centers' (a parking
lot, playground, swimming pool, driveways, sports fields, club
houses, etc.) are built near existing property boundaries. Screening
14-167
of activity centers increases privacy for residents while
accommodating development.
(iii) To protect existing residential properties from glare
associated with outdoor lighting. Excessive glare and light
trespass on existing properties is a growing concern for many
Maryville residents. This ordinance minimizes the amount of light
that can shine across property lines.
(iv) To ensure that Maryville's "best foot forward" will be
presented to potential residents, businesses and tourists. At the
junction of several major approaches to the Great Smoky
Mountains, Maryville has the opportunity to leave a favorable
impression on millions of travelers. As a National Arbor Day
Foundation "Tree City, USA," this ordinance satisfies an important
criterion for maintaining this designation.
(2) Definitions. As used in this article, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
(a) "Activity center" refers to any new land use that causes
significant noise, glare, and/or loss of privacy for an existing residential
property. Screening is only required for activity centers in developments
that must submit a site plan, including planned residential developments
and planned unit developments. Examples of activity centers include, but
are not limited to: swimming pools, parking lots, driveways, outdoor
sports fields, playgrounds, club houses, etc.
(b) "Caliper" refers to the diameter of the tree/shrub trunk.
(c) "Canopy spread" refers to the diameter of vegetative cover.
(d) "Foot-candle" is the measure of light per square foot.
(e) "Hardship" refers to lots that are less than one half (½) acre
in area, extraordinarily configured (as determined by the board of zoning
appeals), and not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth.
(f) "High intensity use." For purposes of this ordinance, any use
other than single family or two family residential.
(g) "Incompatible land use" refers to high intensity land uses
(industrial, office, commercial, etc.) when they adjoin low intensity land
uses (one and two family residential).
(h) "Lamp" is the component of a luminaire that produces the
actual light.
(i) "Landscaping" means beautification of a tract of land by
decorative planting.
(j) "Low intensity use," for purposes of this ordinance, means
single family residential or two family residential uses.
(k) "Luminaire" is a complete lighting system which includes a
lamp(s) and a fixture.
14-168
(l) "Lumen" is a unit of luminous flux. One foot-candle is one
lumen per square foot. For purposes of this ordinance, the lumen-output
values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.
(m) "Opaque." Visually impenetrable.
(n) "Point by point foot-candle diagram." A simple plat or
photometric drawing that displays the foot-candle reading at certain
points on a property.
(o) "Public view(s)" refers to the prevailing view(s) that is (are)
directly in sight of the general public.
(p) "Screen" is a partition (such as a wall or fence) and/or
vegetation (such as screening trees, screening shrubs, and shade trees in
a row) used to protect established neighborhoods, existing properties, and
the public view.
(q) "Screening shrubs" will grow to at least eight feet (8) and
have a mature canopy spread of at least five feet (5).
(r) "Screening trees" are used exclusively for screening
incompatible property uses because of their density and opacity.
Minimum height at installation and maturity are eight feet (8) and eight
feet (8) respectively.
(s) "Shade trees" are used in addition to screening trees to
provide additional opacity and shade. Minimum height at installation:
twelve feet (12) and two (2) inches caliper. Minimum height at maturity:
thirty five feet (35) and canopy spread of twenty feet (20).
(t) "Variance." A grant of permission by the Maryville Board of
Zoning Appeals or the regional board of zoning appeals that authorizes
the recipient to do that which, according to the strict letter of this
ordinance, he/she could not otherwise legally do.
(3) Applicability. The article shall apply to any non-residential
development that abuts residential property.
(4) Landscape plan submittal. A landscape plan for each development
must be submitted to the department of planning. The approval process for the
landscape plan shall take place during weekly site plan review meetings. In
addition to the "minimum site plan requirements" found on page 4 of The City
of Maryville Site Plan Approval Process booklet (copies are available at the
planning department), all landscape plan submittals will be reviewed for the
following three general categories and sub-elements:
(a) Existing vegetation inventory: General location, type, and
quality of existing vegetation; existing significant trees and/or vegetation
to be saved (a variance can be requested to save historic, old and/or large
trees. Setback requirements can be modified to save existing trees.
Contact the planning department for more details); and methods and
details for protecting significant vegetation during construction.
(b) Planting proposal: General location and labels for all
proposed plants; plant lists or schedules with the botanical and common
14-169
name, quantity, and spacing of all proposed landscape material at the
time of planting; and planting and installation details as necessary to
ensure conformance with all required standards.
(c) Built features list: Light poles/structures; a point-by- point
foot-candle plat (see outdoor lighting requirements); and, general location
and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms,
walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture, lights, and
courts or paved areas;
(5) Landscaping and screening types. (a) In order to provide the
greatest possible flexibility, several landscaping and screening types are
available to accommodate a variety of different physical land features in
the Maryville area. Screening Types A, B, and C, are in place to screen
new development from incompatible land uses or activity centers. Any
form of Screening Types A, B, or C may be chosen depending on each
site's topography and situation.
The successful location of a landscape buffer to adequately screen
a new development from an existing residential use is dependent on
several variables. For most projects, particularly for projects that are on
level topography with adjacent residential uses, the landscape buffer will
likely be proposed and approved along the outer perimeter of the property
line. However, when existing and proposed topography varies between
proposed development and adjacent residential use, the landscape buffer
must be more closely evaluated. The zoning administrator has authority
to require relocation of proposed landscape buffer locations if he
determines a more effective buffer location would maximize the shortand
long-term visual effectiveness and survivability of the landscape buffer.
Review of proposed landscape buffers will be based on the following
attributes: existing and proposed topography between the new
development and adjacent residential use; location of utilities; elevation
of building pads; location of buildings; desirable views to protect; and
height of walls.
Type A: Existing natural screen. For those properties that have
significant vegetation that exists along property lines and may be
appropriate for screening, the Type A option should be chosen. The width
of the natural screen shall be at least twenty-five feet (25). If a
substantial screen of less than 25' exists, a written request can be sent to
the administrator for review. To ensure that all existing natural screens
are consistent in opacity and depth, a site visit by the planning
department will be necessary to determine if the natural screen is in the
spirit of the type A option. For those properties that have little or no
existing vegetation, type B or C should be used.
Type B: Dense screen*. Any of the following variations may be chosen for
the type B option:
14-170
(i) Type B (1): Screen width of fifteen (15) feet and above.
Screening trees** spaced at a maximum of ten (10) feet as measured
trunk to trunk; and shade trees** spaced at a maximum of twenty (20)
feet apart.
(ii) Type B (2): Screen width of ten (10) feet to fifteen (15) feet.
Screening trees** spaced at a maximum of ten (10) feet as measured
trunk to trunk; shade trees** spaced at a maximum of twenty (20) feet
apart; and screening shrubs** spaced at a maximum of 5' apart.
*Trees and shrubs already in place should be implemented into the
landscaping pattern.
**All plantings shall meet the installation and planting size
requirements specified in the plant installation specifications section.
Type C: Combination screen*. Any of the following variations may be
chosen for the type C option:
(i) Type C (1): Screen width of fifteen (15) feet and above.
Screening trees** spaced at a maximum of fifteen (15) feet' as
measured trunk to trunk or two staggered rows of screening
shrubs** spaced at a maximum of ten (10) feet' apart. The
plantings shall face the existing property; and an opaque fence or
masonry wall of at least six (6) feet in height which shall face the
new development.
(ii) Type C (2): Screen width of ten (10) feet to fifteen (15)
feet. Screening Trees** spaced at a maximum of 10' as measured
trunk to trunk or two staggered rows of screening shrubs** spaced
at a maximum of seven (7) feet apart. The plantings shall face the
existing property; and an opaque fence or masonry wall of at least
6' in height which shall face the new development.
*Trees and shrubs already in place should be implemented into the
landscaping pattern.
**All plantings shall meet the installation and planting size
requirements specified in the plant installation specifications
section.
(b) If a proposed high intensity development is bordered by
existing lower intensity development across a street, type D, 'street
buffer' is required.
Type D: Street screening*. Where a proposed commercial, office, or
high-intensity residential development (more than 2 family residential)
borders any residential development on the opposite side of a street, alley,
or other public or private way, Type D screening is required. Choose from
the following:
Minimum 10' screen width: An opaque fence or masonry wall of at least
six (6) feet in height with a series of screening trees** spaced at a
maximum of fifteen (15) feet from trunk to trunk on alternating sides of
the fence/wall AND screening shrubs** shall alternate between the trees
14-171
on the street side of the fence/wall. Screening must be planted on the
property at a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the street
right-of-way to observe utility easements). Plantings must not impair
vision or line of sight of ingress and egress.***
*Trees and shrubs already in place should be implemented into the
landscaping pattern.
**All plantings shall meet the installation and planting size
requirements specified in the plant installation specification section.
***The engineering department will review the site plan to make sure
that sight distance is adequate before landscaping can begin.
The planning department staff is authorized to consider proposed
alternatives to the street screening, type D, as long as the proposed buffer or
screen meets or exceeds the opacity requirements of this section. Proposed
alternative landscaping plans may eliminate the required fencing if approved
by the planning department. A landscape plan will still be required for any
alternative to the type D requirements proposed by the applicant.
(6) Outdoor lighting requirements. This section involves the
measurement and regulation of light along property lines to protect the privacy,
comfort, and character of existing residential neighborhoods. Outdoor lighting
is important for night visibility, safety, and security. Outdoor lighting can,
however, also invade privacy and cause nuisance if excessive glare and direct
light trespasses on established residential properties. These requirements
ensure that new development minimizes the amount of light that may shine on
abutting properties. The following is required when installing lights:
(a) A lighting plan may be required (as determined by the
planning department);
(b) A light "point by point" foot-candle diagram must be shown
on the site plan with a 10 x 10 foot maximum grid. The diagram should
cover the at least ten feet on either side of property lines that border
residential zones or uses;
(c) Lighting must not exceed one foot-candle at or beyond the
property line zoned or used for residential purposes;
(d) Any luminaire with a lamp(s) rated at a total of more than
1800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaries with a lamp(s) rated at a
total of more than nine hundred (900) lumens shall not emit any direct
light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct light emitting
part of the luminaire;
(e) Laser source lights or any similar high intensity light for
outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited; and
(f) The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is
prohibited.
Refer to the matrix below to determine how new developments are
required to provide appropriate screening according to their relationship with
surrounding land uses. Screening types are described in their entirety in the
following pages.
14-172
Land Use-Screening Matrix:
P
R
OP
OS
E
D
E X I S T I N G
1 and 2 Family Residential Other
Residential
Commercial,
Industrial and
Office
1 and 2 family residential NA* NA1 NA1
Other Residential A B, or C NA NA
Commercial, industrial,
and office
A B or C A B or C NA2
Any land use with an
Activity Center3
A B or C A B or C NA
Street screening (new
high-intensity uses)
NA D D
Outdoor lighting
requirements
NA E E
NA = "Not Applicable"
1. No landscaping is required unless a residential activity center is built.
2. If a property is zoned business/transportation or office but the current use
of existing property is residential, then screening is required.
3. Landscaping must screen the length of the activity center along the
property line plus an additional ten (10) feet on either side.
(7) Plant installation specifications. All landscaping materials shall
be installed in a professional manner, and according to accepted planting
procedures specified in the Arboricultural Specifications Manual or the
Tennessee Department of Agriculture, University of Tennessee Extension
Services Horticultural Guidelines. All landscaping plants are to be nursery
grown and purchased from a state licensed plant and nursery dealer, and must
be hardy to zone 6B.
(a) Shade trees: All shade trees shall be installed at a minimum
of 2" caliper and not less than 12' as measured from grade level to the top
of the tree crown. Planted trees shall also have a minimum expected
maturity height of 35' and a minimum canopy spread of 20'. Evergreen
trees can be treated as shade trees provided they meet the minimum
maturity height and canopy spread criteria.
14-173
Recommended Species
Common Name Scientific Name
American Beech Fagus Grandiflora
American Sycamore Platanus Occidentalis
Ash Fraxinus _____________
Bald Cypress Taxodium Distichum
Blackgum Nyssa Sylvatica
Chestnut Aesculus ______________
Chinese Elm Ulmus Parvifolia
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia Glyptostroboides
Ginkgo (male only) Ginkgo Biloba
Honey Locust Gleditsia Triacanthos
Japanese Zelkova Zelkova Serrata
Kentucky Coffeetree Gymnocladus Dioicus
Linden Tilia ______________
London Planetree Plantanus Acerifolia
Maple (Except Silver) Acer ______________
Oak Quercus (any sub-species)
Ohio Buckeye Aesculus Glabia
River Birch Betula Nigra
Sweet Bay Magnolia Magnolia Virginiana
Sweetgum Liquidambar Styraciflua
Thornless Common
Honeylocust Gleditsia Triacanthos Var. Inermis
Tulip Poplar Liriodendron Tulipfera
Willow Salix Sp.
(b) Screening trees: All screening trees shall be installed at minimum
height of eight (8) feet and have a minimum expected mature canopy spread of
eight (8) feet. Screening trees shall be semi-sheared and not natural cut.
Recommended Species
Common Name Scientific Name
American Holly Ilex Opaca
Atlas Cedar Cedrus Atlantica
14-174
Canadian Hemlock Tsunga Caroliniana
Deodar Cedar Cedrus Deodara
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus Virginianan
Foster Holly Illex Cassine
Leyland Cypress Xcupressocyparis Leylandii
Nellie Sevens Holly Ilex X "Nellie Stevens"
White Pine Pinus Strobus
Savannah Holly Ilex Attenuata
Southern Magnolia Magnolia Grandiflora
(c) Screening shrubs: All screening shrubs shall be installed at
a minimum size of three (3) gallons and have an expected maturity height
of at least eight (8) feet and a mature canopy spread of at least five (5)
feet.
Recommended Species
Common Name Scientific Name
Buford Holly Ilex Cornuta "Burfordi"
Chinese Juniper Jniper Chinensis Sp.
Dahoon Holly Ilex Cassine
Leatherleaf Viburnum Viburnum Rhytidophyllum
Lusterleaf Holly Ilex Latifolia
Savannah Holly Ilex X Attenuata "Savannah"
Wax Myrtle Myrica Cerifera
Cherrylaurel Prunus Caroliniana
English Laurel Prunus Laurocerasus
Frunchet's Cotoneaster Cotoneaster Franchetii
Parney's Cotoneaster Cotoneaster Lacteus
(d) Landscaping shrubs: To be used if desired in addition to
landscaping requirements. All landscaping shrubs shall be installed at a
minimum size of three (3) gallons
(e) In addition: Earth berms, other shrubs, ground cover, and
plant materials may be used to supplement landscaping/screening
requirements.
(f) Prohibited plants: The following plants are prohibited from
being used to meet these requirements due to problems with hardiness,
maintenance or nuisance:
Autumn Olive Mimosa Shrub Honeysuckle
Common Privet Mulberry Siberian Elm
Japanese Honeysuckle Multiflora Rose Silver Maple
Garlic Mustard Paulownia Silver Poplar
14-175
Kudzu Vine Purple Loostrife Tree of Heaven
Lespedeza Poison Ivy/Oak/Sumac
(g) Prohibited landscaping materials: No rip-rap shall be used
except along the edges of basins, ponds, or lakes, or at the end of culverts.
All other areas should have culverts installed and covered with soil,
flagstone, and/or have fast growing ground covers planted (e.g. Liriope,
Junipers, Vinca).
(h) Utility easement policy: Any tree or shrub used to meet the
requirements of this Section shall not be located within proposed or
existing utility easements or inside street rights of way. The applicant
is responsible for identifying existing and proposed easements.
(8) Maintenance and enforcement. Maintenance of landscaped areas
is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner and/or the lessee of the
development. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a
healthy manner. Plants that die must be replaced in kind. Written proof that
all specifications of this section have been met provided one year after the
planting is completed. The property owner or lessee must provide this
documentation to the building inspector.
Enforcement of this landscape ordinance is the responsibility of the Maryville
Codes Enforcement Department.
(9) Hardships. Hardships: The landscaping/screening ordinance does
not intend to create undue hardship on affected properties. The following
administrative remedies are available when applicable:
(a) An automatic fifty percent (50%) reduction in landscape yard
depth requirements for screening; and
(b) A twenty-five percent (25%) reduction in planting
requirements (for all sections except for the required screening trees)
applies for lots with:
(i) Depths of 150' or less;
(ii) Extraordinary configurations (as determined by the
Maryville Board of Zoning Appeals); and/or
(iii) Areas of less than one half acre (21,780 square feet or
less).
(10) Conflict with other ordinances. Conflict with other articles in the
Maryville Land Development regulations: Where any requirement of the
Landscaping/Screening Ordinance conflicts with the requirement of another
article in the Maryville Land Development Regulations, the most stringent
requirement shall prevail. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and
amended by Ord. #2009-01, Jan. 2009, and Ord. #2018-30, Sept. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
14-214. Density and dimensional regulations. (1) Minimum lot size.
Subject to the provisions of Section 4 (Cluster Subdivisions) and 5 (Integrally
14-176
Designed Subdivisions), all lots in the following zones shall have at least the
amount of square footage indicated in the following table:
Zone Minimum Square Feet
Residential 7,000
without sanitary sewer 30,000
without sanitary sewer and public water 35,000
Environmental Conservation 40,000
Business and Transportation 5,000 **
No minimum
Central Community 5,000 **
No minimum
Single Family 11,000
Office 5,000
Neighborhood 5,000
Residential in Oak Park Historic District 16,000 ***
College Hill Historic District 14,000
Estate 43,560
**If used for residential purposes, otherwise no minimum.
***Refer to City Code on nonconforming uses regarding Oak Park Historic
District nonconforming situations of duplexes and multi-family structures
Subject to the provisions in the city land development ordinances
concerning nonconforming lots and these regulations, the permit-issuing
authority and the owner of two or more contiguous lots may agree to regard
multiple lots as a single lot if necessary to comply with any of the requirements
of these regulations.
(2) Residential density. (a) Subject to subsection (b) and the provision
of (4) (cluster subdivisions) and (5)(integrally designed subdivisions),
every lot developed for residential purposes shall have the number of
square feet per dwelling unit indicated in the following table. In
determining the number of dwelling units permissible on a tract of land,
fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
14-177
Zone Minimum Square
Feet
Residential 7,000
without sanitary sewer 30,000
without sanitary sewer and public water 35,000
Central community 5,000
Environmental conservation 40,000
Single-family 11,000
Office 5,000
Neighborhood 7,000
Estate 43,560
(b) Two-family conversions and primary residences with an accessory
apartment shall be allowed only on lots having at least one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the minimum square footage required for one dwelling
unit on a lot in such district. With respect to multi-family conversions
into three- or four-dwelling units, the minimum lot size shall be two
hundred percent (200%) and two hundred fifty percent (250%)
respectively of the minimum required for one dwelling unit.
(3) Minimum lot widths. (a) No lot may be created that is so
narrow or otherwise so irregularly shaped that it would be impracticable
to construct on it a building that:
(i) Could be used for purposes that are permissible in
that zoning district, and
(ii) Could satisfy any applicable setback requirements for
that district.
(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing standard,
the following indicated minimum lot widths that are recommended and
are deemed presumptively to satisfy the standard set forth in subsection
(a). The lot width shall be measured along a straight line connecting the
points at which a line that demarcates the required setback from the
street intersects with lot boundary lines at opposite sides of the lot.
Zone Lot Width
in Feet
Residential 75
Central community 50
Business and transportation 100
Environmental conservation 100
Single family 75
Office 75
14-178
Neighborhood 75
Estate (at front building line) 150
(c) No lot created after the effective date of these regulations
that is less than the recommended width shall be entitled to a variance
from any building setback requirement.
(4) Cluster subdivisions. (a) In any single-family residential
subdivision a developer may create lots that are smaller than those
required by Section 1 if such developer complies with the provisions of
this section and if the lots so created are not smaller than the minimum
set forth in the following table:
Zone Minimum Square
Feet
Residential 5,500
Environmental Conservation 25,000
(b) The intent of this section is to authorize the developer to
decrease lot sizes and leave the land "saved" by so doing as usable open
space, thereby lowering development costs and increasing the amenity of
the project without increasing the density beyond what would be
permissible if the land were subdivided into the size of lots required by
(1).
(c) The amount of usable open space that must be set aside
shall be determined by:
(i) Subtracting from the standard square footage
requirement set forth in (1) the amount of square footage of each
lot that is smaller than that standard:
(A) Adding together the results obtained in (1) for
each lot.
(d) The provisions of this section may only be used if the usable
open space set aside in a subdivision comprises at least ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of space that satisfies the definition of usable open
space set forth in § 14-211(3) and if such usable open space is otherwise
in compliance with the provisions of § 14-211.
(e) The setback requirements found in the city code shall apply
in cluster subdivisions.
(5) Integrally designed subdivisions. (a) In any integrally designed
subdivision, the developer may create lots and construct buildings
without regard to any minimum lot size, lot width, or setback restrictions
except that:
14-179
(i) Lot boundary setback requirements as found in the
city code shall apply where and to the extent that the subdivided
tract abuts land that is not part of the subdivision, and
(ii) Each lot must be of sufficient size and dimensions
that it can support the structure proposed to be located on it,
consistent with all other applicable requirements of these
regulations and of the city code.
(b) The number of dwelling units in an integrally designed
subdivision may not exceed the maximum density authorized for the tract
under (2).
(c) To the extent reasonably practicable, in residential
subdivisions the amount of land "saved" by creating lots that are smaller
than the standards set forth in (1) shall be set aside as usable open space.
(d) The purpose of this section is to provide flexibility,
consistent with the public health and safety and without increasing
overall density, to the developer who subdivides property and constructs
buildings on the lots created in accordance with a unified and coherent
plan of development.
(6) Density on lots where portion dedicated to city. (a) Subject to the
other provisions of this section, if any portion of a tract that lies with an
area designated on any officially adopted City plan as part of a proposed
public park, greenway, or bikeway and before the parcel or tract is
developed, the owner of the parcel or tract with the concurrence of the
city dedicates to the city that portion of the tract so designated, when the
remainder of the tract is developed for residential purposes the
permissible density at which the remainder may be developed shall be
calculated in accordance with the provision of this section.
(b) If the proposed use of the remaining property after the
dedication at issue in subsection (a) is a single-family detached
residential subdivision, then the lots such subdivision may be developed
in accordance with the provisions of (4) and (5) of this section except that
the developer need not set aside usable open space to the extent that an
equivalent amount of land has previously been dedicated to the city in
accordance with subsection (a).
(c) If the proposed use of the remainder is a two-family or
multi-family project, then the permissible density at which the remainder
may be developed shall be calculated by regarding the dedicated portion
of the original lots as if it were still part of the lot proposed for
development.
(d) If the portion of the tract that remains after dedication as
provided in subsection (a) is divided in such a way that the resultant
parcels are intended for future subdivision or development, then each of
the resultant parcels shall be entitled to its pro rata share of the "density
bonus" provided for in subsections (b) and (c).
14-180
(7) Building setback requirements. (a) Subject to the other provisions
of this section, no portion of any building or any freestanding sign may be
located on any lot closer to any lot line than is authorized in the table set
forth in this section.
(i) If the street right-of-way is readily determinable (by
reference to a recorded map, iron pins, or other means), the setback
shall be measured from such right-of-way line. If the right-of-way
line is not so determinable, the setback shall be measured from the
centerline of the street.
(ii) As used in this section, the term "lot boundary line"
refers to lot boundaries other than those that abut streets.
(iii) As used in this section, the term "building" includes
any substantial structure which by nature of its size scale,
dimensions, bulk or use tends to constitute a visual obstruction or
generate activity similar to that usually associated with a
building. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
following structure shall be deemed to fall within this description,
except gasoline pump islands, pumps and canopy support poles.
The minimum setback requirements for decks/patio are the same
as for accessory buildings (which do not exceed twelve feet (12') in
height) or is two feet (2') for every foot of height (measured from
grade to the top of the railing), whichever is greater.
(A) Fences running along lot boundaries adjacent
to public street rights-of-way if such fences exceed six feet
in height and are substantially opaque.
(b) Whenever a lot in a nonresidential district has a common
boundary line with a lot in a residential district, and the property line
setback requirement applicable to the residential lot is greater than that
applicable to the nonresidential lot, then the lot in the nonresidential
district shall be required to observe the property line setback requirement
applicable to the adjoining residential lot.
(c) Setback distances shall be measured from the property line
or street right-of-way line to a point on the lot that is directly below the
nearest extension of any part of the building that is substantially a part
of the building itself and not a mere appendage to it (such as a flagpole,
etc.)
(i) Subject to the provisions stated above, the following
structural projections shall be allowed to encroach within designed
setbacks not to exceed three (3) feet: awnings; canopies; bay
windows; chimneys; planter boxes and the like; overhanging
cornices; eaves; gutters; roofs; and similar architectural features;
minor utilities associated with the structures; open fire escapes;
steps, open terraces; unenclosed porches.
14-181
(d) Whenever a private road that serves more than three (3) lots
or more than three (3) dwelling units or that serves any nonresidential
use tending to generate traffic equivalent to more than three (3) dwelling
units is located long a lot boundary, then:
(i) If the lot is not also bordered by a public street,
buildings and freestanding signs shall be set back from the
centerline of the private road just as if such road were a public
street.
(ii) If t he lot is also bordered by a public street, then the
setback distance on lots used for residential purposes shall be
measured from the inside boundary of the traveled portion of the
private road.
(e) City of Maryville setback tables:
City of Maryville
Required Building Setbacks (Feet)
FRONT note 1 SIDE REAR
RESIDENTIAL USES notes 2,6
Estate zone 30 10 note 3 25
Other 25 10 20
COMMERCIAL USES note 2 20 NONE notes 4,5 NONE notes 4,5
INDUSTRIAL USES 60 50 60
NOTES:
1. All setbacks along street right-of-way property lines shall be
considered a "front" setback even if there are multiple "front"
setbacks on a lot.
2. Setback from a collector - forty (40) feet; setback from an arterial
fifty (50) feet.
3. In estate zone side setbacks shall be fifteen (15) feet for dwelling
with more than one (1) story.
4. If commercial uses are adjacent to residential uses - ten (10) feet
side and/or ten (10) feet rear.
5. Gasoline pump island and canopy supports setback from collector
or arterial - thirty-five (35) feet.
6. Setbacks within Impact Overlay Districts and Planned Unit
Developments shall be established by BZA on review of the
proposed site plan.
14-182
City of Maryville
Residential Accessory Building Setback Requirements
Setbacks for accessory buildings that do not exceed 12 feet in height
(Feet)
REAR YARD SIDE YARD STREET R-O-W
RESIDENTIAL ZONES 5 10 See note
ESTATE ZONE 10 10 See note
Note: Street R-O-W setback same as principle structure.
Setbacks for accessory buildings that exceed 12 feet in height (Feet)
REAR YARD SIDE YARD STREET R-O-W
RESIDENTIAL
ZONES
5+2 per every ft
over 12 in height
10+2 per every ft
over 12 in height
See note
ESTATE ZONE 10+2 per every ft
over 12 in height
10+2 per every ft
over 12 in height
See note
Note: Street R-O-W setback same as principle structure.
Accessory structure setbacks are not required to exceed primary structure
setbacks.
(8) Building height requirements. (a) For purposes of this section:
(i) The height of a building shall be the vertical distance
measured from the mean elevation of the finished grade at the
front of the building to the highest point of the building.
(ii) A point of access to a roof shall be the top of any
parapet wall or the lowest point of a roof's surface, whichever is
greater. Roofs with slopes greater than seventy five percent (75%)
are regarded as walls.
(b) Subject to the remaining provision of this section, building
height limitations in the various zoning districts shall be as follows:
Zone Height Limitation
(in feet)
Environmental conservation 35
Residential 35
Central community 55
14-183
Business and transportation 55
Single family 35
Office 35
Neighborhood 35
(c) Subject to subsection (d), the following features are exempt
from the district height limitations set forth in subsection (b):
(i) chimneys, church spires, elevator shafts, flyspaces for
curtains, scenery, or lighting in a theatre, auditorium, or
multipurpose structure and similar structural appendages not
intended as places of occupancy or storage.
(ii) flagpoles and similar devices,
(iii) heating and air conditioning equipment, solar
collectors, and similar equipment, fixtures, and devices.
(d) The features listed in subsection (c) are exempt from the
height limitations set forth in subsection (b) if they conform to all other
applicable codes and regulations and to the following requirements:
(i) Not more than one-third of the total roof area may be
consumed by such features unless approved by the board of zoning
appeals.
(ii) The features described in subsection (c)(iii) above
must be set back from the edge of the roof a minimum distance of
one foot for every foot by which such features extend above the roof
surface of the principal building to which they are attached, unless
approved by the board of zoning appeals.
(iii) The permit issuing authority may authorize or
require that parapet walls be constructed (up to a height not
exceeding that of the features screened) to shield features listed in
subsections (b)(i) and (iii) from view.
(e) Notwithstanding subsection (b), in any zoning district the
vertical distance from the ground to a point of access to a roof surface of
any nonresidential building or any multi-family residential building
containing four (4) or more dwelling units may not exceed thirty-five (35)
feet unless the fire chief certifies to the permit-issuing authority that
such building is designed to provide adequate protection against the
dangers of fire.
(f) Towers and antennas fifty (50) feet tall or less - all districts;
towers and antennas fifty (50) feet tall or more - Business and
Transportation District and Central Community District.
(9) Accessory building setback requirements. (a) All accessory
buildings in rear yards of lots in residential districts shall be required to
observe a five (5) foot setback from the rear and side yards.
14-184
(b) All accessory buildings in residential districts must comply
with street right-of-way and side lot setback provisions if the accessory
building is not to the rear of the principal structure.
(c) Where the high point of the roof or any appurtenance of any
accessory building exceeds twelve (12) feet in height, the accessory
building shall be setback from the rear lot boundary lines an additional
two (2) feet for every foot of height exceeding twelve (12) feet.
(d) Maximum lot coverage on principal and accessory buildings
shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the lot.
(e) The cumulative total of accessory buildings shall not exceed
six hundred (600) square feet of ground floor area nor shall any accessory
building exceed fifteen feet (15') in height without a special exception
permit granted by the board of zoning appeals. (as added by Ord. # 2006-
32, June 2006 and amended by Ord. # 2006-39, Aug. 2006, Ord. #2006-40,
Aug. 2006, Ord. #2016-06, March 2016, and Ord. #2018-12, June 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
14-215. Streets and sidewalks. (1) Access to lots. Every lot shall have
access to it that is sufficient to afford a reasonable means of ingress and egress
for emergency vehicles as well as for all those likely to need or desire access to
the property in its intended use.
(2) Road and sidewalk requirements in unsubdivided developments.
(a) Within unsubdivided developments, all permanent private
easements and access ways shall be designed and constructed to facilitate
the safe and convenient movement of motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
Width of roads, use of curb and gutter, and paving specifications shall be
determined by the provisions of the city' subdivision regulations and/or
applicable city ordinances. To the extent not otherwise covered in the
foregoing articles, and to the extent that the requirements set forth in
this article for subdivision streets may be relevant to the roads in
unsubdivided developments, the requirements of this article may be
applied to satisfy the standards set forth in the first sentence of this
subsection.
(b) Whenever a road in an unsubdivided development connects
two or more sub collector streets, collector streets, or arterial streets (as
the same are defined in the city' subdivision regulations) in such a
manner that any substantial volume of through traffic is likely to make
use of this road, such road shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards applicable to subdivision streets and shall be dedicated. In
other cases when roads in unsubdivided developments within the city are
constructed in accordance with the specifications for subdivision streets,
the city may accept an offer of dedication of such streets.
(c) In all unsubdivided residential developments, sidewalks
shall be provided linking dwelling units with other dwelling units, the
14-185
public street, and on-site activity centers such as parking areas, laundry
facilities, and recreational areas and facilities.
(d) Whenever the permit-issuing authority finds that a means
of pedestrian access is necessary from an unsubdivided development to
schools, parks, playgrounds, or other roads or facilities and that such
access is not conveniently provided by sidewalks adjacent to the roads,
the developer may be required to reserve an unobstructed easement of at
least ten feet to provide such access.
(e) The sidewalks required by this section shall be at least five
(5) feet wide and constructed according to specifications outlined by the
city director of engineering and public works or his or her designee and
in accordance with other design criteria adopted by the city, except that
the permit-issuing authority may permit the installation of walkways
constructed with other suitable materials when it concludes that:
(i) Such walkways would serve the residents of the
development as adequately as concrete sidewalks; and
(ii) Such walks could be more environmentally desirable
or more in keeping with the overall design of the development.
(3) Attention to handicapped in street and sidewalk construction.
(a) Whenever curb and gutter construction is used on public
streets, wheelchair ramps for the handicapped shall be provided at
intersections and other major points of pedestrian flow. Wheelchair
ramps and depressed curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the
International building code, in the current edition otherwise adopted by
the city, as enforced by the city building inspector.
(b) In unsubdivided developments, sidewalk construction for the
handicapped shall conform to the requirements of the building code of the
City of Maryville.
(4) Street names and house numbers. (a) Street names shall be
assigned by the developer subject to the approval of the permit-issuing
authority. Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with existing
streets shall be given the same name. Newly created streets shall be
given names that neither duplicate nor are phonetically similar to
existing streets within the city's planning jurisdiction, regardless of the
use of different suffixes (such as those in subsection (b)).
(b) Street names shall include a suffix such as the following:
(i) Circle. A short street that returns to itself.
(ii) Court or place. A cul-de-sac or dead-end street.
(iii) Loop. A street that begins at the intersection with
one street and circles back to end at another intersection with the
same street.
(iv) Street. All public streets not designated by another
suffix.
(c) Building numbers shall be assigned by the city.
14-186
(d) Street signs shall be placed appropriately by the developer
or subdivider in a new subdivision. The developer shall install signs
where indicated by the city director of engineering and public works or
his or her designee.
In the event the street is a designated private street then those
who are responsible for the maintenance of the said private street shall
also be responsible for the installation and maintenance of all traffic
control devices.
All devices shall conform to size, material and location criteria
found in the "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
(5) Bridges. All bridges shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications of the Tennessee Department of Transportation,
except that bridges on roads not intended for public dedication may be approved
if designed by a licensed architect or engineer.
(6) Utilities. Utilities installed in public rights-of-way or along
permanent private easements shall conform to the requirements set forth in
§ 14-216.
14-216. Utilities. (1) Utility ownership and easement rights.
(a) In any case in which a developer installs or causes the
installation of water, sewer, electrical power, telephone, cable television,
or stormwater facilities and appurtenances and intends that such
facilities shall be owned, operated, or maintained by the public utility or
other entity other than the developer, the developer shall transfer to such
utility or entity the necessary ownership and/or easement rights to enable
the utility or entity to operate and maintain such facilities.
(b) Drainage and utility easements shall be five (5) feet in width
along interior boundary lines of lots in a subdivision and shall be ten (10)
feet in width along all exterior lot lines where adjoining lot or property is
not subject to a similar easement at least five (5) feet in width. A ten (10)
foot utility and drainage easement shall exist along platted rights-of-ways
and be determined by this document to be an exterior lot line. Such
dedication shall be noted on the final plat of a subdivision, unless
otherwise required by the appropriate reviewing agency.
(2) Lots served by governmentally owned water or sewer lines. Water
and sewer connection requirements shall be determined based on the rules,
rates, regulations and policies of the City of Maryville Water Quality Control
Department.
(3) Sewage disposal facilities required. Every principal use and every
lot within a subdivision shall be served by sanitary sewer as provided in (2) of
this section or by a sewage disposal system that is adequate to accommodate the
reasonable needs of such use or subdivision lot and that complies with all
applicable health regulations. For purposes of complying with all local health
department regulations, if the lot uses a subsurface sewer disposal system and
14-187
is served by a public water supply, there shall be a minimum of thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of useable lot area for lots developed for residential
purposes. If a lot is developed for residential purposes and sanitary sewer and
public water are not available to the lot, then the minimum lot area per unit
shall be thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet.
(4) Determining compliance with § 14-216(3). (a) Primary
responsibility for determining whether a proposed development will
comply with the standards set forth in (3) often lies with an agency other
than the city, and the developer must comply with the detailed standards
and specifications of such other agency. The relevant agencies are listed
in subsection (b). Whenever any such agency requires detailed
construction or design drawings before giving its official approval to the
proposed sewage disposal system, the authority issuing a permit under
these regulations may rely upon a preliminary review by such agency of
the basic design elements of the proposed sewage disposal system to
determine compliance with (3). However, construction of such system
may not be commenced until the detailed plans and specifications have
been reviewed and any appropriate permits issued by such agency.
(b) In the following table, the IF statement describes the type
of development and the THEN statement indicates the agency that must
certify to the city whether the proposed sewage disposal system complies
with the standards set forth in (3).
(i) IF The use is located on a lot that is served by the
City sewer system or a previously approved, privately owned
package treatment plant, and the use can be served by simple
connection to the system (as in the case of a single-family
residence) rather than the construction of an internal collection
system (as in the case of a shopping center or apartment complex):
THEN No further certification is necessary.
(ii) IF The use (other than a subdivision) is located on a
lot that is served by the city's sewer system but service to the use
necessitates construction of an internal collection system (as in the
case of a shopping center or apartment complex); and
(A) IF the internal collection system is to be
transferred and maintained by the city:
THEN the internal collection system must meet the standards of
the city from design to installation.
(B) IF the internal collection system is to be
privately maintained:
THEN The City must certify that the proposed collection system
is adequate.
(iii) IF the proposed use is a subdivision;
14-188
(A) IF Lots within the subdivision are to be served
by simple connection to existing city lines or lines of a
previously approved private system:
THEN No further certification is necessary.
(B) IF Lots within the subdivision are to be served
by the city system but the developer will be responsible for
installing the necessary additions to the city system:
THEN the internal collection system must meet the standards of
the city from design to installation.
(c) On subdivision plats depicting property within the city
where existing Subsurface Sewer Disposal (SSD) systems exist, it shall
be required that these subdivisions contain wording or notations as
follows:
"In accordance with the policies of the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation, the Blount County Health
Department has not evaluated the existing Subsurface Sewerage
Disposal (SSD) system on lot(s) represented on this plat. In
approving this plat for recordation, the Maryville Municipal
Planning Commission makes no representation as to the
performance of the existing SSD system."
If additional language is required by the planning commission than that
stated in this section, it shall be added and appropriately noted on the
plat starting where existing subsurface sewage disposal systems exist.
(5) Water supply system required. Every principal use and every lot
within a subdivision shall be served by a water supply system that is adequate
to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use or subdivision lot and that
complies with all applicable health regulations.
(6) Determining compliance with § 14-216(5):
(a) Primary responsibility for determining whether a proposed
development will comply with the standards set forth in (5) often lies
within an agency other than the city and the developer must comply with
the detailed standards and specifications of such other agency. The
relevant agencies are listed in subsection (b). Whenever any such agency
requires detailed construction or design drawings before giving its official
approval to the proposed water supply system, the authority issuing a
permit under this chapter may rely upon a preliminary review by such
agency of the basic design elements of the proposed water supply system
to determine compliance with (5). However, construction of such system
may not be commenced until the detailed plans and specifications have
been reviewed and any appropriate permits issued by such agency.
(b) In the following table, the IF statement describes the type
of development and the THEN statement indicates the agency that must
certify to the city whether the proposed water supply system complies
with the standards set forth in (5).
14-189
(i) IF The use is located on a lot that is served by the city
water system or a previously approved, privately owned public
water supply system and the use can be served by simple
connection to the system (as in the case of a single-family
residence) rather than the construction of an internal distribution
system (as in the case of a shopping center or apartment complex):
THEN No further certification is necessary.
(ii) IF The use (other than a subdivision) is located on a
lot that is served by the city water system but service to the use
necessitates construction of an internal distribution system (as in
the case of a shopping center or apartment complex); and the
internal distribution system is to be transferred to and maintained
by the city:
THEN the proposed internal distribution system must meet the
standards of the city from design to installation.
(iii) IF The use (other than a subdivision) is located on a
lot not served by the city system or a previously approved,
privately owned public water supply system; and
(A) IF the use is to be served by a privately owned
public water supply system that has not previously been
approved:
THEN The Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation must certify that the proposed system complies with
all applicable state and federal regulations. The Blount County
Health Department must also approve the plans if the water
source is well and the system has a design capacity of 1,000,000
gallons per day. A private well system may not be connected to the
City utility system.
(B) IF the use is to be served by some other source
(such as an individual well):
THEN: The Blount County Health Department must certify that
the proposed system meets all applicable state and local
regulations.
(iv) IF the proposed use is a subdivision; and
(A) IF Lots within the subdivision are to be served
by simple connection to existing city lines or lines of a
previously approved public water supply system:
THEN No further certification is necessary.
(B) IF Lots within the subdivision are to be served
by the city system but the developer will be responsible for
installing the necessary additions to such system:
THEN the proposed internal distribution system must meet the
standards of the city from design to installation.
14-190
(C) IF Lots within the subdivision are to be served
by individual well:
THEN The Blount County Health Department must certify to the
City that each lot intended to be served by a well can be served in
accordance with applicable health regulations.
(7) Lighting requirements. (a) Subject to subsection (b), all public
streets, sidewalks, and other common areas or facilities in subdivisions
created after the effective date of these regulations shall be sufficiently
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons
using such streets, sidewalks, and other common areas or facilities.
(b) To the extent that fulfillment of the requirement established
in subsection (a) would normally require street lights installed along
public streets, this requirement shall be applicable only to residential and
commercial subdivisions located within the corporate limits of the city.
(c) All roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, and other
common areas and facilities in unsubdivided developments shall be
sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety
of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, and other
common areas and facilities.
(d) All entrances and exits in substantial buildings used for
non-residential purposes and in two-family or multi-family residential
developments containing more than four (4) dwelling units shall be
adequately lighted to ensure the safety of persons and the security of the
buildings.
(8) Excessive illumination. Lighting within any lot that unnecessarily
illuminates any other lot and substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment
of such other lot is prohibited. Lighting unnecessarily illuminates another lot
if it clearly exceeds the standards set forth in (7) or if the standards set forth in
(7) could reasonably be achieved in a manner that would not substantially
interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring properties.
(9) Electric power. Every principal use and every lot within a
subdivision shall have available to it a source of electric power adequate to
accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such
subdivision. Compliance with this requirement shall be determined as follows:
(a) If the use is not a subdivision and is located on a lot that is
served by an existing power line and the use can be served by a simple
connection to such power line (as opposed to a more complex distribution
system, such as would be required in an apartment complex or shopping
center), then no further certification is needed.
(b) If the use is a subdivision or is not located on a lot served by
an existing power line or a substantial internal distribution system will
be necessary, then the electric utility service provider must review the
proposed plans and certify to the city that it can provide service that is
14-191
adequate to meet the needs of the proposed use and every lot within the
proposed subdivision.
(10) Telephone service. Every principal use and every lot within a
subdivision must have available to it a telephone service cable adequate to
accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such
subdivision. Compliance with this requirement shall be determined as follows:
(a) If the use is not a subdivision and is located on a lot that is
served by an existing telephone line and the use can be served by simple
connection to such power line (as opposed to a more complex distribution
system, such as would be required in an apartment complex or shopping
center), then no further certification is necessary.
(b) If the use is a subdivision or is not located on a lot served by
an existing telephone line or a substantial internal distribution system
will be necessary, then the telephone utility company must review the
proposed plans and certify to the city that it can provide service that is
adequate to meet the needs of the proposed use and every lot within the
proposed subdivision.
(11) Underground utilities. (a) All electric power lines (not to include
transformers or enclosures containing electrical equipment including, but
not limited to, switches, meters, or capacitors which may be pad
mounted), telephone, gas distribution, and cable television lines in
subdivisions constructed after the effective date of these regulations shall,
when placed underground, be done in accordance with the specifications
and policies of the respective utility service providers.
(b) All electric power lines (not to include transformers or
enclosures containing electric equipment including, but no limited to,
switches, meters, or capacitors which may be pad mounted) serving four
(4) or more residential lots or developments with apartments,
condominiums, townhouses, etc. shall be placed underground. All electric
power lines installed underground shall be done in accordance with
specifications and policies of the utility service provider as provided for
in (a) of this section.
(c) Whenever an unsubdivided development is hereafter
constructed on a lot that is undeveloped on the effective date of these
regulations, then all electric power, telephone, gas distribution, and cable
television lines installed to serve the development that are located on the
development site outside of a previously existing public street
right-of-way shall be placed underground in accordance with the
specifications and policies of the respective utility companies.
(12) Utilities to be consistent with internal and external development.
(a) Whenever it can reasonably be anticipated that utility
facilities constructed in one development will be extended to serve other
adjacent or nearby developments, such utility facilities (e.g., water or
sewer lines) shall be located and constructed so that extensions can be
14-192
made conveniently and without undue burden or expense or unnecessary
duplication of service.
(b) Whenever it can be reasonably accomplished, when a
development is constructed or phased over time and underground utility
facilities are used in the initial stages of development, then remaining
portions of the development or subdivision shall be serviced with
underground utilities.
(c) All utility facilities shall be constructed in such manner as
to minimize interference with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and to
facilitate maintenance without undue damage to improvements or
facilities located within the development.
(13) As-built drawings required. When a developer installs or causes
to be installed any utility line in any public right-of-way, the developer shall, as
soon as practicable after installation is complete, and before acceptance of any
water or sewer line, furnish the city with a copy of a drawing that shows the
exact location of such utility lines. Such drawings must be verified as accurate
by the utility service provided. Compliance with this requirement shall be a
condition of the continued validity of the permit authorizing such development.
As-built drawings shall further be provided for stormwater lines, ponds or any
associated infrastructure in the stormwater system. Such as-built drawing
shall be approved by the city prior to acceptance by the city of such
infrastructure.
(14) Fire hydrants. (a) Every development within the corporate limits
(subdivided or unsubdivided) that is served by a public water system
shall include a system of fire hydrants sufficient to provide adequate fire
protection for the buildings located or intended to be located within such
development.
(b) The presumption established by these regulations is that to
satisfy the standards set forth in subsection (a), fire hydrants must be
located so that all parts of every building within the development may be
served by a hydrant by laying not more than five hundred (500) feet of
hose connected to such hydrant. However, the fire chief may authorize
or require a deviation from this standard if recognized fire safety
standards would allow another arrangement more satisfactory which
would comply with the standards set forth in subsection (a).
(c) The Maryville Fire Chief shall determine the precise location
of all fire hydrants, subject to the other provisions of this section. In
general, fire hydrants shall be placed six (6) feet behind the curb line of
publicly dedicated streets that have curb and gutter.
(d) The water and wastewater division of the utilities board
shall determine the design standards of all hydrants as set forth in the
rules, regulations, rates and policies for the city water quality control
department. Unless otherwise specified by the fire chief, all hydrants
shall have two (2) two and one-half inch hose connections and one 5 1/4
14-193
inch hose connection. The two and one-half-inch hose connections shall
be located at least twenty one and one-half inches from ground level. All
hydrant threads shall be national standard threads.
(e) Water lines that serve hydrants shall be designed and sized
according to the rules, regulations, rates and policies for the City of
Maryville Water Quality Control Department. (as added by Ord.
#2006-32, June 2006, and amended by Ord. #2018-30, Sept. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
14-217. [Repealed.] (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and
repealed by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007)
14-218. Signs. (1) Title, purpose, and scope. This section shall be known
as the "Sign Ordinance of the City of Maryville, Tennessee," and may be so cited,
and further referenced elsewhere as "sign ordinance" and herein as "the
ordinance" or "this ordinance" shall imply the same wording and meaning as the
full title.
The general purpose and intent of this section shall be the fair and
comprehensive regulation of signs. The intent of this section is to assist the
economic development of the city without lessening the citizenry's quality of life.
The regulations as set forth in this section are established to provide for the
public safety, area development, preservation of property values, and the
general welfare within the city.
The specific purposes of this section include, but not limited to:
(a) Aiding in traffic control and safety through the regulation
of undue concentration of signs which could be distracting and which
could adversely impact traffic safety and traffic flow;
(b) Protecting property values by avoiding unnecessary visual
competition and the uncontrolled proliferation of signs;
(c) Lessen congestion of available land and air spaces by the
establishment of reasonable standards for commercial and other
advertising through the use of signs so as not to be a future detriment to
business activity and area development;
(d) Recognizing the rights of the public when using the roads,
streets, highways, and other public right-of-ways; and
(e) Preserve the attractive character of the city.
This section will regulate all signs within the City of Maryville except those
located within the interior of buildings and/or structures. All signs which are
located either on or to the exterior of a building are to be regulated. All signs
erected by local, state, and federal governmental agencies are subject to the
provisions of this section except as set forth in (4) and (12) herein.
(2) Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless
clearly required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this section
shall have the meaning indicated when used in this article.
14-194
(a) "Animated sign." Any sign which incorporates in any
manner visible or mechanical movement within the sign frame and not
rotating movement of the sign itself, or visible apparent movement
achieved by electrical pulsations.
(b) "Banner." A sign made of fabric or non-rigid material.
(c) "Billboard." A billboard is any off-premise sign in excess of
one-hundred square feet.
(d) "Changeable copy sign." A sign which by manual or
mechanical means or by lighting effects can have its copy message
changed, apart from any reworking of the sign.
(e) "Digital billboard." A digital billboard is an off-premises
billboard sign in excess of one hundred (100) square feet that is digital in
nature and uses LCD, LED, or similar electronic technology for providing
content to the billboard.
(f) "Directory sign." A directory sign is one which directs and
guides traffic on private property.
(g) "Electronic Message Center (EMC) sign." A type of
changeable copy sign that uses a bank of lights or other lighting
technology that can be electronically altered to form words, letters,
figures, symbols, pictures or patterns to convey a message without
altering the sign face. An EMC sign shall only be used as a marquee or
message center on-premise business sign and shall be attached to a pylon,
monument or wall sign.
(h) "Free-standing sign." A sign erected on a free-standing
frame, mast or pole, and not attached to any building.
(i) "Internally illuminated sign." Any sign designed to provide
artificial light either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through
transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign.
(i) "Landmark sign." A sign that exemplifies the cultural,
architectural or commercial identity of the City of Maryville, is iconic in
its location, and contributes to the character of the surrounding area.
(k) "Marquee sign." A wall sign mounted on a permanent
roof-like projection over the entry to an establishment, with or without
changeable copy.
(l) "Monument sign." A free-standing sign sitting directly on the
ground or mounted on a low base.
(m) "Mural." A picture or representation painted on a wall of a
structure.
(n) "Non-conforming sign." Any sign which was lawfully erected
and maintained prior to such time as it was subject to a sign ordinance
and which now fails to conform to the present sign ordinance.
(o) "Off-premise sign." A sign or structure which advertises a
business, product or service not on or offered on the premise on which
14-195
subject sign is located or a sign or structure which identifies an
organization not located on the premise on which subject sign is located.
(p) "On-premise sign." A sign or structure which advertises a
business, product or service on or offered on the premises on which
subject sign is located or a sign or structure which identifies an
organization located on the premise on which subject sign is located.
(q) "Parapet or parapet wall." That portion of a building wall
that rises above the roof level.
(r) "Pennant." A piece of plastic or cloth, pointed at the bottom
and suspended at its top, and primarily used as an attention-getting
device.
(s) "Permit." An authorization by the City of Maryville of a
particular act or activity. A permit is required for the erection, relocation,
or other alteration of a sign.
(t) "Placard." A card generally used for advertising a product or
service.
(u) "Product sign. A sign which displays petroleum product
prices. Such sign is considered a changeable copy sign.
(v) "Propeller." A device of two (2) or more blades on a revolving
hub used as an advertising device.
(w) "Right-of-way width." The particular distance across a public
street or other right-of-way, usually measured from property line to
property line.
(x) "Sign." Any letter, figure, design, symbol, trademark or
device mounted or otherwise placed and intended to be visible from the
outside of a building, for display as an advertisement, announcement,
notice, or name.
(y) "Sign height." The vertical dimension from ground level at
the base of the structure to the uppermost point of the sign.
(z) "Sign setback." The linear distance measured horizontally
in feet from the property line or public right-of-way to the nearest edge
of a sign.
(aa) "Streamer." Any long, narrow, flowing strip primarily used
as an attention-getting device.
(bb) "Street frontage." The linear distance measured horizontally
along that portion of a property adjacent to a street.
(cc) "Temporary sign." A sign that is used in the connection with
a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended, or expected
to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short or definite
period of time. If a sign display area is permanent but the message
displayed is to be subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be
regarded as temporary.
(dd) "Wall sign." Any sign erected parallel to the face or on the
outside wall of any building and supported throughout its entire length
14-196
by such wall where the edges of the sign do not project more than twelve
inches therefrom.
(3) Permit required for signs. Except signs excluded from regulation
or signs not requiring a permit, no sign may be constructed, erected, moved,
enlarged, illuminated or substantially altered except in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(a) Sign permit applications and sign permits shall be in
accordance with§ 14-204.
(b) In the case of a lot occupied or intended to be occupied by
multiple business enterprises (e.g., a shopping center), a master sign plan
is required. Sign permits will be issued in the name of the individual
business enterprise requesting a particular sign. Signage allocation per
each business enterprise will be determined based on the amount of store
frontage (business to business).
(c) Signs constructed in Maryville shall conform to the
standards and specifications outlined in the International Building Code
as amended in the edition most recently otherwise adopted by the city.
(d) The sign permit application fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00),
and sign permit fees shall be one dollar ($1.00) per square foot beyond
what is allowed without a permit.
(e) Where work for which a permit is required by this section is
started or proceeds prior to obtaining said permit, the penalty shall be
two hundred-fifty dollars ($250.00), but the payment of such penalty shall
not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of
this section nor from other penalties.
(4) Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs do not require a
permit: (a) Signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in a residential zoning
district, the Office Transition district, Institutional district, and the
Neighborhood district; or not exceeding nine (9) square feet in a
downtown district (excluding the Office Transition district), Central
Community district, the Office district; or sixteen (16) square feet in the
Business and Transportation district, the High Commercial district, the
High Intensity Retail district and the Industrial district.
(b) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the
authorization of a governmental body, including legal notices,
identification and informational signs, and traffic, directional, or
regulatory signs.
(c) Official signs of a non-commercial nature erected by public
utilities.
(d) Flags, pennants, or insignia of any government.
(e) Integral, decorative or architectural features ofbuildings or
works of art, so long as such features or works do not contain letters,
trademarks, or moving parts.
(f) Directory signs.
14-197
(g) Signs painted on or otherwise permanently attached to
currently licensed motor vehicles that are not primarily used as signs.
(5) Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be regarded and treated
in all respects as permanent signs. Except in residential zoning districts
temporary signs shall not be included in calculating the total amount of
permitted sign area. The duration of temporary signage shall not cumulatively
exceed six (6) weeks.
(6) Determining the number of signs. (a) For the purpose of
determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single
display surface or display device containing elements organized, related,
and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random
manner without organized relationship of elements, each element shall
be considered a single sign.
(b) A two (2) sided or multi-sided sign shall be regarded as one
(1) sign so long as:
(i) With respect to a V-type sign, the two sides are at no
point separated by a distance that exceeds five feet (5'); and
(ii) With respect to double-faced (back-to-back) signs, the
distance between the backs of each face of the sign does not exceed
three feet (3').
(7) Computation of sign area. (a) The surface area of a sign shall be
computed by including the entire area within a single, continuous,
rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines, or a circle
or an ellipse, enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the
sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not
including any supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental
to the display itself.
(b) If the sign consists of more than one (1) section or module,
all of the area, including that between sections or modules, shall be
included in the computation of the sign area.
(c) With respect to two-sided, multi-sided, or three-dimensional
signs, the sign surface area shall be computed by including the total of all
sides designed to attract attention or communicate information that can
be seen at any one time by a person from one (1) vantage point. Without
otherwise limiting the generality of the foregoing:
(i) The sign surface area of a double-faced, back-to-back
sign shall be calculated by using the area of only one (1) side of
such sign, so long as the distance between the backs of such signs
does not exceed eighteen inches (18").
(ii) The sign surface area of a double-faced sign
constructed in the form of a "V" shall be calculated by using the
area of only one side of such sign ( the larger side if there is a size
14-198
difference), so long as the angle of the "V" does not exceed thirty
degrees (30°) and at no point does the distance between the backs
of such sides exceed five feet (5').
(8) Total sign surface area for all signs. (a) Unless otherwise provided
in this section, the total surface area devoted to all signs on any lot shall
not exceed the limitations set f orth in this section, and all signs except
temporary signs shall be included in this calculation.
(b) Unless otherwise provided in this section, the maximum,
permanent sign surface area permitted on any lot in any residential
district is four (4) square feet.
(c) Subject to the other provisions of this section and of this
section, the maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in a
commercial land use, other than the Business and Transportation district
or the Industrial Zone district, shall be determined as follows:
(i) There may be not more than one half (0.5) square feet
of sign surface area per linear foot of lot street frontage up to two
hundred feet (200') of frontage.
(ii) There may be up to three quarters (0.75) square feet
of additional sign surface area per linear foot of lot street frontage
in excess of two hundred feet (200').
(d) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the maximum
sign surface area on any lot in the Business and Transportation district
or the Industrial district shall be determined by multiplying the number
of linear feet of street frontage of the lot by one foot (1.0').
(e) Whenever a lot is situated such that it has no street frontage
on any lot boundary and an applicant desires to install on such a lot a
sign that is oriented toward a street, then the total sign surface area
permitted on that lot shall be sign surface area that would be allowed if
the lot boundary closest to the street toward which such sign is to be
oriented fronted on such street. The applicant shall be restricted to using
only one (1) street and the closest lot boundary to this street for
determining the total permitted sign surface area.
(f) The sign surface area of any sign located on a wall of a
structure may not exceed one-third (1/3) or thirty-three percent (33%) of
the total surface area of the wall on which the sign is located. If a wall
painting is depicted with any advertisement (i.e., business name) then a
sign permit shall be issued and such a wall painting will be considered as
part of the overall signage for that particular development.
(g) The surface area for a marquee or changeable copy sign may
not exceed twenty (20) square feet (thirty (30) square feet in the High
Intensity Retail and Institutional zoning districts). The area of this type
of sign does not count against the calculated total sign area for a given
property. Only one (1) such sign per development will be allowed.
14-199
(h) An Electronic Message Center (EMC) sign is a type of
electronically changeable copy sign. For EMC signs see § 14-218(13)(g).
(i) In the case of the retail sale of gasoline, diesel, kerosene, and
oil, a product (price) sign may be installed on the free-standing sign or on
the building itself. The product sign surface area may not exceed
twenty-five (25) square feet. If the product sign is installed on the
free-standing sign, a changeable copy sign may not be installed on the
same free-standing sign. There shall be only one product sign per
individual lot or development. The product sign may not be installed as
a separate free-standing sign nor may it be installed as a portable sign.
(9) Free-standing sign surface area. (a) For purposes of this section, a
side of a free-standing sign is any plane or flat surface included in the
calculation of the total sign surface area. For example, wall signs
typically have one (1) side. Free-standing signs typically have two (2)
sides (back-to-back), although four-sided and other multi-sided signs are
also common.
(b) In no case may a single side of a free-standing sign exceed
fifty (50) square feet in surface area if the lot on which the sign is located
has less than two hundred feet (200') of frontage on the street toward
which the sign is primarily oriented, seventy-five (75) square feet on lots
with two hundred (200) or more but less than four hundred feet (400') of
frontage, and one hundred (100) square feet on lots with four hundred
feet (400') or more of frontage.
(c) In the Central Community district, no free-standing sign
shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in surface area.
(d) With respect to free-standing signs that have no discernible
sides, such as spheres or other shapes not composed of flat planes, no
such free-standing sign may exceed the maximum total surface area
allowed for double-sided, free-standing sign.
(e) In the Parkway district, no free-standing sign shall exceed
seventy-five (75) square feet in surface area on lots with two hundred
(200) or more feet of frontage and no more than fifty (50) square feet on
lots with less than two hundred feet (200') of frontage.
(f) In the Industrial zone, no free standing sign shall exceed one
hundred fifty (150) square feet in surface area. The free-standing sign
shall be monument type.
(10) Number of free-standing signs. (a) Except as authorized by this
section, no development (single or multi-tenant) may have more than one
(1) free-standing sign.
(b) If a development is located on a corner lot that has at least
one hundred feet (100') of frontage on each of the two (2) intersecting
public streets, then the development may have not more than one (1)
free-standing sign along each side of the development bordered by such
streets.
14-200
(c) If a development is located on a lot that is bordered by
two (2) public streets that do not intersect at the lot's boundaries
(double-front lot), then the development may have not more than
one (1) free-standing sign on each side of the development bordered
by such streets.
(d) A development that has more than five hundred (500) linear
feet of frontage or more, and located within the Parkway district along
U.S. Highway 321, may have two (2) free-standing signs if the following
provisions are met:
(i) Both signs do not collectively exceed seventy-five (75)
square feet;
(ii Both signs and their support structures do not exceed
ten feet (10') in height;
(iii) The two (2) signs are separated by one hundred (100) linear
feet as measured from base of sign to base of sign; and
(iv) The property must have two (2) or more businesses on
the same parcel.
(11) Subdivision and multi-family development entrance signs. Any
entrance to a residential subdivision or multi-family development may have no
more than two (2) signs identifying such subdivision or development. A single
side of any such sign may not exceed sixteen (16) square feet, nor may the total
surface area of all such signs located at a single entrance exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet, nor may the sign structure exceed a height of eight feet (8') from
ground level.
(12) Location and height. (a) Free-standing ground signs shall observe
a minimum setback requirement of ten feet (10') from the property line,
and, where feasible, shall observe the setback requirements of this
section.
(b) No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed, erected
or constructed upon any roof surface with the exception of canopies and
roof surfaces with an angle of more than seventy-five degrees (75°)
measured from the horizontal. Any roof surface with an angle less than
seventy-five degrees (75°) from horizontal, individual letters may be
installed on the roof surface provided the size requirements for the zoning
district is met. The individual letters must be installed flush with the roof
surface and not bounded by any type framework or additional flat surface
such as a background.
(c) No sign attached to a building may project more than twelve
inches (12") from the building wall.
(d) No sign or supporting structure may be located in or over
any public right-of-way, including sidewalks. Exception: Signs erected by
or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a governmental body,
including legal notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic,
directional, or regulatory signs.
14-201
(e) No part of a free-standing ground sign may exceed a height,
measured from ground level, of twenty feet (20').
(f) Directory signs may not exceed four (4) square feet in size,
be no more than three feet (3') in height, and do not have to meet the
required ten feet (10') setback from the right-of-way and/ or property line.
(13) Sign illumination and signs containing lights. (a) Unless otherwise
prohibited by this section signs may be illuminated in accordance with
this section.
(b) No sign within one-hundred-fifty feet (150') of a residential
use may be illuminated between the hours of midnight and 6:00 A.M.,
unless the impact of such lighting beyond the boundaries of the lot where
it is located is entirely inconsequential.
(c) Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it
illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly into a
public right-of-way or residential premises.
(d) Internally illuminated free-standing signs may not be
illuminated during hours that the business or enterprise advertised by
such sign is not open for business and/or operation. This subsection shall
not apply to the following types of signs:
(i) Signs that constitute an integral part of a vending
machine, telephone booth, device that indicates time, date, or
weather conditions, or similar device whose principal function is
not to convey an advertising message,
(ii) Signs that do not exceed two (2) square feet in area
and that convey the message that a business or enterprise is open
or closed.
(e) Neon and bare fluorescent light tubes in any form on the
exterior of a building or any other structure is prohibited. In addition,
plastic with back lighting is also prohibited as an accent feature.
(f) No sign may contain or be illuminated by flashing or
intermittent lights or lights of changing intensity. Typical "time and
temperature" displays are exempt from this requirement.
(g) Electronic Message Center (EMC) signs permitted as
changeable copy on-premise, business signs shall be allowed subject to
the following standards:
(i) EMC signs are allowed in the Business and
Transportation High Intensity Retail and Institutional zoning
districts; as well as in the Central Community zoning district if
located along an arterial roadway as designated on the most recent
City of Maryville Major Road Plan; and EMC signs may also be
located at public schools and the Blount County Public Library in
any zoning district as long as they conform to the EMC sign
standards herein.
14-202
(ii) EMC signs shall be limited to one (1) display per
development, regardless of the number of tenants or owners within
the project.
(iii) The maximum size ofan EMC sign display area shall
be twenty (20) square feet in the Business and Transportation and
Central Community zoning districts, and for EMC signs used by
public schools and the public library; and thirty (30) square feet in
the High Intensity Retail and Institutional zoning districts.
(iv) The area of an EMC sign does not count against the
calculated total sign area for a given property.
(v) EMC signs must hold a constant message for a
minimum of sixty (60) seconds. Messages on an EMC sign cannot
scroll, be animated, contain moving video images, etc.
(vi) EMC signs must be located at least one hundred feet
(100') from a residential structure, measured on a straight line
from the nearest point on the sign face to the nearest point of the
residence.
(h) Any illuminated free-standing sign erected within the
corporate limits of Maryville must be installed in accordance with the
National Electric Codes and must have a disconnect either installed on
or be within sight of such sign and of no more than fifty feet (50') from
such sign.
(14) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions. (a) As provided in the
table of permissible uses, no off-premises signs (except those exempted
from regulations or from permit requirements may be located in any
district.
(b) No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes
with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through
intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private roads.
(c) Signs that revolve, rotate, or are animated or utilize
movement or apparent movement to attract the attention of the public
are prohibited. Unless their movement:
(i) Is not a primary design feature of the sign, and
(ii) Is not intended to attract attention to the sign.
The restriction of this sub-section shall not apply to signs indicating the
time, date, or weather conditions.
(d) No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size,
shape, nature, or message it would tend to obstruct the view of or be
confused with official traffic signs or other signs erected by governmental
agencies.
(e) Free-standing signs shall be securely fastened to the ground
or to some other substantial supportive structure so that there is
virtually no danger that either the sign or the supportive structure may
14-203
be moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injury to
persons or property.
(f) No signs are allowed which are written upon, temporarily
or permanently placed upon or attached to a motor vehicle or trailer,
which advertise the price of any product or service, or advertise special
business events or sales. This provision prohibits the use of an
automobile, truck or trailer for on-premise or off-premise advertising.
This restriction shall not be construed to prohibit signs on vehicles which
carry a firm name, telephone number, address of business, major
enterprise, principle products, or service.
(g) No signs shall be allowed on any telecommunication tower
or antenna.
(h) Streamers are prohibited.
(i) Animated signs are prohibited.
(j) Pennants are prohibited.
(k) Propellers are prohibited in relation to signs or attention
seeking devices.
(l) Off-premise signs including billboards are prohibited.
However, existing billboards that are grandfathered under state law as
pre-existing, non-conforming uses may be replaced with digital billboards
of the same or lesser size.
(m) No signs are allowed to exist in the median or right-of-way
of any roadway. The city may immediately, and without prior notice,
remove a sign erected, placed or maintained in whole or in part on public
right-of-way if the sign is not authorized by state law or under the terms
of this section. Removed signs will be stored at a City of Maryville facility
pending disposal or returned to the rightful owner. The city will exercise
ordinary care with such signs while in its possession. If the city removes
a sign and the name and address of the owner is reasonably
ascertainable, the city will notify the owner about the sign's removal
within three (3) working days of the date of the removal and provide the
owner information regarding retrieval of the sign. Reasonably
ascertainable means that the name and mailing address of the owner are
displayed on the sign or a name is displayed on the sign from which the
city can readily identify the name and address of the owner. The owner
must pay removal costs in order to retrieve a removed sign. The owner
will remit the removal cost by cash, cashier's check or money order with
ten (10) days from the date of the removal of the sign in order to retrieve
the sign. If the owner fails to timely remit the removal costs, the sign will
be considered abandoned and may be discarded and disposed of by the
city on or after the eleventh (11th) day from the date of removal. Any sign
owner may declare ownership of a sign at any time between removal and
prior disposal.
14-204
(n) Banners are prohibited in the City of Maryville except as
permitted temporary signs.
(o) Placards are prohibited in the City of Maryville except as
permitted temporary signs.
(p) Air inflated displays including air powered displays are
prohibited at all business and commercial locations. This prohibition does
not apply to residential type uses or locations, use on floats for a parade
where a permit has been issued by the city or at recreational, festival or
authorized events by the city or sponsored by the city.
(15) Maintenance of signs. (a) All signs and all components thereof,
including without limitation, supports, braces, and anchors, shall be kept
in a state of good repair.
(b) If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the
supporting "shell" of a sign or the supporting braces, anchors or similar
components, the owner of the sign or the owner of the property where the
sign is located or other person having control over such sign shall, within
thirty (30) days of the removal of the message portion of the sign, either
replace the entire message portion of the sign or remove the remaining
components of the sign. This sub-section shall not be construed to alter
the prohibition on the replacement of a non-conforming sign. Nor shall
this sub-section be construed to prevent changing a sign.
(c) The area within ten feet (10') of any part of a free-standing
sign shall be kept clear of all debris and all undergrowth more than five
inches (5") in height.
(d) The sign inspector as designated by the city manager shall
notify in writing the owner of the sign if the sign is need of maintenance
or repair.
(16) Unlawful cutting of trees or shrubs. No person may, for the purpose
of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage, trim, destroy, or
remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation located:
(a) Within the right-of-way of any public street or road, unless
the work is done pursuant to the express written authorization of the City
of Maryville;
(b) On property that is not under the ownership or control of the
person doing or responsible for such work, unless the work is done
pursuant to the express authorization of the person owning the property
where such trees or shrubs are located;
(c) In any area where such trees or shrubs are required to
remain.
(17) Non-conforming signs. (a) Subject to the remaining restrictions of
this section, signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this
section may be continued only pursuant to rights granted under state law
and as provided herein.
(b) No person may increase the extent of non-conformity of a
non-conforming sign. No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered
14-205
in such a manner as to aggravate the non-conforming condition, nor may
illumination be added to any non-conforming sign.
(c) A non-conforming sign may not be moved, replaced, or
altered except to bring the sign into complete conformity with this
chapter. This sub-section shall not apply to digital billboards which are
regulated separately.
(d) If a non-conforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it
may not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in
conformity with all the provisions of this section, and the remnants of the
former sign structure shall be cleared from the land. For purposes of this
section, a non-conforming sign is "destroyed" if damaged to an extent that
the cost of repairing the sign to its former stature or replacing it with an
equivalent sign equals or exceeds the value (tax value as listed for tax
purposes) of the sign so damaged.
(e) The message of a non-conforming sign may be changed so
long as this does not create any new non-conformity (for example, by
creating an off-premises sign under circumstances where such a sign
would not be allowed).
(f) Subject to the other provisions of this section,
non-conforming signs may be repaired and renovated so long as the cost
of such work does not exceed, within any twelve (12) month period, fifty
percent (50%) of the value of such sign. This sub-section shall not apply
to digital billboards which are regulated separately.
(g) If a non-conforming sign, other than a billboard, advertises
a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or
other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being
offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and
shall be removed within thirty (30) days after such abandonment
by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located,
or other party having control over such sign.
(h) If a non-conforming billboard remains blank for a continuous
period of one hundred eighty (180) days, that billboard shall be deemed
abandoned and shall, within thirty days after such abandonment, be
altered to comply with this article or be removed by the sign owner,
owner of the property where the sign is located, or other person having
control over such sign. For purposes of this section, a sign is "blank" if:
(i) It advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is
no longer operating or being offered or conducted; or
(ii) The advertising message it displays becomes illegible
in whole or substantial part; or
(iii) The advertising copy paid for by a party other than
the sign owner or promoting an interest other than the rental of
the sign has been removed.
14-206
(18) Enforcement of sign regulations. The sign inspector as designated
by the City Manager of the City of Maryville shall be responsible for the
enforcement of these regulations, including the issuance of permits, as required,
for construction and placement of signs.
(19) Digital billboards. Billboards that are existing in the City of
Maryville which are grandfathered under state law as pre-existing,
non-conforming uses may be replaced at the same location with digital
billboards of the same or lesser size. Digital billboards are otherwise prohibited
in the City of Maryville. Such digital billboards shall be subject to the following
rules and regulations:
(a) The message display shall remain static and fixed for a
minimum of eight (8) seconds with a maximum transition time of one (1)
second to the next message. Transitions shall not be scrolling, but shall
be instantaneous.
(b) Video, continuous scrolling messages, and animation are
prohibited.
(c) The minimum spacing is two thousand feet (2,000') between
digital billboards measured billboard to billboard on the same side of the
street.
(d) No person shall erect, operate, use or maintain a digital
billboard without first obtaining and annually renewing a sign permit
with the City of Maryville.
(e) Digital billboards must be single-faced with one (1) display
area.
(f) Digital billboards must be located at least one hundred feet
(100') from any residentially zoned property measured from the closest
point of any structural element of the billboard to the residential property
line.
(g) Displays on digital billboards cannot have varying light
illumination and/or intensity, blinking, bursting, dissolving, distorting,
fading, flashing, oscillating, rotating, scrolling, sequencing, shimmering,
sparkling, traveling, tracing, twinkling or simulated movement or convey
the illusion of movement other than the change of the entire copy of the
sign message at one (1) time.
(h) No smoke, steam, or noise shall emanate from the digital
billboard.
(i) The light intensity of a digital billboard shall have a monitor
to allow it to automatically adjust for natural ambient light conditions.
(j) Owners of digital billboard will coordinate with the City of
Maryville to convey real time emergency information such as Amber
Alerts or National Disaster Directives.
(k) A digital billboard shall be at the same or lesser height as
the billboard it replaces.
14-207
(l) A digital billboard shall be stationary and not contain any
visible moving parts.
(m) Using industry standards, daytime brightness levels shall
be no more than ninety percent (90%) maximum intensity. At night the
brightness shall be reduced to no more than twenty percent (20%) of
maximum light intensity for an LED (Light Emitting Diode) sign.
(n) Digital billboards shall conform to the standards and
specifications outlined in the International Building Code as amended in
the edition most recently adopted by the city.
(o) Digital billboards shall not be lit externally.
(p) Digital billboards can only be placed in the city's High
Intensity Retail zone.
(20) Landmark signage. The Maryville City Council may, by resolution,
designate certain existing signs as landmark signs. Upon such a designation,
the following will apply:
(a) The sign may be restored and repaired to its original
condition.
(b) In restoring or repairing landmark signs, the same color
scheme and materials shall be used to an extent practicable in order to
replicate the original condition of the sign.
(c) A designated landmark sign shall not count towards any
applicable maximum sign allowances.
(d) Restoration or repair of the sign shall not be expanded
beyond the original sign area nor shall such sign be lighted.
(e) A sign permit for repair and restoration of a landmark sign
is required.
(f) At such time a landmark sign is removed or destroyed by
purposeful intent of the property owner, agent or lessee, the landmark
designation of such sign shall be rendered null and void. The Maryville
City Council may also remove the landmark sign designation upon
determination that the sign no longer meets the definition for a landmark
sign. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and amended by Ord.
#2008-19, April 2008, Ord. #2008-20, April 2008, Ord. #2011-13, April
2011, Ord. #2011-34, Dec. 2011, Ord. #2012-11, May 2012, and Ord.
#2016-07, March 2016, and replaced by Ord. #2018-33, Oct. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
14-219. Parking. (1) Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically
provided or unless clearly required by the context, the words and phrases
defined below shall have the meaning indicated when used in this section.
(a) "Circulation area." That portion of the vehicle movement
area used for access to parking or loading areas or other facilities on the
lot. Essentially, driveways and other maneuvering areas (other than
parking aisles) comprise the circulation area.
14-208
(b) "Driveway." That portion of the vehicle movement area that
consists of a travel lane bounded on either side by an area that is not part
of the vehicle movement area.
(c) "Gross floor area." The total area of a building measured by
taking the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended
for occupancy or storage.
(d) "Loading and unloading area." That portion of the vehicle
movement area used to satisfy the requirements of (11).
(e) "Long term parking." Long term parking shall be defined as
the continuous use of parking space in a designated parking area for five
(5) days or longer within the city's industrial zoning district. Long term
parking is not associated with off street parking requirements for
industrial uses, businesses, or commercial operations within the
industrial zoning district, but rather for specific parking and storage
areas for motorized vehicles, motor homes, boats, trailers, etc. where
owners of the referenced vehicles pay rental fees for the ability to store
and park said vehicles.
(f) "Parking area aisles." That portion of the vehicle movement
area consisting of lanes providing access to parking spaces.
(g) "Parking space." A portion of the vehicle movement area set
aside for the parking of one vehicle.
(h) "Pug mix." A mixture of various sizes of crushed stone
aggregate material commonly used as a base layer for paving. Other
material such as water or cement may be added to the various mixture
of aggregate to enhance compaction of the finished product.
(i) "Vehicle movement area." That portion of a lot that is used
by vehicles for access, circulation, parking, and loading and unloading.
It comprises the total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas,
and parking areas (spaces and aisles).
(2) Number of parking spaces required. (a) All developments in all
zoning districts shall provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to
accommodate the number of vehicles that ordinarily are likely to be
attracted to the development in question. The parking requirements for
uses may be provided by individual action for a use, by joint action for all
the uses of a lot, by joint project of adjacent lots for all the uses of those
lots, by joint action for some or all the uses of an Impact Overlay district,
or by public parking program carried out by special assessment district
or otherwise.
(b) The presumptions established by this article are that: (1) a
development must comply with the parking standards set forth in
Subsection (e) to satisfy the requirement stated in subsection (a), and (2)
any development that does meet these standards is in compliance.
However, the table of parking requirements is only intended to establish
a presumption and should be flexibly administered, as provided in (3).
14-209
(c) Uses in the table of parking requirements (subsection (e)),
are based on the table of permissible uses (following pages). When
determination of the number of parking spaces required by this table
results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or
less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be
counted as one parking space.
(d) The council recognizes that the table of parking
requirements set forth in subsection (e) cannot and does not cover every
possible situation that may arise. Therefore, in cases not specifically
covered, the permit-issuing authority is authorized to determine the
parking requirement using this table as a guide.
(e) Satellite parking facilities in residential zones shall be
subject to the special exception process but shall also consider the
following criteria: (1) that satellite parking shall be located so that it will
adequately serve the intended uses; (2) ease of pedestrian access; (3)
satellite parking shall serve a unique facility in the residential zone and
(iv) off-site parking lots in residential zones shall be owned by the facility
served.
Table of Parking Requirements
USE PARKING REQUIREMENT
Single-family detached, one dwelling
unit per lot
Two spaces per dwelling unit plus one
space per room rented out
Single-family detached, more than one
dwelling per unit
Two spaces for each dwelling unit,
except that one-bedroom units require
only one space
Multi-family residences With respect to multi-family units
located in buildings where each dwelling
unit has an entrance and a living space
on the ground floor, the requirement
shall be one and one half spaces for each
one-bedroom unit and two spaces for
each unit with two or more bedrooms
Residences for elderly and/or
handicapped
Multi-family units limited to persons of
low- or moderate- income or the elderly
require only one space per unit. All
other multi-family units require one
space for each bedroom in each unit plus
one additional space for every four units
in the development
14-210
USE PARKING REQUIREMENT
Homes emphasizing special services,
treatment or supervision
Three spaces for every five beds except
for uses exclusively serving children
under sixteen, in which case one space
for every three beds shall be required.
Tourist homes and hotels or motels One space for each room to be rented
plus additional space (in accordance
with other sections of this table) for
restaurant or other facilities
Home occupations Four spaces for offices of physicians or
dentists; two spaces for attorneys, one
space for all others
Sales or rentals of goods, merchandise,
or equipment-miscellaneous (not
storage or display of goods outside
fully enclosed building)
One space per two hundred (200) feet of
gross floor area
Convenience stores One space per two hundred (200) feet of
gross floor area
Wholesale sales One space per four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area
Retail and wholesale sales (outside
storage, display of goods)
One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of gross floor area
14-211
USE PARKING REQUIREMENT
Wholesale sales and retail with
low-volume traffic generation
One space per four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area
Retail and wholesale sales (outside
storage, display of goods)
One space per two hundred (200) square
foot of gross floor area
Wholesale sales and retail with
low-volume traffic generation
One space per four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area
Office, clerical, research, service uses:
-primarily on-premises services
(attorneys, physicians and other
professions)
-services with little or no customer or
client traffic; primarily employee
traffic
-medical, dental clinics with less than
ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of gross floor area
One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of gross floor area
One space per four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area
One space per one hundred fifth (150)
square feet of gross floor area
Banks with drive-in service One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of area within main building plus
reservoirs and capacity equal to five (5)
spaces per window (ten (10) spaces if
window serves two stations)
Enclosed manufacturing, processing,
assembling, repairing; mainly walk-in
trade
One space per four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area
Enclosed manufacturing, processing,
repairing, assembling with little or no
walk-in trade
One space for every two employees on
the maximum shift except that, if
permissible in the commercial districts,
such uses may provide one space per
two hundred (200) square feet of gross
floor area
Schools 1.75 spaces per classroom in
elementary schools, five spaces per
classroom in high schools
Trade or vocational schools One space per one hundred (100)
square feet of gross floor area
14-212
USE PARKING REQUIREMENT
Colleges, universities One space per one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of gross floor area
Churches, synagogues, temples One space for every four seats in the
portion of the church building to be used
for services plus spaces for any
residential use as determined in
accordance with the parking
requirements set forth above for
residential uses, plus one space for
every two hundred (200) square feet of
gross floor area designed to be used
neither for services nor residential
purposes
Libraries, art galleries, museums,
social and fraternal clubs
One space per three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area
Indoor recreational facilities One space for every three persons that
the facilities are designed to
accommodate when fully utilized (if
they can be measured in such a fashion
 example, tennis courts or bowling
alleys) plus one space per two hundred
(200) square feet of gross floor area
used in a manner not susceptible to
such calculation
Movie theaters, stadiums, coliseums One space per every four seats
Outdoor recreational facilities, public
and private
One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of area within enclosed buildings,
plus one space for every three persons
that the outdoor facilities are designed
to accommodate when used to the
maximum capacity
14-213
USE PARKING REQUIREMENT
Golf driving ranges and similar
recreational uses
Miniature golf course, skateboard park,
water slide, and similar uses - one space
per three hundred (300) square feet of
area plus one space per two hundred
(200) square feet of building gross floor
area; driving range - one space per tee
plus one space per two hundred (200)
square feet in building gross floor area;
par three course - two spaces per golf
hole plus one space per two hundred
(200) square feet of building gross floor
area
Stables One space per horse that could be kept
at the stable when occupied to
maximum capacity
Hospitals, clinics, medical treatment
facilities
Two spaces per bed or one space for one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross
floor area, which ever is greater
Institutions for nursing care,
intermediate care, handicapped or
infirm care, child care
Three spaces for every five beds.
Multifamily units developed or
sponsored by public or non-profit agency
for limited income families or the elderly
require only one space per unit
Institutions for mentally ill and
correctional facilities
One space for every two employees on
maximum shift
Restaurants, entertainment (no
substantial carry-out or delivery; no
drive-in service)
One space per one hundred (100) square
feet of gross floor area
Restaurants, entertainment with
carry-out or delivery and/or outside
service, consumption
One space per one hundred (100) square
feet of gross floor area plus one space for
every four outside seats
Restaurants, entertainment with
carry-out or delivery and/or outside
service, consumption and drive-in
service
Restaurants, entertainment with carry
out or delivery and/or outside service,
consumption and drive-in service
14-214
USE PARKING REQUIREMENT
Motor vehicle-related sales and service One space per two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area
Gas sales One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of gross floor area of building
devoted primarily to gas sales operation,
plus sufficient parking area to
accommodate vehicles at pumps without
interfering with other parking spaces
Car wash Conveyor type - one space for every
three employees on the maximum shift
plus reservoir capacity equal to five
times the capacity of the washing
operations. Self service type - two
spaces for drying and cleaning purposes
per stall plus two reservoir spaces in
front of each stall
Goods storage (no sales on premises) One space for every two employees on
the maximum shift but not less than one
space per five thousand (5,000) square
feet of area devoted to storage (whether
inside or outside)
Scrap materials salvage yards, junk
yards
One space per two hundred (200) feet of
gross floor area
Veterinarian, kennels One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area
Emergency services One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of gross floor area
Agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
quarrying operations
One space for every two employees on
maximum shift
Post office One space per two hundred (200) square
feet of gross floor area
Sanitary landfill One space for every two employees on
maximum shift
14-215
USE PARKING REQUIREMENT
Military reserve, national guard
centers
One space per one hundred (100)
square feet of gross floor area
Dry cleaner, laundromat One space per two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area
Open air markets and horticultural
sales
One space per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of lot area used for storage,
display, or sales
Funeral home One space per one hundred (100)
square feet of gross floor area
Nursery school; day care centers One space per employee plus one space
per two hundred (200) square feet of
gross floor area
Bus station One space per two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area
Commercial greenhouse One space per two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area
(3) Flexibility in administration required. (a) The council recognizes
that, due to the particularities of any given development, the inflexible
application of the parking standards set forth in subsection (2)(e) may
result in a development either with inadequate parking space or parking
space far in excess of its needs. The former situation may lead to traffic
congestion or parking violations in adjacent streets as well as
unauthorized parking in nearby private lots. The latter situation wastes
money as well as space that could more desirably be used for valuable
development or environmentally useful open space. Therefore, as
suggested in (2), the permit-issuing authority may permit deviations from
the presumptive requirements of subsection (2)(e) and may require more
parking or allow less parking whenever it finds that such deviations are
more likely to satisfy the standard set forth in subsection (2)(a).
(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
permit-issuing authority may allow deviations from the parking
requirements set forth in subsection (2)(e) when it finds that:
(i) A residential development is irrevocably oriented
toward the elderly;
(ii) A business is primarily oriented to walk-in trade.
14-216
(c) Whenever the permit-issuing authority allows or requires a
deviation from the presumptive parking requirements set forth in
subsection (2)(e), it shall enter on the face of the permit the parking
requirement that it imposes and the reasons for allowing or requiring the
deviation.
(d) If the permit-issuing authority concludes, based upon
information it receives in the consideration of a specific development
proposal, that the presumption established by subsection (2)(e) for a
particular use classification is erroneous, it shall initiate a request for an
amendment to the table of parking requirements in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 14-220.
(4) Parking space dimensions. (a) Subject to subsections (b) and (c),
each parking space shall contain a rectangular area at least nineteen (19)
feet long and nine (9) feet wide. Lines demarcating parking spaces may
be drawn at various angles in relation to curbs or aisles, so long as the
parking spaces created contain within them the rectangular area
required by this section.
(b) In the parking areas containing ten (10) or more parking
spaces, up to fifteen percent (15%) of the parking spaces need to contain
a rectangular area of only seven and one-half (7 ½) feet in width by
fifteen (15) feet in length. If such spaces are provided, they shall be
conspicuously designated as reserved for small or compact cars only.
(c) Whenever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for
parallel parking, the dimensions of such parking spaces shall be not less
than twenty-two (22) feet by nine (9) feet.
(5) Required widths of parking area aisles and driveways. (a) Parking
area aisle widths shall conform to the following table which varies the
width requirement according to the angle of parking.
PARKING ANGLE
Aisle Width 0 30 45 60 90
One-way traffic 13 11 13 18 24
Two-way traffic 19 20 21 23 24
(b) Driveways shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width for
one-way traffic and eighteen (18) feet in width for two-way traffic, except
that ten-feet-wide driveways are permissible for two-way traffic when:
(1) the driveway is not longer than fifty (50) feet, (2) it provides access to
not more than six (6) spaces, and (iii) sufficient turning space is provided
so that the vehicles need not back into a public street.
(6) General design requirements. (a) Unless no other practicable
alternative is available, vehicle movement areas shall be designed so
14-217
that, without resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit
such areas without backing onto a public street. This requirement does
not apply to parking areas consisting of driveways that serve one or two
dwelling units, although backing onto arterial streets is discouraged.
(b) Vehicle movement areas of all developments shall be
designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles
can serve such developments without the necessity of backing
unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning
movements. Every vehicle movement area shall be designed so that
vehicles cannot extend beyond the perimeter of such area onto adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way. Such areas shall also be designed so
that vehicles do not extend over sidewalks or tend to bump against or
damage any wall, vegetation, or other obstruction.
(c) Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can
proceed safely without posing a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles
and without interfering with parking areas.
(d) Parking requirements for the Office District shall be in
accordance with all other sections of this section and the site plan review
process and when possible vehicle movement areas and parking spaces
shall be located to the rear of the structures.
(e) Parking requirements for the Neighborhood District shall be
in accordance with all other sections of this Article and the site plan
review process.
(7) Vehicle movement area surfaces. (a) Vehicle movement areas
that: (1) include lanes for drive-in windows, or (2) contain parking areas
that are required to have more than five (5) parking spaces and that are
used regularly at least five (5) days per week shall be graded and
surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other material that will provide
equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust. Specifications
for surfaces meeting the standards set forth in this subsection shall be in
accordance with those requirements outlined by the city director of
engineering and public works.
Long term parking spaces and areas within the industrial zoning
district may use pug mix for the permanent surface. A mixture such as
TDOT Specifications 303.01 "Mineral Aggregate Grading D" is acceptable
for the graded surface material. The graduation of stone sizes is listed in
table 903.05 of the TDOT Standard Specification for Road and Bridge
Construction (2006). This specification of graduation of stone listed in
table 903.05 of the TDOT construction manual may also be used under
or within permanent shelters, garages, storage buildings, or three (3)
sided structures. Specifications for the surface material set forth in this
subsection shall be submitted to the city director of engineering and
public works for review. The access and circulation aisles serving the long
14-218
term parking spaces shall meet the standard paving requirements of this
section. Access and circulation aisles shall be constructed of asphalt,
concrete, or other such materials to protect against pot holes, erosion and
dust.
(b) Vehicle movement areas that are not provided with the type
of surface specified in subsection (a) shall be graded and surfaced with
crushed stone, gravel or other suitable material as set forth by the city
director of engineering and public works, to provide a surface that is
stable and will help to reduce dust and erosion. The perimeter of such
parking areas shall be defined by bricks, stones, railroad ties, or other
similar material. In addition, whenever such a vehicle movement area
abuts a paved street, the driveway leading from such street to such area
(or, if there is no driveway, the portion of the vehicle movement area that
opens onto such street), shall be paved as provided in subsection (a) for
a distance of fifteen (15) feet back from the edge of the paved street. This
subsection shall not apply to single-family or two-family residences or
other uses that are required to have only one or two parking spaces.
(c) Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance with
subsection (a) shall be appropriately demarcated with painted lines or
other markings. Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance with
subsection (b) shall be demarcated whenever practicable.
(d) Vehicle movement areas shall be properly maintained in all
respects. In particular, and without limiting the foregoing, vehicle
movement area surfaces shall be kept in good condition (free from
potholes, etc.) and parking space lines or markings shall be kept clearly
visible and distinct.
(8) Joint use of required parking spaces. (a) One parking area may
contain required spaces for several different uses, but except as otherwise
provided in this section, the required space assigned to one use may not
be credited to any other use.
(b) To the extent that developments that wish to make joint use
of the same parking spaces operate at different times, the same spaces
may be credited to both uses. For example, if a parking lot is used in
connection with an office building on Monday through Friday but is
generally ninety percent (90%) vacant on weekends, another development
that operates only on weekends could be credited with ninety percent
(90%) of the spaces on that lot. Or, if a church parking lot is generally
occupied only to fifty percent (50%) of capacity on days of primary use,
another development could make use of fifty percent (50%) of the church
lot's spaces on those other days.
(c) If the joint use of the same parking spaces by two or more
principal uses involves satellite parking spaces, then the provisions of
Section 9 are also applicable.
14-219
(9) Satellite parking. (a) If the number of off-street parking spaces
required by this ordinance cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot
where the principal use associated with these parking spaces is located,
then spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby lots in accordance
with the provisions of this section. These off-site spaces are referred to
in this section as satellite parking spaces.
(b) All such satellite parking spaces (except spaces intended for
employee use) must be located within four-hundred (400) feet of the lot
on which the use associated with such parking is located if the use is not
housed within any principal building. Satellite parking spaces intended
for employee use may be located within any reasonable distance.
(c) The developer wishing to take advantage of the provisions
of this section must present satisfactory written evidence that he has the
permission of the owner or other person in charge of the satellite parking
spaces to use such spaces. The developer must also sign an
acknowledgment that the continuing validity of his permit depends upon
his continuing ability to provide the requisite number of parking spaces.
(d) Persons who obtain satellite parking spaces in accordance
with this section shall be held accountable for insuring that the satellite
parking areas from which they obtain their spaces satisfy the design
requirements of this subsection.
(e) Satellite parking facilities in residential zones shall be
subject to the special exception process but shall also consider the
following criteria: (1) that satellite parking shall be located so that it will
adequately serve the intended uses: (2) ease of pedestrian access; (3)
satellite parking shall serve a unique facility in the residential zone and
off-site parking lots in residential zones shall be owned by the facility
served.
(10) Special provisions for lots with existing buildings.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, whenever: (1) there
exists a lot with one or more structures on it constructed before the effective
date of this ordinance, and (2) a changing use that does involve any enlargement
of a structure is proposed for such lot, and (3) the parking requirements of (2)
that would be applicable as a result of the proposed change cannot be satisfied
on such lot because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can
practicably be used for parking, then the developer need only comply with the
requirements of (2) to the extent that: (1) parking space is practicably available
on the lot where the development is located, and (2) satellite parking spaces are
reasonably available as provided in (8). However, if satellite parking
subsequently becomes reasonably available, then it shall be a continuing
condition of the permit authorizing development on such lot that the developer
obtains satellite parking when it does become available.
14-220
(11) Loading and unloading areas. (a) Subject of subsection (e),
whenever the normal operation of any development requires that goods,
merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that
development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be
provided in accordance with this section to accommodate the delivery or
shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner.
(b) The loading and unloading area must be of sufficient size to
accommodate the numbers and types of vehicles that are likely to use this
area, given the nature of the development in question. The following
table indicates the number and size of spaces that, presumptively, satisfy
the standards set forth in this subsection. However, the permit-issuing
authority may require more or less loading and unloading area if
reasonably necessary to satisfy the foregoing standard.
GROSS LEASEABLE AREA OF BUILDING NUMBER OF SPACES*
1,000 - 19,999 1
20,000 - 79,999 2
80,000 - 127,999 3
128,000 - 191,999 4
192,000 - 255,999 5
256,000 - 329,999 6
320,000 - 391,999 7
NOTE: Plus one (1) space for each additional seventy-two thousand (72,000)
square feet or fraction thereof.
*Minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet X fifty-five (55) feet and overhead
clearance of fourteen (14) feet from street grade required.
(c) Loading and unloading areas shall be so located and
designed that the vehicles intended to use them can: (1) maneuver safely
and conveniently to and from a public right-of-way, and (2) complete the
loading and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with
public right-of-way or any parking space or parking lot aisle.
(d) No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be
used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any
portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area
requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
(e) Whenever: (1) there exists a lot with one or more structures
on it constructed before the effective date of this ordinance, and (2) a
changing use that does not involve any enlargement of a structure is
proposed for such lot, and (3) the loading area requirements of this
14-221
section cannot be satisfied because there is not sufficient area available
on the lot that can practicably be used for loading and unloading, then
the developer need only comply with this section to the extent reasonably
possible. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006, and amended by Ord.
#2011-16, May 2011, and Ord. #2012-23, Sept. 2012)
14-220. Amendments. (1) Initation of amendments. (a) Whenever a
request to amend this ordinance is initiated by the city council, the board
of zoning appeals, or the city administration, the city attorney in
consultation with the planning staff shall draft an appropriate ordinance
and present that ordinance to the council so that a date for a public
hearing may be set.
(b) Any other person may also petition the council to amend this
ordinance. The petition shall be filled with the administrator and shall
include, among the information deemed relevant by the administrator:
(i) The name, address, and phone number of the
applicant,
(ii) A description of the land affected by the amendment
if a change in zoning district classification is proposed,
(iii) A description of the proposed map change or a
summary of the specific objective of any proposed change in the
text of this ordinance.
(c) Upon receipt of a petition as provided in subsection (b), the
administrator shall either:
(i) treat the proposed amendment as one initiated by the
city administration and proceed in accordance with subsection (a)
if he believes that the proposed amendment has significant merit
and would benefit the general public, or
(ii) Forward the petition to the council with or without
written comment for a determination of whether an ordinance
should be drafted and a public hearing set in accordance with
subsection (d).
(d) Upon receipt of a proposed ordinance as provided in
subsection (a), the council may establish a date for a public hearing on it.
Upon receipt of a petition for an ordinance amendment as provided in
subsection (b), the council may summarily deny the petition or set a date
for a public hearing on the requested amendment and order the attorney,
in consultation with the administrator, to draft an appropriate ordinance.
(2) Planning commission consideration of proposed amendments.
(a) If the council sets a date for a public hearing on a proposed
amendment on a zoning matter or annexation matter, it shall also refer
the proposed amendment to the planning commission for its
consideration.
14-222
(b) The planning commission shall endeavor to review the
proposed amendment in such a timely way that any recommendations it
may have can be presented to the council at the public hearing on the
amendment. However, if the planning commission is not prepared to
make recommendations at the public hearing, it may request the council
to delay final action on the amendment until such time as the planning
commission can present its recommendations.
(c) The council must have before it the recommendations of the
planning commission before taking action on a proposed amendment.
The council is not bound by any recommendations of the planning
commission that are before it at the time it takes action on a proposed
amendment.
(3) Hearing required; notice. (a) No ordinance that amends any of the
provisions of this ordinance may be adopted until a public hearing has
been held on such ordinance.
(b) The administrator shall publish a notice of the public
hearing on any ordinance that amends the provisions of this ordinance on
one occasion in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. If it
is a zoning matter, the notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days
before the date fixed for the hearing. If it is not a zoning matter, the
notice shall be published at least five (5) but no more than fifteen (15)
days before the date fixed for the hearing. In computing this period, the
date of publication shall not be counted but the date of the hearing shall
be.
(c) With respect to minor map amendments, the administrator
shall mail written notice of the public hearing to the record owners for tax
purposes of all properties whose zoning classification is changed by the
proposed amendment.
(d) The planning staff shall also take any other action deemed
by the staff to be useful or appropriate to give notice of the public hearing
on any proposed amendment.
(e) The notice required or authorized by this section shall:
(i) State the date, time and place of the public hearing,
(ii) Summarize the nature and character of the proposed
change,
(iii) If the proposed amendment involves a change in
zoning district classification, reasonably identify the property
whose classification would be affected by the amendment,
(iv) State that the full text of the amendment can be
obtained from the city clerk, and
(v) State that substantial changes in the proposed
amendment may be made following the public hearing.
14-223
(f) The planning staff shall make every reasonable effort to
comply with the notice provisions set forth in this section. However, it is
the council's intention that no failure to comply with any of the notice
provisions (except those set forth in subsection (b)) shall render any
amendment invalid.
(4) Council action on amendments. (a) At the conclusion of the public
hearing on a proposed amendment, the council may proceed to vote on the
proposed ordinance, refer it to a committee for further study, or take any
other action consistent with its usual rules of procedure.
(b) The council is not required to take final action on a proposed
amendment within any specific period of time, but it should proceed as
expeditiously as practicable on petitions for amendments since inordinate
delays can result in the petitioner incurring unnecessary costs.
(c) Voting on amendments to this ordinance shall proceed in the
same manner as other ordinances, except that if it has been disapproved
by the planning commission a majority of the entire membership of the
council is required to adopt an amendment to this ordinance (Tennessee
Code Annotated § 13-7-204).
(5) Ultimate issue before council on amendments. In deciding whether
to adopt a proposed amendment to this ordinance, the central issue before the
council is whether the proposed amendment advances the public health, safety,
or welfare. All other issues are irrelevant, and all information related to other
issues at the public hearing may be declared irrelevant by the Mayor and
excluded. In particular, when considering proposed minor map amendments:
(a) The council shall not consider any representations made by
the petitioner that if the change is granted the rezoned property will be
used for only one of the possible range of uses permitted in the requested
classification. Rather, the council shall consider whether the entire range
of permitted uses in the requested classification is more appropriate than
the range of uses in the existing classification.
(b) The council shall not regard as controlling any advantages
or disadvantages to the individual requesting the change, but shall
consider the impact of the proposed change on the public at large.
(c) The council shall consider the recommendation made by the
planning commission. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June 2006)
14-221. Fees. (1) Planning commission and board of zoning appeals
hearings. The following fees shall be collected by the city when an application
is submitted and prior to placing the application on the agenda for consideration
by the Maryville Municipal Planning Commission or the board of zoning appeals
for review of a special exception, variance request, or hearing on a planned unit
development, or designation of an impact overlay zone:
14-224
Activity Fee
Special exception request $150.00
Planned unit development $150.00
Impact overlay district $150.00
Variance or any other request to BZA $150.00
Telecommunications towers and antennas review
or cost of review, whichever is greater $1,000.00
Rezoning requests $250.00
Requested amendments to zoning or subdivision text $150.00
(2) Subdivision fees. The following fees shall be collected by the city
when an application is submitted and prior to placing it on the agenda for
consideration by the Maryville Municipal Planning Commission for a
preliminary subdivision plat and/or a final subdivision plat:
Subdivision Plats Number of Lots Fee
Preliminary Plat 1-2 $100.00
3-10 $150.00
11-30 $300.00
31-50 $400.00
Over 50 $500.00
Final Plat 1-4 $25.00
5-30 $100.00+$10.00 per lot
over 30 $100.00+$10.00 per lot
(3) Called meetings. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be paid to
the city before any called meeting - separate and apart from a regularly
scheduled meeting - of the Maryville Municipal Planning Commission or the
Maryville Board of Zoning Appeals' consideration of an application for a special
exception, variance, administrative hearing, or subdivision of property.
(4) Site plan review fees. (a) All site plans reviewed by the site review
team shall be subject to the following fee schedule:
Size of Site (Acres) Fee
0-1 $100.00
1.01 to 10 $150.00
10.01 to 20 $200.00
20.01 to 50 $250.00
50.01 or more $300.00
14-225
(b) Standard single-family detached, attached condominium
housing development or any other subdivision development submitted to
the planning commission for subdivision approval will not be subject to
the site plan fee. These type developments are subject to the site plan
process as outlined in this document and other fee schedules found
elsewhere in this section.
(c) Parking lot improvement designs for individual residential
or commercial lots which propose, add, or reconfigure ten (10) parking
stalls or less will not be subject to the site plan fee. New designs,
improvements, or additions of ten (10) parking stall stalls to an
individual site will be subject to site plan process as outlined in this
document. The addition of eleven (11) parking stalls or more to a
residential or commercial site or tract will be subject to the site plan
review fee and the site review process. (as added by Ord. #2006-32, June
2006, as amended by Ord. #2018-30, Sept. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-222. Fences and vegetation adjacent to roadways. (1) Title,
purpose, and scope. This shall be known as the "Fence Ordinance of the City of
Maryville, Tennessee," and may be so cited, and further referenced elsewhere
as "fence ordinance" and herein as "the ordinance" or "this ordinance" shall
imply the same wording and meaning as the full title. The intent of this
ordinance shall be the fair and comprehensive regulation of fences. It is the
intent of this ordinance that its interpretation and application assist in the
economic development of the city, but without lessening a quality oflife which
the citizens of Maryville strive to maintain and improve. The regulations as set
forth in this ordinance arn established to provide for the public safety, area
development, preservation of property values, and the general welfare within
the city. The purpose of this ordinance is to:
(a) Protect public safety regarding motorists' line of sight at
road and driveway intersections;
(b) Provide efficient access to city infrastructure and facilities
which may be located on private property;
(c) Protect property values by adopting a minimum level of
aesthetic regulations; and
This ordinance regulates all fences within the City of Maryville except
those exempted. No fence may be constructed, erected, moved, extended or
enlarged unless it complies with the provisions herein.
Vegetation adjacent to 1·oadways shall be dealt with additionally in this
ordinance in a limited manner as pertains to site distance issues.
(2) Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless
clearly required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this section
shall have the meaning indicated when used in this section.
Fence. A fence means an unroofed barrier or screen of any nature
(excluding vegetation) or construction. A retaining wall is a fence insofar as it
14-226
extends in height above the finished grade of the high side. Fences over six feet
(6') tall shall be considered accessory structures and meet the setback
requirements of §14-214.
(3) Miscellaneous restrictions and prohibitions, including regulation
of vegetation adjacent to roadways. (a) It shall be unlawful for any
property owner or occupant to have or maintain on his or her property
any fence which prevents or impairs persons driving vehicles on public
streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view of traffic and/or traffic control
signs.
(b) No fence may be located so that it substantially interferes
with utility or emergency workers needing access to utilities including
meters, fire hydrants and other fire protection devices, water main
valves, stormwater junction boxes, catch basins, manholes, transformers,
pedestals, etc.
(c) The removal and replacement cost of fences located within
utility easements will be the property owner's responsibility when
utilities have to be accessed for service or replacement. Therefore,
construction of fences within utility easements is discouraged.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to
have or maintain on his or her property any vegetation, including, but not
limited to, bushes, trees or other plant matter which prevents persons
driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view of
traffic and traffic control signs.
(4) Nonconforming fencing. Subject to the remaining restrictions of
this section, nonconforming fences that were otherwise lawful on the effective
date of this ordinance may be continued only pursuant to rights granted under
state law and as provided herein.
(5) Enforcement of fence regulations. A permit is not required for
erecting a fence. However, fences that are erected shall comply with this article.
These fence regulations shall be enforced by the city manager or his designee.
If a site plan was approved to include a fence, such fence shall be installed as
specified on site plan including height, location from property line and
materials.
(6) Fence regulations applicable to properties within the College Hill
Historic District and Oak Park Historic District. Property owners in the historic
districts must prepare an application and receive approval by the City of
Maryville Historic Zoning Commission before installing a fence. Following are
the fence regulations for the historic districts.
(a) Preserve historic fence and retaining wall materials.
(b) The addition of historic fence designs and materials is
appropriate; fence designs shall be related to the architectural design of
the primary structure.
(c) Wood plank fences and solid wall brick fences walls shall not
be placed between the street and the structure.
14-227
(d) Wood plank fences and solid walls shall not be added on
secondary or side yards unless they are recessed back at least twenty feet
(20') from the plane of the structure's front wall.
(e) Fences on the facades shall not exceed three feet (3') in
height while fences on the secondary and rear facades shall be no higher
than six feet (6'). On corner lots fences shall be no higher than two and a
half feet (2 1/2') within ten feet (10') of the street intersection.
(f) The use of uncoated-chain-link or vinyl/similar-material is
not allowed.
(g) The use of coated-chain-link is allowed, provided that:
(i) The proposed fencing would be located in a rear yard
and would not be readily visible from a public street, or
(ii) The proposed fencing would be located in a side yard
in which the fencing is recessed back at least twenty feet (20') from
the plane of the structure's front wall and is not highly visible from
a public street.
(iii) The fence must have a permanent black, brown or
green coating. Other colors are allowed provided the applicant can
demonstrate that the fence blends-in with its background.
(h) Chain link pet cages are prohibited if clearly visible from the
street.
(i) Wood picket and cast iron are the most appropriate
materials at the sidewalk or property line on the primary facade of a
residence or any street fronting side. Information provided in applications
for proposed fencing shall include the location of the proposed fence on a
scaled site plan, the proposed materials. In the case of proposed picket
fences, the details of the picket width, spacing, and design shall also be
shown on drawings.
(j) Wooden split rail fences are prohibited.
(k) The use of ivy, vines, or other suitable plant material to
cover or screen existing chain link fences is encouraged.
(7) Fence regulations applicable to residential properties outside
historic districts. (Applicable to single-family and two-family dwellings.
Multifamily residential development having three (3) or more dwelling units
shall comply with the fence regulations set forth in section (8), fences on
commercial property).
A fence that is six feet (6') or less in height, measured from the ground to
the top of the structure, may be erected adjacent to the rear and side property
lines. Fence posts, including decorative features on fence posts shall not exceed
seven feet, (7') as measured from the ground to the top of the structure.
(a) A fence that is taller than six feet (6') in height, measured
from the ground to the top of the structure, must meet minimum setback
requirements for accessory structures per § 14-214.
14-228
(b) A fence may be erected in the front yard but shall be no closer than
five feet (5') from the street right-of-way. Exception: Chain link or fence
of similar type may extend to the street right-of-way when determined by
the Maryville City Engineer that no sight distance problems or safety
hazards exist.
(c) Fence structures should be free of barbs, spikes, razor wire
electrical wire (except agricultural uses) and similar safety hazards.
(8) Fences on commercial property. The following standards shall
apply to the design of all fencing on commercial and multi-family land uses.
(a) Fences: Fences that are visible from residential uses and are
visible from public roads shall not be constructed of unfinished concrete
block, unfinished chain link metal wire or mesh. Chain link fencing is
only acceptable if it is dark colored. Chain link fencing is prohibited in
the downtown districts when visible from public roads. Within the
Parkway District Overlay, chain link fencing is prohibited when visible
from public roads between US 129 and Washington Street. Chain link is
allowed in other areas within the Parkway Overlay District if screening
trees (as defined in §14-213) are planted at fifteen feet (15') intervals on
the outer perimeter of the fence.
This specific fence standard regarding chain link shall not apply
to property principally used for livestock areas or farms and shall not be
applicable to fences in property zoned industrial.
These regulations, including fence height and material, shall not
be applicable to areas of properties that require a heightened level of
security such as, public and private utility equipment, perimeters of
stormwater detention/retention ponds, and cellular tower equipment and
similar uses. This subsection on fences also does not apply to temporary
construction fencing.
(b) Fence structures should be free of barbs, spikes, razor wire
electrical wire (except agricultural uses) and similar safety hazards
unless granted a special exception from the BZA.
(c) Fence used to screen dumpsters. Dumpsters must be
screened from public roads and adjacent residential uses but flat faced
block and any type of chain link fencing are not allowed. Dumpster
screening may consist of painted split faced concrete block, brick, stone,
wooden fencing or similar type materials.
(d) Construction fence wrapping. Fence wrapping is defined as
mesh or similar material attached to construction fences for the purpose
attractively screening the view of construction sites. Fence wrapping shall not
be subject to sign regulations. Such fence wrapping shall be allowed when all of
the following conditions are met:
(i) Commercial sites must be two (2) acres or larger as
measured by the area of disturbed soil;
14-229
(ii) Fence wrap shall not be placed in the right-of-way nor
in areas that block motorist visibility;
(iii) Fence wrap shall be attached to stable well-anchored
fencing such as chain-linked fencing;
(9) All fence wrap shall be removed with in two (2) weeks after a
certificate of occupancy is issued. Landscape with fences used to screen
commercial and industrial projects from adjacent residential development. The
City of Maryville Land Development Regulations addresses ways to visually
screen commercial and industrial development when it is located adjacent or
across the street from a residential development. Landscaping and screening
requirements are addressed in §14-213.
(10) Fence regulations applicable to properties in industrial zones.
Properties zoned "Industrial" are only required to comply with subsections
(1)-(5) and (9) of this fence section, but are not required to the height restriction
in subsection (9).
(11) Fence regulations in private subdivision covenants. Property in the
City of Maryville may be subject to private restrictive covenants that set forth
criterion for fencing. This section does not address such private restrictive
covenants. The city does not enforce private restrictive covenants, and doing so
would be outside of the city's legal authority. This section regulating fences shall
apply to all property specified herein, regardless of what language may appear
in such private restrictive covenants. (as added by Ord. #2008-20, April 2008,
amended by Ord. #2010-07, Jan. 2010, Ord. #2010-08, Jan. 2010, and Ord.
#2016-26, Oct. 2016, and replaced by Ord. #2018-11, June 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-230
CHAPTER 3
HISTORIC ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION
14-301. Creation of historic zoning commission.
14-302. Powers and duties.
14-303. Jurisdiction.
14-304. Review of decision.
14-301. Creation of historic zoning commission. (1) In accordance
with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-401 et seq. there is hereby created a
historic zoning commission for the City of Maryville which shall officially be
known and designated as the "Maryville Historic Zoning Commission."
(a) Membership. (i) The members of the Maryville
Historic Zoning Commission (HZC) shall be appointed by the
mayor, subject to confirmation by the council. The commission
shall be comprised of seven (7) members which consist of a
representative of a local patriotic or historical organization; an
architect, if available; a member of the Maryville Planning
Commission at the time of such person's appointment; and the
remainder shall be from the community in general.
(ii) The terms of the members shall be five (5) years,
except that the members appointed initially shall be appointed for
staggered terms so that the terms of at least one (1) member but
not more than two (2) members shall expire each year. All
members shall serve without compensation.
(iii) Members of the HZC may be removed from office by
the mayor for just cause. Removal can also occur once the member
has been absent from three (3) regular, consecutive meetings or
absent from six (6) regularly scheduled meetings in a twelve (12)
month period. A commission member moving outside the city shall
constitute resignation from the commission effective on the date a
replacement is appointed.
(iv) The commission shall annually elect from its
members a chair and a vice chair.
(v) The commission may adopt rules and regulations consistent
with the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7- 403(a).
(b) Meetings. (i) The HZC shall establish a regular meeting
schedule and shall meet with sufficient frequency that it can take
action expeditiously. Adequate notice shall be provided of a
meeting of the commission. All meetings of the commission shall
be open to the public, and the agenda shall be made available in
advance of the meeting.
14-231
(ii) Quorum. A quorum for the HZC shall consist of a
majority of the regular commission membership (excluding vacant
seats). A quorum is necessary for the commission to take official
action.
(iii) Voting. The concurring vote of a simple majority of
the regular commission membership (excluding vacant seats) shall
be necessary to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon
which it is required to pass under any ordinance.
(iv) Conflict of interest. Any member of the HZC who shall
have a direct or indirect interest in any decision of the commission
shall recuse themselves from participating in the discussion,
decision, and/or proceedings of the HZC in connection therewith.
(1985 Code, § 11-201, as replaced by Ord. #2018-40, Dec. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
14-302. Powers and duties. (1) The HZC shall review all plans for
construction, alteration, repair, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition of any
structure in the designated zones in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-7-407(a), and either grant or deny certificates of appropriateness in
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-408. In all cases the
commission shall review within thirty (30) days all applications for construction
within the designated zone. If a certificate of appropriateness is denied then the
applicant shall be informed of the commission's finding in writing no later than
seven (7) days after the termination of the thirty (30) day period.
(2) Historic zones and boundaries shall be recommended by the HZC
to the Maryville Planning Commission and council of the City of Maryville.
(3) The commission shall present guidelines for the historical districts
to the planning commission for its recommendation to city council, who shall
approve or deny approval of the same.
The HZC shall maintain guidelines for the historic districts and
recommend to the planning commission and to city council any amendments
needed. Copies of the HZC 's Required Regulations and Suggested Guidelines
shall be kept in the development services office.
(4) Windshield surveys of the historic districts should be undertaken
on a regular basis by the HZC to monitor approved cases and to check that
unauthorized work is not in progress.1 (1985 Code, § 11-202, as amended by
Ord. #2018-30, Ch17_2-5-19, and replaced by Ord. #2018-40, Dec. 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
1Required Regulations and Suggested Guidelines (all volumes) and any
amendments are of record in the city recorder's office.
14-232
14-303. Jurisdiction. (1) The HZC has jurisdiction over the historic
zones per Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 13-7-403 and 13-5-405 through
§ 13-7-408.
(2) The following zoning districts must conform to the required
regulations as adopted in the City of Maryville Zoning Ordinance,§ 14-209:
(a) College Park Historic District
(b) Oak Park Historic District
(c) College Park Historic District Overlay
(d) Oak Park Historic District Overlay (1985 Code, § 11-203, as
replaced by Ord. #2018-40, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
14-304. Review of decision. Any person who may be aggrieved by any
final order or judgment of the HZC may have such order or judgment reviewed
by the courts by the procedure of statutory certiorari as provided in Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 13-7-409. (1985 Code, § 11-204, as replaced by Ord.
#2018-40, Dec. 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
15-1
TITLE 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
3. SPEED LIMITS.
4. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
5. STOPPING AND YIELDING.
6. PARKING.
7. ENFORCEMENT.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS2
SECTION
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements.
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc.
15-103. Public assemblies, picketing, etc.: distracting motorists or other
passers by restricted.
15-104. One-way streets.
15-105. Unlaned streets.
15-106. Laned streets.
15-107. Yellow lines.
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic-control signs, etc.
15-109. General requirements for traffic-control signs, etc.
15-110. Unauthorized traffic-control signs, etc.
15-111. Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs, etc.
15-112. School safety patrols.
1Municipal code reference
Excavations and obstructions in streets, etc.: title 16.
2State law references
Under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-307, the following offenses
are exclusively state offenses and must be tried in a state court or a
court having state jurisdiction: driving while intoxicated or drugged,
as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-401; failing to
stop after a traffic accident, as prohibited by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 55-10-101, et seq.; driving while license is suspended or
revoked, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-7-116; and
drag racing, as prohibited by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-501.
15-2
15-113. Driving through funerals or other processions.
15-114. Clinging to vehicles in motion.
15-115. Riding on outside of vehicles.
15-116. Backing vehicles.
15-117. Projections from the rear of vehicles.
15-118. Causing unnecessary noise.
15-119. Operators of motor vehicles to be licensed.
15-120. Passing.
15-121. Damaging pavements.
15-122. Bicycle riders, etc.
15-123. Operation of motor vehicle without adequate energy absorption system
prohibited--alteration of altitude from ground level of passenger
car prohibited--exceptions--enforcement.
15-124. Child passenger restraint system required.
15-125. Truck traffic restricted on Broadway.
15-126. Following too closely.
15-127. Window tint.
15-128. Safety belts in passenger vehicles.
15-129. Coloring or alteration of headlights on motor vehicles.
15-130. Use of a dynamic breaking device (Jake Brake) prohibited.
15-131. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
15-132. Motor vehicles prohibited from using private property as thoroughfares
to avoid traffic control devices.
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such
vehicle is equipped with properly operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn, and
such other equipment as is prescribed and required by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 55, chapter 9.
Further it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle
within the corporate limits unless such vehicle be registered and/or have a
proper certificate of title as described and required by Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 55, chapters 1, 3, and 4.
The foregoing provisions are deemed a condition precedent to the
operation of any motor vehicle upon the streets of the municipality, and the
foregoing violations are prescribed under the authority of Priv. Acts 1967, ch. 27,
art. II, § 1, subsection 18 (The Charter of the City of Maryville, Tennessee).
(1985 Code, § 9-101)
15-102. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc. Except for
necessary access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle shall be driven
upon any street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or other lawful purpose.
(1985 Code, § 9-106)
15-3
15-103. Public assemblies, picketing, etc.: distracting motorists
or other passers by restricted. No person, persons, group, club, organization,
or similar gathering shall engage in or conduct any gathering, demonstration,
public assembly, picketing, proselytizing, performance, or any other related
event designed to attract the attention of motorists or other passers by within
two hundred fifty feet (250') of the center point of any of the following
intersections:
(1) U.S. Highway 321 (West Lamar Alexander Parkway) at U.S.
Highway 411 (West Broadway);
(2) U.S. Highway 129 (Bypass) at U.S. Highway 321 (West Lamar
Alexander Parkway);
(3) U.S. Highway 321 (West Lamar Alexander Parkway) at Foothills
Mall Drive;
(4) Foch Street at U.S. Highway 129 (By-Pass);
(5) U.S. Highway 411 (West Broadway) at Foothills Mall Drive; and
(6) U.S. Highway 321 (West Lamar Alexander Parkway) at Court
Street;
(7) U.S. Highway 321 (East Lamar Alexander Parkway) at Washington
Street;
(8) U.S. Highway 411 (Broadway) at Washington Street.
The activity prohibited by this section shall not be allowed within the
streets, medians, sidewalks, common areas, private property, or right-of-way in
the designated area. (1985 Code, § 9-107, as deleted by Ord. #2004-41, Nov.
2004, and replaced by Ord. #2012-22, Sept. 2012)
15-104. One-way streets. On any street for one-way traffic with posted
signs indicating the authorized direction of travel at all intersections offering
access thereto, no person shall operate any vehicle except in the indicated
direction. (1985 Code, § 9-109)
15-105. Unlaned streets. (1) Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient
width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the street except:
(a) When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.
(b) When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while
under construction or repair.
(c) Upon a roadway designated and signposted by the
municipality for one-way traffic.
(2) All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or
when preparing for a left turn. (1985 Code, § 9-110)
15-4
15-106. Laned streets. On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his vehicle
within the boundaries of the proper lane for his direction of travel except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
On two (2) lane and three (3) lane streets, the proper lane for travel shall
be the right hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four
(4) or more lanes, either of the right hand lanes shall be available for use except
that traffic moving at less than the normal rate of speed shall use the extreme
right hand lane. On one-way streets either lane may be lawfully used in the
absence of markings to the contrary. (1985 Code, § 9-111)
15-107. Yellow lines. On streets with a yellow line placed to the right
of any lane line or center line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing
zone, and no operator shall drive his vehicle or any part thereof across or to the
left of such yellow line except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from
such street. (1985 Code, § 9-112)
15-108. Miscellaneous traffic-control signs, etc.1 It shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle to violate or fail to comply with
any traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device placed or erected by the state
or the municipality unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle
willfully to violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions of any police
officer. (1985 Code, § 9-113)
15-109. General requirements for traffic-control signs, etc. The
city engineer shall direct the placement of all signals, markings, devices and
signs except those governing speed limit and no parking zones. The city council
shall direct the placement of all markings, devices and signs governing speed
limit and no parking zones.
All newly installed traffic control signs, signals, markings and devices
shall conform to the latest revision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways,2 published by the U. S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, and shall, so far as
practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the municipality. Use
1Municipal code references
Stop signs, yield signs, flashing signals, pedestrian control signs,
traffic control signals generally: §§ 15-505--15-509.
2This manual may be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. 20402.
15-5
of the above referenced manual shall be directive rather than mandatory. (1985
Code, § 9-114)
15-110. Unauthorized traffic-control signs, etc. No person shall
place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street, any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles
an official traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to control the movement of traffic or parking of
vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device or any railroad sign or
signal. (1985 Code, § 9-115)
15-111. Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs, etc.
When a traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device has been placed, the
presumption shall be that it is official and that it has been lawfully placed by
the proper municipal authority. All presently installed traffic-control signs,
signals, markings and devices are hereby expressly authorized, ratified, and
approved irrespective of whether or not they were lawfully placed originally.
(1985 Code, § 9-116)
15-112. School safety patrols. All motorists and pedestrians shall obey
the directions or signals of school safety patrols when such patrols are assigned
under the authority of the chief of police and are acting in accordance with
instructions; provided, that such persons giving any order, signal, or direction
shall at the time be wearing some insignia and/or using authorized flags for
giving signals. (1985 Code, § 9-117)
15-113. Driving through funerals or other processions. Except
when otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1985
Code, § 9-118)
15-114. Clinging to vehicles in motion. It shall be unlawful for any
person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any
other vehicle to cling to, or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving
vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public way or place. (1985 Code, § 9-120)
15-115. Riding on outside of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to ride, or for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle being operated
on a street, alley, or other public way or place, to permit any person to ride on
any portion of such vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers.
This section shall not apply to persons engaged in the necessary discharge of
15-6
lawful duties nor to persons riding in the load-carrying space of trucks. (1985
Code, § 9-121)
15-116. Backing vehicles. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the
same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without
interfering with other traffic. (1985 Code, § 9-122)
15-117. Projections from the rear of vehicles. Whenever the load or
any projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend beyond the rear of the bed or
body thereof, the operator shall display at the end of such load or projection, in
such position as to be clearly visible from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag
being not less than twelve (12) inches square. Between one-half (½) hour after
sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed in place of
the flag a red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least
two hundred (200) feet from the rear of such vehicle. (1985 Code, § 9-123)
15-118. Causing unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cause unnecessary noise by unnecessarily sounding the horn, "racing"
the motor, or causing the "screeching" or "squealing" of the tires on any motor
vehicle. (1985 Code, § 9-124)
15-119. Operators of motor vehicles to be licensed. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits
unless such person shall have a valid license as an operator or chauffeur under
the provisions of and as required by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55, chapter
50.
The foregoing provision is deemed a condition precedent to the operation
of any motor vehicle upon the streets of the municipality, and the foregoing
violation is prescribed under the authority of Priv. Acts 1967, ch. 27, art. II, § 1,
subsection 18 (The Charter of the City of Maryville, Tennessee). (1985 Code,
§ 9-125)
15-120. Passing. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left
turn.
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a street of
15-7
sufficient width for four (4) or more lanes of moving traffic when such movement
can be made in safety.
No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the street
in overtaking or passing on the right.
When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an intersection
to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless he can see that the way ahead is sufficiently clear and
unobstructed to enable him to make the movement in safety. (1985 Code,
§ 9-126)
15-121. Damaging pavements. No person shall operate upon any
street of the municipality any vehicle, motor propelled or otherwise, which by
reason of its weight or the character of its wheels or track is likely to damage
the surface or foundation of the street. (1985 Code, § 9-119)
15-122. Bicycle riders, etc. Every person riding or operating a bicycle,
motorcycle, or motor scooter shall be subject to the provisions of all traffic
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city applicable to the driver or operator
of other vehicles except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application to bicycles, motorcycles, or motor scooters.
No person operating or riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or motor scooter shall
ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, nor shall the operator carry any other person upon such vehicle other
than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon.
No bicycle, motorcycle, or motor scooter shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle, or motor scooter shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands
upon the handlebar.
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall operate any
motorcycle or motor driven cycle while any other person is a passenger upon
said motor vehicle.
All motorcycles and motor driven cycles operated on public ways within
the corporate limits shall be equipped with crash bars approved by the state's
commissioner of safety except in the case where the displacement of the
motorcycle engine is seven hundred and fifty (750) cubic centimeters (forty-five
and seventy-five/one hundredths (45.75) cubic inches) or less and the operator
is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
The driver of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle and any passenger
thereon shall be required to wear on his head a crash helmet of a type approved
by the state's commissioner of safety.
15-8
Every motorcycle or motor driven cycle operated upon any public way
within the corporate limits shall be equipped with a windshield of a type
approved by the state's commissioner of safety, or, in the alternative, the
operator and any passenger on any such motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall
be required to wear safety goggles of a type approved by the state's
commissioner of safety for the purpose of preventing any flying object from
striking the operator or any passenger in the eyes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride on any vehicle in
violation of this section and it shall also be unlawful for any parent or guardian
knowingly to permit any minor to operate a motorcycle or motor driven cycle in
violation of this section. (1985 Code, § 9-127)
15-123. Operation of motor vehicle without adequate energy
absorption system prohibited--alteration of altitude from ground level
of passenger car prohibited--exceptions--enforcement. (1) No person
shall operate a motor vehicle on any road, street, or highway in the City of
Maryville unless the vehicle is equipped with a bumper or other energy
absorption system with an analogous function.
(2)(a) No person shall operate a passenger vehicle, except a four-wheel
drive recreational vehicle, of a type required to be registered under the
laws of this state upon a city highway or street modified by reason of
alteration of its altitude from the ground if its bumpers, measured to any
point on a load-bearing member on the horizontal bumper bar, are not
within the range of fourteen inches (14") to twenty-two inches (22") above
the ground, except that no vehicle shall be modified to cause the vehicle
body or chassis to come in contact with the ground or expose the fuel tank
to damage from collision or cause the wheels to come in contact with the
body under normal operation and that no part of the original suspension
system be disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension
system; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the
installation of heavy duty equipment to include shock absorbers and
overload springs; and provided further, that nothing contained in this
section shall prevent a person from operating a motor vehicle on a public
highway with normal wear of the suspension system if normal wear does
not affect the control of the vehicle.
(b) No person shall operate a four-wheel drive recreational
vehicle of a type required to be registered under the laws of this state
upon a city highway or street modified by reason of alteration of its
altitude from the ground if its bumpers, measured to any point on a
load-bearing member on the horizontal bumper bar, are not within the
range of fourteen inches (14") to thirty-one inches (31") above the ground,
except that no vehicle shall be modified to cause the vehicle body or
chassis to come in contact with the ground or expose the full tank to
damage from collision or cause the wheels to come in contact with the
15-9
body under normal operation and that no part of the original suspension
system be disconnected to defeat the safe operation of the suspension
system; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the
installation of heavy duty equipment to include shock absorbers and
overload springs; and provided further, that nothing contained in this
section shall prevent a person from operating a motor vehicle on a public
highway with normal wear of the suspension system if normal wear does
not affect the control of the vehicle. In the case of a four-wheel drive
vehicle where the thirty-one inches (31") limitation is exceeded, the
vehicle will comply with this section if the vehicle is equipped with a drop
bumper. Such a drop bumper must be bolted and welded to the frame of
the vehicle and be made of a strength equal to a stock bumper.
(3) This section shall not apply to freight motor vehicles and/or other
vehicles which have designs which would intrinsically preclude conformity with
this provision. This section also shall not apply to any vehicle which has an
unaltered and undamaged stock bumper or energy absorption system as
supplied by the manufacturer of the vehicle.
(4) Any law enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of traffic
laws and regulations may stop and inspect motor vehicles which appear to be
operated in violation of this section. If, upon inspection, the vehicle is found to
be in violation of this section, the operator shall be issued a citation stating the
particulars of the violation and, in general, the repairs necessary to bring the
vehicle into compliance with this section. The citation shall also state a time
and place for appearance in city court, not less than fourteen (14) days from the
date of the issuance of the citation.
(5) If, upon reinspection at such an appearance, the defect is found to
have been corrected, or the vehicle is found to be in compliance with this section,
and upon payment of the court costs, no further penalties shall be assessed. If,
however, the vehicle is found not to be in compliance with this section, the
operator shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty clause for this
code.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to establish standards
higher than those formulated by the United States Department of
Transportation for bumpers on passenger motor vehicles sold within the United
States. (1985 Code, § 9-128)
15-124. Child passenger restraint system required. Any person
transporting a child/children under the age of four (4) years in a motor vehicle
on the roadways, streets or highways of this city shall be responsible for
providing for the protection of the child/children and properly using a child
passenger restraint system meeting federal motor vehicle safety standards;
provided, however, nothing in this section shall restrict a mother from removing
the child from such system and holding the child when the mother is nursing the
child, or attending to its other physiological needs. Provided that the term
15-10
"motor vehicle" as used in this paragraph shall not apply to recreational vehicles
of the truck or van type. Provided further that the term "motor vehicle" as used
in this paragraph shall not apply to trucks having a tonnage rating of one (1) ton
or more. (1985 Code, § 9-129)
15-125. Truck traffic restricted on Broadway. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or drive a truck, tractor-trailer truck, bus or any
vehicle with a trailer attached upon that portion of Broadway Avenue from Cate
Street to Norwood Street except that said vehicles may be operated and driven
on said portion of Broadway Avenue for the purpose of loading and unloading
for properties located on said portion of said Broadway Avenue between the
hours of 6:00 o'clock P.M. to 10:30 o'clock A.M. The term "truck" and
"tractor-trailer truck" for the purpose of this section shall be construed as any
such truck having a rated capacity of one (1) ton or greater. (1985 Code, § 9-130)
15-126. Following too closely. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not
follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent having due
regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the conditions of
the roadway. (1985 Code, § 9-131)
15-127. Window tint. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate,
upon a public highway, street or road, any motor vehicle registered in this state,
in which any window, which has a visible light transmittance equal to, but not
less that specified in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 205, has
been altered, treated or replaced by the affixing or installation of any material
which:
(a) Has a visible light transmittance of less than thirty-five
percent (35%); or
(b) With the exception of the manufacturers standard installed
shade band, reduce the visible light transmittance in the windshield
below seventy percent (70%).
(2) Any vehicle model permitted by Federal Regulations to be equipped
with certain windows tinted so as not to conform to the specifications of
subsection (1), shall be exempt from subsection (1) with respect to those certain
windows. Likewise, vehicles bearing commercial license plates shall be exempt
from the specification of subsection (1), for those windows rearward of the front
doors. This subsection shall not be construed in any way to exempt the front
door windows of any vehicle of any kind from the specifications of subsection (1).
(3) Violation of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by
a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). (1985 Code, § 9-132)
15-128. Safety belts in passenger vehicles. (1) It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city
unless child passengers in the vehicle are restrained according to the provisions
15-11
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-9-602(a), including all sub-sections thereof,
then and there in effect. In addition to or in lieu of the penalty imposed for
violation of this part, persons guilty of their first offense of violating this section
may be required to attend a court approved offenders' class designed to educate
offenders on the hazards of not properly transporting children in motor vehicles.
A fee may be charged for such class sufficient to defray all costs of providing
such class.
(2) No person shall operate a passenger motor vehicle in the city limits
of the City of Maryville unless such person and all passengers nine years of age
and older are restrained by a safety belt at all times the vehicle is in forward
motion.
(3) No person nine years of age or older shall be a passenger in a motor
vehicle in the City of Maryville unless such person is restrained by a safety belt
at all times the vehicle is in forward motion.
(4) As used in this section, "passenger motor vehicle" means any motor
vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or less
that is not used as a public or livery conveyance for passengers and does not
apply to motor vehicle which are not required by federal law to be equipped with
safety belts.
(5) Violation of this section shall be punishable pursuant to the general
penalty clause of the City of Maryville and as otherwise set forth herein in
subsection (1) regarding subsection (1).
(6) This section shall not apply to:
(a) A passenger or operator with a physically disabling condition
whose physical disability would prevent appropriate restraint in such
safety, seat or seat belt; provided that such condition is duly certified in
writing by a physician who shall state the nature of the handicap as well
as the reason such restraint is inappropriate; or
(b) A passenger motor vehicle operated by a rural letter carrier
of the United States Postal Service while performing the duties of a rural
letter carrier; or
(c) Utility workers, water, gas and electric meter readers in the
course of their employment; or
(d) Newspaper delivery motor carrier service while performing
the duties of a newspaper delivery motor carrier service provided that
this exemption shall apply only from the time of the actual first delivery
to the customer until the last actual delivery to the customer; or
(e) Sales persons or mechanics employed by an automobile
dealer who in the course of their employment test drive a motor vehicle,
if such dealership customarily test drives 50 or more motor vehicles a
day, and if such test drives occur within one mile of the location of the
dealership. (1985 Code, § 9-133, as replaced by Ord. #2004-12, Jan. 2004)
15-12
15-129. Coloring or alteration of headlights on motor vehicle. It
shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle with headlights
which have been painted, blacked out, darkened, or otherwise altered in color.
Headlights are deemed altered in color if they do not project a white or clear
light. (As added by Ord. #2000-23, July 2000)
15-130. Use of a dynamic braking device (Jake Brake) prohibited.
(1) Any motor vehicle traveling within the corporate limits of the City
of Maryville is prohibited from using dynamic braking devices (commonly reffers
to as jake brake except in the event that a motor vehicle loses normal means to
slow down and stop.
(2) The dynamic braking device is defined hereby as a device used on
motor vehicles for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion
engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel
brakes. (as added by Ord. #2003-10, May 2003, and replaced by Ord. #2007-01,
Feb. 2007)
15-131. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
(1) Every vehicle operated within the corporate limits of the City of
Maryville must be in compliance with the financial responsibility law.
(2) At the time the driver of the motor vehicle is charged with any
moving vehicle violation under title 55, chapters 8 and 10, parts 1 through 5;
chapter 50; or any provision in this title of the municipal code; or is involved in
an accident for which notice is required under Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-10-106, the officer shall request evidence of financial responsibility as
required by this section. In an accident for which notice is required under
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-106, the officer shall request such evidence
of financial responsibility from all drivers involved in the accident without
regard to apparent or actual fault.
(3) For the purpose of this section, "financial responsibility" means:
(a) Documentation such as a declaration page of an insurance
policy, an insurance binder, or an insurance card from an insurance
company authorized to do business in Tennessee stating that a current
policy of insurance meeting the requirements of the Tennessee Financial
Responsibility Law of 1977 compiled in Tennessee Code Annotated,
chapter 12, title 55 has been issued.
(b) A certificate valid for one year issued by the Commissioner
of Safety stating that a cash deposit or bond in the amount required by
the Tennessee Financial Responsibility Law of 1977 compiled in
Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 12, title 55, has been paid or filed
with the Commissioner or has qualified as a self-insurer under Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-12-111, or
(c) The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation
was owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of
15-13
Safety or the Interstate Commerce Commission or which was owned by
the United States, the State of Tennessee, or any political subdivision
thereof and such motor vehicle is being operated with such owner's
consent.
(4) Civil offense. It is a civil offense to fail to provide evidence of
financial responsibility pursuant to this section. Any violation of this section is
punishable by a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00). The civil penalty
prescribed by the section shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed by
the laws of this state or by the city's municipal code of ordinances.
(5) Evidence of compliance after violation. On or before the court date,
the person charged with the violation of this section may submit evidence of
compliance with this section in effect at the time of the violation. If the court is
satisfied that the compliance was in effect at the time of the violation, the
charge for failure to provide evidence of financial responsibility may be
dismissed. Such dismissal may be with court costs taxed the person receiving
the citation. (as added by Ord. #2004-13, Jan. 2004)
15-132. Motor vehicles prohibited from using private property as
thoroughfares to avoid traffic control devices. It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to leave the roadway and travel across private property,
or public property devoted to other than highway use, to avoid compliance with
an official signal or an official traffic sign or for the purpose of avoiding
obedience to directions given by a police officer or any traffic regulations or
ordinance. (as added by Ord. #2008-35, Sept. 2008)
15-14
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
SECTION
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined.
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-203. Following emergency vehicles.
15-204. Running over fire hoses, etc.
15-201. Authorized emergency vehicles defined. Authorized
emergency vehicles shall be fire department vehicles, police vehicles, and such
ambulances and other emergency vehicles as are designated by the chief of
police. (1985 Code, § 9-102)
15-202. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.1 (1) The
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency
call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section, subject to the conditions herein stated.
(2) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may park or stand,
irrespective of the provisions of this title; proceed past a red or stop signal or
stop sign, but only after slowing down to ascertain that the intersection is clear;
exceed the maximum speed limit and disregard regulations governing direction
of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
(3) The exemptions herein granted for an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion
sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle and when the vehicle
is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle
need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the
vehicle.
(4) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1985 Code,
§ 9-103)
1Municipal code reference
Operation of other vehicle upon the approach of emergency vehicles:
§ 15-501.
15-15
15-203. Following emergency vehicles. No driver of any vehicle shall
follow any authorized emergency vehicle apparently travelling in response to an
emergency call closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive or park such vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1985 Code, § 9-104)
15-204. Running over fire hoses, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive over any hose lines or other equipment of the fire department
except in obedience to the direction of a fireman or policeman. (1985 Code,
§ 9-105)
15-16
CHAPTER 3
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION
15-301. In general.
15-302. At intersections.
15-303. In school zones.
15-304. In congested areas.
15-301. In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of
thirty (30) miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating
other speed limits, in which cases the posted speed limit shall apply. (1985
Code, § 9-201)
15-302. At intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour unless such person is driving on a street regulated by
traffic-control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the
intersecting streets. (1985 Code, § 9-202)
15-303. In school zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour
when passing a school during recess or while children are going to or leaving
school during its opening or closing hours. (1985 Code, § 9-203)
15-304. In congested areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or drive a motor vehicle through any congested area at a rate of speed
in excess of any posted speed limit when such speed limit has been posted by
authority of the municipality. (1985 Code, § 9-204)
15-17
CHAPTER 4
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-401. Generally.
15-402. Right turns.
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways.
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways.
15-405. U-turns.
15-401. Generally. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any
turning movement which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any
other vehicle without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in
safety and signaling his intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law.1 (1985 Code, § 9-301)
15-402. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right
turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway. (1985 Code, § 9-302)
15-403. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the
right of the intersection of the center line of the two roadways. (1985 Code,
§ 9-303)
15-404. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any
intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the
roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available
to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly
as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (1985 Code, § 9-304)
15-405. U-turns. U-turns are prohibited. (1985 Code, § 9-305)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-143.
15-18
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING AND YIELDING
SECTION
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-502. When emerging from alleys, etc.
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection.
15-504. At railroad crossings.
15-505. At "stop" signs.
15-506. At "yield" signs.
15-507. At traffic-control signals generally.
15-508. At flashing traffic-control signals.
15-509. At pedestrian control signals.
15-510. Stops to be signaled.
15-501. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.1 Upon
the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and/or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state,
or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only,
the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear
of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer. (1985 Code, § 9-401)
15-502. When emerging from alleys, etc. The drivers of all vehicles
emerging from alleys, parking lots, driveways, or buildings shall stop such
vehicles immediately prior to driving onto any sidewalk or street. They shall not
proceed to drive onto the sidewalk or street until they can safely do so without
colliding or interfering with approaching pedestrians or vehicles. (1985 Code,
§ 9-402)
15-503. To prevent obstructing an intersection. No driver shall
enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of such intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he
is operating without obstructing the passage of traffic in or on the intersecting
street or crosswalk. This provision shall be effective notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1985 Code, § 9-403)
1Municipal code reference
Special privileges of emergency vehicles: title 15, chapter 2.
15-19
15-504. At railroad crossings. Any driver of a vehicle approaching a
railroad grade crossing shall stop within not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed further while any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the approach of a railroad train.
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the
approach of a railroad train.
(3) A railroad train is approaching within approximately fifteen
hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal
indicating its approach.
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing. (1985 Code, § 9-404)
15-505. At "stop" signs. The driver of a vehicle facing a "stop" sign shall
bring his vehicle to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until he can proceed
through the intersection in safety. (1985 Code, § 9-405)
15-506. At "yield" signs. The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right
of way to approaching vehicles before proceeding at all places where "yield"
signs have been posted. (1985 Code, § 9-406)
15-507. At traffic-control signals generally. Traffic-control signals
exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored
lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, shall show the following colors
only and shall apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone, or "Go":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits such
turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Steady yellow alone, or "Caution":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the
red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
15-20
(3) Steady red alone, or "Stop":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go"
is shown alone.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(4) Steady red with green arrow:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(5) In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made a vehicle length short of the signal.
(1985 Code, § 9-407)
15-508. At flashing traffic-control signals. (1) Whenever an
illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal placed
or erected in the municipality it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
(a) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked,
or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed
shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(b) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(2) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct
of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules set forth in § 15-504 of this code. (1985 Code, § 9-408)
15-509. At pedestrian control signals. Wherever special pedestrian
control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" have been
placed or erected by the municipality, such signals shall apply as follows:
(1) "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
15-21
(2) "Wait or Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk
or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. (1985 Code, § 9-409)
15-510. Stops to be signaled. No person operating a motor vehicle
shall stop such vehicle, whether in obedience to a traffic sign or signal or
otherwise, without first signaling his intention in accordance with the
requirements of the state law,1 except in an emergency. (1985 Code, § 9-410)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-143.
15-22
CHAPTER 6
PARKING
SECTION
15-601. Generally.
15-602. Angle parking.
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space.
15-604. Where prohibited.
15-605. Loading and unloading zones.
15-606.--15-611. [Deleted.]
15-612. Parking on city parking lots regulated.
15-613. Handicapped parking.
15-614. Parking on private parking lots regulated.
15-615. Parking of trucks, tractor-trailers and buses upon public streets or
public ways regulated.
15-616. Parking enforcement in Royal Oaks Subdivision.
15-617. Closing of city owned or maintained parking lots, including parking
garages.
15-601. Generally. No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended
on any street without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor,
removing the ignition key, and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward
the nearest curb or gutter of the street.
Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked upon a street within
this municipality shall be so parked that its right wheels are approximately
parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right edge or curb of the street.
On one-way streets where the municipality has not placed signs prohibiting the
same, vehicles may be permitted to park on the left side of the street, and in
such cases the left wheels shall be required to be within eighteen (18) inches of
the left edge or curb of the street.
Notwithstanding anything else in this code to the contrary, no person
shall park or leave a vehicle parked on any public street or alley within the fire
limits between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M. or on any other public
street or alley for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours without the
prior approval of the chief of police.
Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease, or work on any vehicle, except
to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is parked on
a public street. (1985 Code, § 9-501)
15-602. Angle parking. On those streets which have been signed or
marked by the municipality for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at the angle indicated by such signs or markings. No person
15-23
shall angle park any vehicle which has a trailer attached thereto or which has
a length in excess of twenty-four (24) feet. (1985 Code, § 9-502)
15-603. Occupancy of more than one space. No person shall park a
vehicle in any designated parking space so that any part of such vehicle occupies
more than one such space or protrudes beyond the official markings on the
street or curb designating such space unless the vehicle is too large to be parked
within a single designated space. (1985 Code, § 9-503)
15-604. Where prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle in violation
of any sign placed or erected by the state or municipality, nor:
(1) On a sidewalk.
(2) In front of or within five (5) feet of a public or private driveway.
(3) Within an intersection or within twenty-five (25) feet thereof.
(4) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.
(5) Within a pedestrian crosswalk.
(6) Within fifty (50) feet of a railroad crossing.
(7) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station,
and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance.
(8) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
other traffic would be obstructed.
(9) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
(10) Upon any bridge.
(11) Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the municipality.
(12) Park at a distance of 65 feet from the intersecting streets of
Cunningham Street, Melrose Street, and South Cedar Street along the northern
side of Mountain View Avenue.
(13) On any area within a municipal owned parking lot or garage other
than the striped parking stalls. (1985 Code, § 9-504, as amended by
Ord. #2003-19, July 2003; Ord. #2003-24, Sept. 2003; and Ord. #2004-33, Aug.
2004)
15-605. Loading and unloading zones. No person shall park a vehicle
for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers or merchandise in any place marked by the
municipality as a loading and unloading zone. (1985 Code, § 9-505)
15-606.--15-611. [Deleted]. (as deleted by Ord. #2016-30, Nov. 2016)
15-612. Parking on city parking lots regulated. It shall be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to park any vehicle upon any public parking
lot, including parking garages, owned or maintained by the City of Maryville for
15-24
a period of more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours except where such
parking is expressly allowed by the Chief of Police pursuant to any city
permitted special event or for other good cause. (1985 Code, § 9-512, as amended
by Ord. #98-38, Sept. 1998, and Ord. #2016-30, Nov. 2016)
15-613. Handicapped parking. (1) Any business, firm, or other person
transacting business with the public from a permanent location in the City of
Maryville may provide on private property and the City of Maryville may
provide on public property specially marked parking spaces for the exclusive use
of any handicapped driver or handicapped passenger to whom the distinctive
license plates or placards were issued pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
title 55, chapter 21, and to qualified operators acting under the express direction
of a handicapped driver or handicapped passenger.
(2) Each such parking space shall be marked and maintained with the
stylized wheelchair symbol designated by Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-21-104. Provided, however, nonconforming markings or signs shall be
acceptable during the useful life of such markings or signs which may not be
extended by other than normal maintenance as long as such markings or signs
provide reasonable notice of the specially marked parking space.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, except those persons designated
in sub-section (1) above, to park in any parking space marked and maintained
as provided in sub-section (2) above, located on either public or private property,
and any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $50.00.
(4) Whether violations occur on public or private property, the
provisions of this section shall be enforced in the same manner used to enforce
other parking laws of the City of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 9-513, as amended by
Ord. #2004-32, Aug. 2004)
15-614. Parking on private parking lots regulated.1 It shall be
unlawful for any person to park a truck tractor, a trailer, or semitrailer, as
defined in Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 55-1-104 and 55-1-105, in any parking
lot of a privately owned shopping mall or shopping center in the City of
Maryville, or in any other privately owned parking lot in the City of Maryville
which will accommodate thirty (30) or more motor vehicles, without obtaining
permission to park in such a parking lot from the parking lot owner, manager,
or other authorized agent of the owner. It shall not be unlawful for such a truck
or trailer to park for the purpose of loading or unloading. Any violation of the
provisions of this section shall be punishable under the general penalty clause
for this municipal code. The provisions of this section shall be enforced in the
1See also Priv. Acts 1986, ch. 144, which also regulates this activity.
15-25
same manner used to enforce other parking laws of the City of Maryville. (1985
Code, § 9-514)
15-615. Parking of trucks, tractor-trailers and buses upon public
streets or public ways regulated. (1) Definitions. (a) "Truck" shall mean
every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(b) "Truck tractor" shall mean every motor vehicle designed and
used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to
carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so
drawn.
(c) "Trailer" shall mean every vehicle with or without motive
power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part
of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
(d) "Semitrailers" shall mean every vehicle without motive
power and not a motor vehicle as herein defined, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(e) "Pole trailers" shall mean every vehicle without motive
power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the
towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or
otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for
transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or
structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as
beams between the supporting connection.
(f) "Buses" and "motor vehicles" shall mean every self propelled
device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, excluding motorized bicycles and
every vehicle which is not propelled by electric power.
(g) "Roads" relates to streets, highways, avenues, boulevards,
parkways, lanes or other ways or any part of the public transportation
system and shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel and passage.
(h) "Loading" and "unloading" shall mean to place or store
goods, wares, or merchandise into a trailer or motor vehicle or to remove
such items from said vehicle and shall for purposes of this section refer
to the actual time consumed in such operation.
(i) "Refrigeration" or "refrigerated" means any unit or
individual compartment for the purpose of such storage and preservation
of frozen foods, commodities, or goods for human consumption or use.
15-26
(j) "Residential area" means area predominately in use for
residential purposes.
(2) Parking provisions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation owning, operating or having control of any truck, truck tractor,
trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, bus or motor vehicle in excess of one (1) ton
capacity to park the same upon any street or public way within the corporate
limits of Maryville, Tennessee.
(3) Refrigerated trucks. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation owning, operating or having control of any truck, truck tractor,
trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, bus or motor vehicle which has refrigeration
capability or capacity to park the same upon any street or public way or on
private property within any residential area within the corporate limits with the
refrigeration units operating.
(4) Exclusions. The provisions of subsection (2) shall not be deemed
to prohibit the lawful parking of any truck, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer,
pole trailer, bus or motor vehicle and related equipment upon any street within
the corporate limits for the loading or unloading of goods, wares, materials,
supplies or merchandise.
The provisions of subsection (3) shall not be deemed to prohibit the lawful
parking of refrigerated trucks, truck tractors, trailers, semitrailers, pole trailers,
bus or motor vehicles with refrigeration capability or capacity upon any street
or public way within the corporate limits for the loading or unloading of goods,
wares, materials, supplies or merchandise.
The provisions of these subsections shall not be deemed to prohibit the
parking of any truck, trailer, truck tractor, bus or motor vehicle within a
designated construction or work zone on streets or public ways within the
corporate limits. This provision shall be applicable only for the duration of
construction within the designated construction or work zone.
(5) Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation owning, operating or
having control of any truck, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, bus
or motor vehicle or refrigerated type trailers or motor vehicles shall be subject
to a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00 for each parking violation
of this section. (1985 Code, § 9-515)
15-616. Parking enforcement in Royal Oaks Subdivision. In the
platted subdivision known as Royal Oaks in the corporate limits, no person shall
park a vehicle on the street in violation of restrictions on parking stated on any
official sign placed or erected by the Royal Oaks Property Owners Association,
Inc. where such sign has been approved and authorized by the Chief of Police of
the City of Maryville. Parking in an area where parking is prohibited pursuant
to such signage will result in a parking citation and/or a vehicle being subject
to being towed at the owner's expense. Parking in such areas shall further
subject the vehicle and its owner to all other enforcement mechanisms found in
the city code to regulate illegal parking. (as added by Ord. #2009-30, May 2009)
15-27
15-617. Closing of city owned or maintained parking lots,
including parking garages. The City of Maryville through its City Manager
or Chief of Police reserves the right to close either portions or the entirety of any
city owned or maintained parking lots, including parking garages, for city
permitted special events, during emergency situations or as otherwise deemed
necessary by such City Manager or Chief of Police for the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Maryville. (as added by Ord. #2016-30, Nov.
2016)
15-28
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.
15-702. Failure to obey citation.
15-703. Use of driver's license in lieu of bail.
15-704. Illegal parking.
15-705. Impoundment of vehicles.
15-706. Violation and penalty.
15-701. Issuance of traffic citations.1 When a police officer halts a
traffic violator other than for the purpose of giving a warning, and does not take
such person into custody under arrest, he shall take the name, address, and
operator's license number of said person, the license number of the motor vehicle
involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall
issue to him a written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge
against him in the city court at a specified time. The officer, upon receiving the
written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation,
shall release such person from custody. It shall be unlawful for any alleged
violator to give false or misleading information as to his name or address. (1985
Code, § 9-701)
15-702. Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate his written promise to appear in court after giving said promise to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1985 Code, § 9-702)
15-703. Use of driver's license in lieu of bail. The City of Maryville
does hereby adopt the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55, chapter
50, part 8, allowing the deposit of chauffeur's or operator's license by any person
issued a citation or arrested and charged with the violation of any municipal
ordinance or state statute regulating traffic, except those ordinances and
statutes, the violation of which call for the mandatory revocation of a operator's
or chauffeur's license for any period of time, in lieu of bail of any other security
required for appearance in the City Court of the City of Maryville. (1985 Code,
§ 9-703)
1State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq.
15-29
15-704. Illegal parking. (1) Whenever any motor vehicle without a
driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed
by this code, or by ordinance or regulation of the city, the officer finding such
vehicle shall take its license number and may take any other information
displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously
affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner to answer for the
violation within fifteen (15) days during the hours and at a place specified in the
citation.
(2) In all prosecutions for alleged violations of any of the restrictions
imposed by this code, or by any ordinance or regulation of the city, the owner of
the vehicle involved shall be prima facie presumed to have been the operator or
in control thereof at the time the alleged offense was committed, and no such
owner shall evade guilt for any such violation by representing that he was not
operating or in control of the vehicle himself at the time the alleged offense was
committed unless at that time the vehicle was being operated without his
express or implied consent, or unless such owner furnishes the name of the
person who was operating the vehicle with the owner's consent at the time the
alleged offense was committed, and a signed statement under oath by such
person showing that he was operating and in control of the owner's vehicle at
that time.
(3) If a violator of any of the parking restrictions imposed by this code,
or by ordinance or regulation of the city, does not appear in response to a traffic
citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of fifteen (15) days of the
date of the violation, the clerk of the city court shall send to the owner of the
motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a summons informing him
of the violation, directing him to appear in city court in response to said traffic
citation, and warning him that in the event such summons is disregarded for a
period of five (5) days from the date thereof a warrant of arrest will be issued for
him.
(4) In the event any person fails to comply with a traffic citation given
to such person or attached to his vehicle for a violation of any of the parking
restrictions imposed by this code, or by ordinance or regulation of the city,
within twenty (20) days of the commission thereof or fails to make appearance
pursuant to a summons issued in accordance with subsection (3) above, the clerk
of the city court shall secure and issue a warrant for his arrest. (1985 Code,
§ 9-704, modified)
15-705. Impoundment of vehicles. Members of the police department
are hereby authorized, when reasonably necessary for the security of the vehicle
or to prevent obstruction of traffic, to remove from the streets and impound any
vehicle whose operator is arrested or any unattended vehicle which is parked so
as to constitute an obstruction or hazard to normal traffic. Any impounded
vehicle shall be stored until the owner or other person entitled thereto, claims
it, gives satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to possession, and pays all
15-30
applicable fees and costs, or until otherwise lawfully disposed of. (1985 Code,
§ 9-705)
15-706. Violation and penalty. Any violation of this title shall be a
civil offense punishable as follows:
(1) Traffic citations. Traffic citations shall be punishable by a civil
penalty up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate offense.
(2) Parking citations. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any
of the parking restrictions imposed by this code, or by ordinance or regulation
of the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and except for the fine imposed in
§ 15-613 and fine imposed in § 15-615 shall be fined $15.00 for each violation
except for six (6) or more wheeled vehicles sidewalk parking shall be fined
$50.00. (1985 Code, § 9-704, modified, as amended by Ord. #2003-34, Oct. 2003;
and Ord. #2004-31, Aug. 2004)
16-1
TITLE 16
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, ETC1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS.
3. STREET ACCEPTANCE.
4. PROPERTY NUMBERING.
5. MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAY DRAINAGE CULVERTS.
6. SKATEBOARDING AND OTHER SIMILAR ACTIVITIES.
7. ACTIONS OF PEDESTRIANS ON CITY STREETS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-101. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-102. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated.
16-103. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
16-104. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted.
16-105. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted.
16-106. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-107. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-108. Obstruction of drainage ditches.
16-109. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc.
16-110. Parades regulated.
16-111. Operation of trains at crossings regulated.
16-112. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks.
16-113. Fires in streets, etc.
16-114. Abutting occupants not to cause flooding of streets, etc.
16-115. Unauthorized depositing of sand, gravel, asphalt and other materials
on city streets.
16-116. Police department authorized to temporarily close city parks.
16-117. Applications for street, way, or right-of-way closure, vacation,
relocation, etc.
16-118. Golfing prohibited in public parks.
16-119. Closure of city streets for festivals, fairs, concerts, special events, etc.
1Municipal code reference
Related motor vehicle and traffic regulations: title 15.
16-2
16-120. Restricted access to public streets, sidewalks, parks, or other publicly
owned areas inside the city for festivals, fairs, concerts, special
events, and related activities and allowance for fees to be charged
for such access.
16-101. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. No
person shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or
right-of-way for the purpose of storing, selling, or exhibiting any goods, wares,
merchandise, or materials; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to the sale of vegetables or other products of the soil sold in market places
especially provided for that purpose; provide further, that this section shall not
apply to churches, schools, or other charitable organizations conducting special
sales to raise money for charitable causes or for purposes intended to promote
the general welfare of society.
Provided, it shall be lawful for the owners and/or lessees of properties
abutting on sidewalks in the City of Maryville, which sidewalks have a
minimum width of twelve feet (12'), to construct and/or place planter boxes on
said sidewalks in front of their properties, providing the following conditions
and/or specifications are strictly adhered to:
(1) Location. Planter boxes shall be set back at least four inches (4")
from the face of the nearest curb. Planter boxes may be spaced according to the
discretion of the owner within his property lines, except that not more than
twenty-four feet (24') of continuous planters without a break will be permissible.
The break between continuous planter boxes twenty-four feet (24') long shall not
be less than four feet (4'). In no case shall back of planter boxes extend more
than twenty-four inches (24") from face of nearest curb.
(2) Construction. Planter boxes may be constructed of any material
that is safe, durable, and pleasant to look upon. Location requirements limit the
maximum outside-to-outside width of planter boxes to twenty inches (20").
Minimum outside-to-outside width shall be twelve inches (12"). Planter boxes
shall be limited to twenty-six inches (26") in height. Not less than three feet (3')
of each six feet (6') of length shall be left as open area at the base of the boxes
so that surface water may drain to the street gutter, and so that debris will not
accumulate against the base of the boxes. Planter boxes shall be constructed in
such a manner as to provide sturdiness and immobility yet easy removal. Boxes
shall be securely anchored in some manner to the sidewalk. The outside surface
of all boxes shall be smooth and free of all protrusions that might be damaging
or harmful to pedestrians.
(3) Removal. Planter boxes may be left in place on the sidewalk at all
times, except that discontinued use of boxes for a period of excess of twenty-one
(21) days will require removal. Planter boxes shall be removed at the direction
of the police department during parades and excessively large crowds. Planter
boxes allowed to deteriorate and become ugly shall be renovated or removed.
16-3
(4) Maintenance. Planter boxes shall be maintained in first class
condition at all times. Flowers, shrubs or artificial flowers and/or shrubs shall
be kept in the boxes at all times. Boxes shall not be left empty even during a
transition period for more than four (4) days. Flowers and/or shrubs shall be
watered and tended in such a manner as to provide an attractive display at all
times. The person responsible for the upkeep of the boxes shall maintain the
openings at the base of the boxes and keep them free of accumulations of any
kind.
(5) Approval. Approval from the engineering and public works director
or his/her designee office shall first be obtained before any planter boxes are
erected. A sketch of intended construction and arrangement of boxes shall be
submitted to the engineering and public works director's office (to be kept on
permanent file) before approval can be granted. Planter boxes shall conform to
all specifications and requirements of this chapter.
(6) Responsibility. At the time the owner and/or lessee of property
abutting on said sidewalk shall apply for a permit to construct and/or place
planter boxes on sidewalks, he shall designate some particular person to assume
and have responsibility of the care and maintenance of the planter boxes, and
the applicant shall agree to conform to all requirements of these specifications.
If for any reason the person originally designated to assume the responsibility
for the care of the planter boxes should be relieved of this responsibility, then
another person shall be designated by the owner and/or lessee to assume these
duties, and the engineering and public works director or his/her designee of the
City of Maryville shall be promptly notified of said change. The City of Maryville
assumes absolutely no responsibility for the care and maintenance of planter
boxes or their contents, nor does the city assume any responsibility for damage
to planter boxes or their contents.
Any person, firm, or corporation constructing and placing planter boxes
upon the sidewalks of the City of Maryville without first having obtained a
permit from the city to do so, or having obtained a permit and not strictly
complying with the specifications hereinabove set forth in constructing or
placing planter boxes on the sidewalks, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty clause
of this code.
As set forth in this paragraph, this section shall not apply to areas
identified as being part of city-sponsored special event or any other official
community special event as determined by the city manager during the course
of such festival or special event or in times immediately before and after the
set-up of such festival or special event. In such instances, the use and occupancy
of public streets, alleys, sidewalks and right-of-way for the purpose of storing,
selling, or exhibiting any goods, wares, merchandise, or materials is permitted
if the person or entity is expressly allowed or permitted by the city to occupy the
public street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way during city-sponsored special event
or special event pursuant to terms and conditions set forth by the city. Such
16-4
terms and conditions may include a reasonable charge by the city for use of the
public street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way during the city-sponsored special
event. Obstruction of public streets, alleys, sidewalks or rights-of-way during the
city-sponsored special event or any other official community special event as
determined by the city manager that is not permitted by the city or use of such
area in any way inconsistent with terms and conditions set forth for such use by
the city is a violation subject to punishment under general penalty clause. (1985
Code, § 12-301, as amended by Ord. #2004-27, June 2004, and replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-102. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated. It shall be
unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs of trees on his
property to project out over any street, alley, or sidewalk at a height of less than
fourteen feet (14'). The engineering and public works director or his/her designee
shall have the right to have vegetation trimmed that interferes with the flow of
traffic. (1985 Code, § 12-302, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-103. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain on
his or her property any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction which
prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection with a public road. (1985
Code, § 12-303, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009, and Ord. #2010-06,
Jan. 2010)
16-104. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted. Signs,
awnings, or other structures which project over any street or other public way
shall be erected subject to the requirements of the city regulations and codes.
(1985 Code, § 12-304, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-105. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted. It
shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed any banner or sign
across any public street or alley except when expressly authorized by the city
council. (1985 Code, § 12-305, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-106. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property
to allow any gate or door to swing open upon or over any street, alley, or
sidewalk except when required by statute. (1985 Code, § 12-306, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-107. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw, track, or allow to fall on any
street, alley, or sidewalk any refuse, rocks, lumber, glass, tacks, mud, or other
16-5
objects or materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit or
interfere with the use of such public ways and places for their intended
purposes.
Provided, that for the purpose of erecting, finishing, or repairing any
building, an owner of property abutting upon the street and/or sidewalk shall,
upon obtaining a building permit, have the privilege of depositing on the street
and/or sidewalk, opposite or adjacent to said building, any lumber, brick, or
material necessary for the erection, finishing, or repairing of said building;
provided further, that such materials do not hinder or impede the necessary
passage of citizens and others with their vehicles of any kind, nor the free
passage of the water in the gutters of said streets; and provided further, that
said materials do not remain longer than is absolutely necessary for the
completion of the work being done and that all rubbish from said building be
removed as soon as possible.
Should any rocks, lumber, rubbish, or other obstruction whatsoever be
found upon any of the pavements, sidewalks, and/or streets of the city, when and
where the same is not permitted by the provisions of this section, the
engineering and public works director or his/her designee shall request the
person allowing, making or suffering such obstructions to remove the same
without delay. If the same be not removed by the offender, it shall be the duty
of said engineering and public works director or his/her designee to remove or
cause to be removed said obstructions, and the person offending in the matter
mentioned shall be liable, in addition to the general penalty clause of this code,
to pay to the city the expense of removing said obstructions. (1985 Code,
§ 12-307, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-108. Obstruction of drainage ditches. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or cause the obstruction of any drainage ditch in any public
right-of-way. (1985 Code, § 12-308, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-109. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc. The
occupants of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep the sidewalk
clean. Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, such occupants are required to
remove all accumulated snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk. (1985 Code,
§ 12-309, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-110. Parades regulated. (1) Enforcement of other laws. Nothing
contained in this section shall prohibit the authority of any officer to arrest or
cite a person engaged in any act or activity granted under this section if the
conduct of such person otherwise violates the laws of the state or ordinances of
the city, or unreasonably obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the city,
or if such person engages in acts that cause or would tend to cause a breach of
the peace as determined by the city and/or police department.
16-6
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
(a) "Block party." An outdoor gathering on a public street or
portion of a public street which involves the closure or partial closure of
a street.
(b) "Celebratory gathering." A gathering for the purpose of
celebrating a person, place, holiday, even, and/or entity.
(c) "Concert." An outdoor event centered around amplified
music or speech.
(d) "Event." A block party, celebratory gathering, concert,
parade, public assembly, race or similar function as determined by the
city manager or his/her designee.
(e) "Parade." The march, procession, or motorcade consisting of
persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, upon the streets
within the city which interferes with the normal flow or regulation of
traffic upon the streets or sidewalks.
(f) "Permit." Permission to operate an event under this chapter
which is issued by the City of Maryville as required by this chapter.
(g) "Public assembly." Any meeting, demonstration, picket line,
rally, or gathering of people for a common purpose, which interferes with
the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(h) "Race." Any organized event where participants are
physically competing.
(i) "Sidewalk." Any public area or way set aside or open to the
general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic.
(j) "Street." Any place or way set aside or open to the general
public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder
parkway, right-of-way, median or common area, or median strip thereof,
set aside for parking or for purposes of vehicular traffic.
(3) Permit required. Except as exempted herein, no person or persons
shall engage in or conduct any block party, celebratory gathering, concert,
parade, race, public assembly, or any other event involving the use or disruption
of the public right-of-way or public property, streets or sidewalks within the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville, unless a permit is issued by the city
manager or his/her designee.
(4) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
(a) Funeral processions;
(b) A governmental agency acting within the scope and
authority of its functions;
(c) Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming
into public knowledge within three (3) days of such event, provided that
the organizer thereof gives written notice to the city manager or his/her
designee reasonable notice of such event;
16-7
(d) Businesses that have been approved for a grand opening or
similar business oriented event governed under zoning or other provisions
of this code; and
(e) Any event involving less than ten (10) persons gathered
together for a common purpose; and
(f) A city sponsored event; and
(g) Students going to and from classes or participating in
educational activities providing such conduct is under the direction and
supervision of proper school activities.
(5) Application for permit. (a) A person seeking a permit for an event
as defined under this section shall file an initial application with the city
manager, or his or her designee, using the initial special event application
form provided by the city manager's office.
(b) For most events the initial application for a permit shall be
filed with the city manager at least seven (7) calendar days and not more
than three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days before the event is
proposed to commence. The city manager may waive the seven (7) day
filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if
after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the event
the anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in
connection with the event, the city manager determines that the waiver
will not present a hazard to public safety and welfare. Applications for
block parties, celebratory gatherings, races, concerts or other recreational
type events must be filed at least ninety (90) days in advance of the event,
which time period can also be waived in the discretion of the city
manager. An applicant can contact the city manager's office to determine
which deadline applies based on the type of event.
(c) Based on the type of event, either the chief of police or the
city manager's office will be assigned to the event by the city manager. An
additional application seeking additional and more specific information
will be required after assignment to one (1) of these coordinators. Fees
may be charged for recreational or entertainment oriented or like events
to pay for extra services required of city personnel. Refundable deposits
and an application may be required for use of city owned or controlled
facilities, including, but not limited to, the theater in the park for certain
events.
(6) Standards for issuance. The city manager or his/her designee may
issue a permit when, from consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
(a) The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so
great a number of city employees to properly police the line of movement,
and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal public safety of
the city and its citizens;
16-8
(b) If applicable, the event is scheduled to move from its point
of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays en route;
(c) There are sufficient parking places near the beginning/
ending of the event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably
expected;
(d) No event application for the same time and location has
already been granted or has been received and will be granted;
(e) No event permit application for the same time but different
location has already been granted, or has been received and will be
granted that by combination thereof will disrupt city services or
unreasonably inhibit traffic circulation; and
(f) The reasonable enjoyment of surrounding properties,
businesses, and residences will not be disturbed in such a way as to cause
an undue nuisance.
(7) Nondiscrimination. The city manager shall uniformly consider each
application based upon its merits, and shall not discriminate in granting or
denying permits under this chapter based upon political, religious, ethnic, race,
disability, or gender-related factors.
(8) Grant or denial (a) The city manager, or his or her designee, shall
have a reasonable time to grant or deny the permit under this section.
The length of time which is reasonable shall be determined by the type
of use, the information supplied, the time of filing of the application, the
extent of advance preparation a planning demonstrated and reasonably
required, and the manner in which the application demonstrates whether
or not the proposed use meets the standards and purposes of this section.
In no event shall an application for permit be denied less than four (4)
days prior to the planned event.
(b) The city manager, or his/her designee, shall grant or deny
the permit in writing, and the grant or denial shall be mailed, emailed,
or delivered to the applicant.
(c) If the application for permit shall be denied, the denial shall
set forth the reasons for such denial.
(d) If the application for permit is approved, the approval shall
specify the date, time, and place for which the permit is approved, the
route or staging area (if for a parade), the number of city personnel
required, and any other requirements deemed necessary by the city
manager, his/her designee.
(9) Revocation of permit. The city manager and/or his or her designee
may revoke the permit and terminate all activities related to the event in the
interest of public health and safety, or if a public nuisance is generated by the
event as determined by the city manager and/or public safety personnel.
(10) No fund-raising events. No fund-raising activities shall occur on
city owned or controlled property, streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way as part of
16-9
any permitted event except as part of city sponsored events. This prohibition
expressly prohibits money exchanging hands on city owned or controlled
property during or as a part of a permitted event. (1985 Code, § 12-310,
modified, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009, and Ord. #2012-29, Oct.
2012)
16-111. Operation of trains at crossings regulated. No person shall
operate any railroad train across any street or alley without giving a warning
of its approach as required by state law. It shall be unlawful to stop a railroad
train so as to block or obstruct any street or alley for a period of more than ten
(10) consecutive minutes. (1985 Code, § 12-311, modified, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-112. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for
any person to ride, lead, or tie any animal, or ride, push, pull, or place any
vehicle across or upon any sidewalk in such manner as to unreasonably interfere
with or inconvenience pedestrians using the sidewalk. It shall also be unlawful
for any person knowingly to allow any minor under his control to violate this
section. (1985 Code, § 12-312, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-113. Fires in streets, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to set
or contribute to any fire in any public street, alley, or sidewalk. (1985 Code,
§ 12-313, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-114. Abutting occupants not to cause flooding of streets, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning and/or in possession of any land or
property abutting upon any of the streets, avenues, and alleys of the City of
Maryville to excavate, fill, and/or change the surface grade of said land or
property in such manner as will result in flooding or increasing the
accumulation or flow of surface waters upon the streets, avenues, or alleys upon
which said land or property abuts; provided, however that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to properties abutting upon streets, avenues, or alleys
which are improved by pavement, curbs, and gutters and in which storm sewers
and catch basins have been installed to carry off surface waters running upon
said streets, avenues, or alleys. (1985 Code, § 12-314, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-115. Unauthorized depositing of sand, gravel, asphalt and
other materials on city streets. (1) No truck, trailer or other vehicle shall
be driven or moved on any streets, roads, alleys or public ways within the City
of Maryville, Tennessee, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to
prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom.
16-10
Any vehicle hauling sand, gravel, asphalt or any other similar material
within the City of Maryville shall be loaded so that any loose material
transported therein remains at least four inches (4") below the walls of said
vehicle bed as measured at the front, back and sidewalls; but such load may be
piled higher in the center of the bed of the truck.
(2) Loose materials shall include any substance which could spill, drop
off, or blow away from the bed when the vehicle is in operation.
For the purpose of this code section, the City of Maryville Engineering
and Public Works Department and the Tennessee Department of Transportation
shall be authorized to deposit sand, salt, or other material necessary for snow
and ice removal and shall be authorized to spray water on city streets for
purposes of sanitation.
(3) The party responsible for spilled material will be billed for cleanup
if City of Maryville cleans the spill.
(4) Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A charge of violation under this municipal
code section shall be brought against the hauler whose vehicle is found in
violation.
(5) As used in this section the term "hauler" shall include both the
owner and the driver of a vehicle, and both parties shall be jointly liable. Only
one (1) fine shall be imposed on a hauler, regardless of a difference between
ownership and operation. (1985 Code, § 12-315, modified, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-116. Police department authorized to temporarily close city
parks.1 The Police Department of the City of Maryville upon authorization of
the city manager, the chief of police, or his designee, is authorized at any time
to close temporarily any and all public city parks to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic when in the opinion of the city manager, the chief of police, or his
designee, such action is necessary and justified for the public safety and for the
general welfare of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
order of closing or any traffic control or signs posted by the police department
as to any such closing of a public city park. (1985 Code, § 12-316, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-117. Applications for street, way, or right-of-way closure,
vacation, relocation, etc. (1) Application fee. Whenever a request is made
by any person, firm, organization, or corporation with the exception of
governmental agencies to narrow, relocate, close, vacate or change the use of any
1Municipal code reference
Recreation and parks system: title 2, chapter 2.
16-11
street, way, or right-of-way within the corporate limits of Maryville, Tennessee,
an initial filing fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be
paid to the City of Maryville, Tennessee. The filing fee may upon proper showing
of hardship or unusual circumstances be waived if in the sole judgment of the
city and waiver is reasonable and justified. The fee shall be paid prior to the
request being reviewed by the Maryville Regional Planning Commission and
before they render a recommendation on the request to the Council of Maryville,
Tennessee.
(2) Resubmission of request. No person, firm, organization, or
corporation may resubmit a request to narrow, relocate, close, vacate or change
the use of any street, way or right-of-way within the corporate limits of
Maryville, Tennessee, until the passage of twelve (12) months from the original
request and the filing of a new application fee in accordance with the subsection
(1) of this section. Upon proper showing of hardship or unusual circumstances
the city may in its sole discretion waive this requirement. (1985 Code, § 12-317,
as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-118. Golfing prohibited in public parks. The practice of golfing
and the activities relating to the sport of golf shall be prohibited from being
pursued within the boundaries of public parks located in the City of Maryville.
(1985 Code, § 12-318, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-119. Closure of city streets for festivals, fairs, concerts, special
events, etc.1 The city manager in his/her reasonable discretion shall be
permitted to allow for the temporary closure of any public streets and sidewalks
within the City of Maryville to allow for a festival, fair, concert, special event,
etc. to be held on or around such streets and sidewalks. Such closure shall be
allowed only provided that there is ample opportunity for re-routing traffic
through the affected area in a reasonable manner. Such streets and sidewalks
shall be closed pursuant to terms and conditions determined by the city
manager. (as added by Ord. #2003-28, Sept. 2003, and replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-120. Restricted access to public streets, sidewalks, parks, or
other publicly owned areas inside the city for festivals, fairs, concerts,
special events, and related activities and allowance for fees to be
charged for such access.1 The city manager in his/her reasonable discretion
after allowing for the temporary closure of public streets, sidewalks, parks or
other city owned areas within the City of Maryville to allow for a festival, fair,
concert, special event, or related activity may allow for restricted access to such
1Municipal code reference
City-sponsored special event rules and regulations: title 20, chapter 3.
16-12
otherwise public areas by use of fencing, blockades, armbands, or other like
measures. Additionally, the city manager in his discretion may allow for
reasonable fees to be charged for access to such festivals, fairs, concerts, special
events, or related activities even though such events take place on public
streets, sidewalks, parks or other city owned areas in the City of Maryville.
Consideration shall be given to allow sufficient and reasonable opportunity for
those people who live or conduct business in the affected area to reasonably
continue to do so. (as added by Ord. #2004-22, April 2004, and replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-13
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS1
SECTION
16-201. Permit required.
16-202. Applications.
16-203. Fee.
16-204. Deposit.
16-205. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights.
16-206. Driveway cuts.
16-207. Restored streets and curbs.
16-208. Perpetual care.
16-209. Inspection.
16-210. Specifications.
16-211. Insurance.
16-212. Time limits.
16-213. Supervision.
16-201. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, public or private utility, association, or others to make any cut or
excavation in any street, curb, alley, or public right-of-way, or to tunnel under
any street, curb, alley, or public right-of-way in the city without having first
obtained a permit, as herein required, and without complying with the
provisions of this chapter; and it shall be unlawful to violate, or to vary from, the
terms of any such permit; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes,
lines, driveways, or other facilities in or under the surface of any public
right-of-way may proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency
circumstances demand the work to be done immediately, provided the permit
could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand. The person
shall therefore apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
office of the engineering and public works director or his/her designee is open for
business, and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was
begun; however, said requirement of this section may be waived by the
engineering and public works director or his/her designee. (1985 Code, § 12-201,
as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
1State law reference
This chapter was patterned substantially after the ordinance upheld
by the Tennessee Supreme Court in the case of City of Paris,
Tennessee v. Paris-Henry County Public Utility District, 207 Tenn.
388, 340 S.W.2d 885 (1960).
16-14
16-202. Applications. Applications for such permits shall be made to
the engineering and public works director or his/her designee or such person
designated by him/her to receive such applications, and shall state thereon the
location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose
thereof, the person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or
others doing the actual excavating, and the name of the person, firm,
corporation, public or private utility, association, or others for whom the work
is being done, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply
with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. Such application
shall be rejected or approved by the engineering and public works director or
his/her designee within five (5) working days of its filing. However, the
requirements of this section, shall not be construed to apply to the emergency
requirement set forth in § 16-201. (1985 Code, § 12-202, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-203. Fee. The fee for such permits shall be set by resolution as
adopted by the Council of the City of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 12-203, as
replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-204. Deposit. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to place
with the City of Maryville a cash deposit either by the job or activity or on an
annual basis. The amount of the deposit shall be determined by the engineering
and public works director or his/her designee based upon the size and nature of
the permitted work within the right-of-way. The city may use the deposit to
cover its cost should a failure of restoration work occur to the public right-of-way
facility. (1985 Code, § 12-204, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-205. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights. Any person,
firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or others making any
excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the specifications and standards
issued by the City of Maryville Engineering and Public Works Department.
Sufficient and proper barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect
persons and property from injury by or because of the excavations being made.
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed and provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users.
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to adhere to the Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, current edition. (1985 Code, § 12-205, as
replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-206. Driveway cuts. No one shall cut, build, or maintain a driveway
across a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the
engineering and public works director or his/her designee. Such a permit will
not be issued when the contemplated driveway is to be so located or constructed
16-15
as to create an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.
(1985 Code, § 12-206, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-207. Restored streets and curbs. Any person, firm, corporation,
public or private utility, association or others making any excavation or tunnel
in or under any street, curb, alley or public right-of-way in the city shall backfill
said street, curb, alley or public right-of-way and restore the same including
final surfacing to city specifications and standards promptly upon the
completion of the work for which the excavation or tunnel is made. Final
surfacing may be done by the city at the expense of the entity for which the
excavation or tunnel is made if requested, providing that city crews can schedule
the work within twenty-four (24) hours of this request. If not, the entity will be
required to place final surfacing in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. No excavation or tunnel in or under any street, curb, alley, or public
right-of-way shall be permitted to obstruct the flow of traffic. In the event final
resurfacing cannot be completed immediately after backfilling, the entity shall
use temporary resurfacing materials such as cold mix or steel plate or an
approved detour around such opening or excavation which would aid the flow
of traffic. The detour must be approved by the engineering and public works
director or his/her designee prior to establishing any such detour. (1985 Code,
§ 12-207, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-208. Perpetual care. Any person, firm, corporation, public or
private utility, association, or others affecting a public way within the city, shall
be responsible for any defects which occur to the public facility within the public
way due to workmanship or materials. The cost for repairs shall be the
responsibility of the utility owners of the facility which was placed within the
City of Maryville public way. The city's engineering and public works
department will be responsible for making the repairs or having the work
contracted. The city may allow the utility to make the repair if requested to do
so. Repairs shall be made in accordance with specifications furnished by the City
of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 12-208, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-209. Inspection. It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm,
corporation, public or private utility, association, or others to call for an
inspection of the permitted facility as required by the permit. The permit shall
specify, based upon the size and scope of the permitted work, the type of
inspection to be required. Should a full-time person be mandated, the cost of this
service will be borne by the owner of the permitted work. The permittee is to be
bound by the rules and regulations as specified on the permit. (1985 Code,
§ 12-209, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-210. Specifications. Each permit shall be assigned a set of
restoration specification standards. These specifications will be referenced by
16-16
number and so indicated on the permit. It shall be the responsibility of the city
engineering and public works department to maintain and provide the
specification standards. The permittee may request a copy as required. The cost
of the specification shall be limited to reproduction cost and paid by the
permittee. (1985 Code, § 12-210, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-211. Insurance. In addition to making the deposit hereinbefore
provided to be made, each person applying for such a permit shall file a
certificate of insurance or other suitable instrument indicating that he is
insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims
for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the
work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor, or anyone
directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse,
explosive hazards, and underground work by equipment on the street, and shall
include protection against the liability arising from completed operations. The
amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the risk manager in accordance
with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that the liability
insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be in an amount less than one
million U.S. dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate per occurrence for all types of
insurance required. All certificates of insurance are required to have the City of
Maryville added/endorsed on each certificate as "additional insureds." (1985
Code, § 12-211, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-212. Time limits. Each application for a permit shall state the
length of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work
until the restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the refill
is made ready for the pavement to be put on by the city or if the city restores
such surface pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time
limitation unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the
engineering and public works director or his/her designee. (1985 Code, § 12-212,
as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-213. Supervision. The engineering and public works director or
his/her designee shall inspect excavations and tunnels being made in or under
any public street, curb, alley, or other public right-of-way in the city and see to
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to the
inspector before the work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences
and said work may not commence until the inspector arrives at the site or gives
verbal permission to proceed. (1985 Code, § 12-213, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-17
CHAPTER 3
STREET ACCEPTANCE
SECTION
16-301. Conditions upon which streets will be accepted by the municipality for
maintenance.
16-302. Must be for public use.
16-301. Conditions upon which streets will be accepted by the
municipality for maintenance. The municipality will accept for maintenance
and incorporate into its street system only those roads and streets which comply
with the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the Maryville Planning
Region. 1 (1985 Code, § 12-101, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-302. Must be for public use. Before the municipality will accept for
maintenance and incorporate into its street system any road and/or street, the
owner or owners thereof shall dedicate said road or street for public use in the
manner provided by law. Said road and/or street shall meet or exceed the
municipality's street and road specifications to qualify for public dedication.
(1985 Code, § 12-102, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
1These regulations were adopted by the Maryville Regional Planning
Commission and a copy of these regulations is of record in the city recorder's
office.
16-18
CHAPTER 4
PROPERTY NUMBERING
SECTION
16-401. Uniform numbering system.
16-402. Assignment of street numbers.
16-403. Posting of designated street address.
16-404. New buildings and administration.
16-405. Penalties.
16-401. Uniform numbering system. A uniform system is hereby
established for numbering properties and private buildings fronting on all public
and private streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, alleys, and other ways in
the City of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 12-401, as replaced by Ord. #2005-22, June
2005, and Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-402. Assignment of street numbers. Property numbers for all
properties or parcels of land, dwelling units, or places of business, shall be
assigned by the Blount County Communication Center in accordance with its
policies. (1985 Code, § 12-402, as replaced by Ord. #2005-22, June 2005, and
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-403. Posting of designated street address. (1) Each principal
building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front
entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one (1)
business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance may display a
separate number.
(2) Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal
building or each front entrance to such building shall be placed either over or at
the side of the main entrance of said building or upon the front of any porch or
stoop thereof or over or at the side of any gateway leading thereto, or upon the
steps thereof in such manner that the same may be plainly seen and
distinguishable from the street on which the property is located and in such a
manner that the same shall not be hidden from view by any trees or shrubs or
other obstructions.
All units that do not allow ready or easy visibility of its address numerals
from the street due to excessive set back, shrubbery, or color shall place a parcel
identification marker near the entrance or driveway to the parcel. Such
identification marker shall contain the parcel's designated address.
(3) All building numbers displayed shall be permanent, legible figures
not less than two and one-half inches (2 1/2") nor more than five inches (5") high
and of a color contrasting to the building background.
16-19
(4) It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant or person in charge of
each principal building upon affixing the new numbers to remove any different
number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to
said structure by the building inspector, or his designee.
(5) It shall be permissible to have property address numerals painted
on the curb in front of a lot. Such curbside designations shall be positioned in
front of the unit or between the driveway and half the distance of the frontage
along the public street.
All painted numerals displayed on curbs shall be permanent, legible blue
or black colored numerals, which are no more nor less that four inches (4") high,
on a white contrasting background. The background shall be no more nor less
that six inches by four inches (6"x4"). All paint used shall be of alkyd resin, Type
F traffic paint. Numerals shall have glass beads or similar materials for
reflective purposes. These standards are in accordance with the attached sheet
designated Attachment "A," which is made a part of this chapter.1
Painted curbside numerals shall not replace the required assigned
numerals which are to be placed on the front entrance to all principal buildings
as provided in this section. Further, painted curbside numerals shall not replace
parcel identification markers which are required by this section if a unit is not
easily visible from the street due to an excessive set back. (1985 Code, § 12-403,
as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-404. New buildings and administration. (1) The Blount County
Communication Center shall assign the number to each lot or tract which may
hereafter be platted and shall indicate the same upon an approved final
subdivision plat.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until
the owner or developer has procured from the Blount County Communication
Center or his designee the official number of the premises. Final approval of a
certificate of occupancy of any principal building erected or repaired after the
adoption of this chapter shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers
have been displayed in accordance with § 16-403 of this chapter. (1985 Code,
§ 12-404, as replaced by Ord. #2005-22, June 2005, and Ord. #2009-04, Feb.
2009)
16-405. Penalties. In the event that an owner, occupant, person, or
corporation responsible for any parcel or unit or building refuses to comply with
the terms herein stated by failing to affix the number assigned shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of the municipal code and upon conviction shall be subject
to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day the unit of property is
in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (1985 Code,
1Attachment A to Ord. #86-1 is of record in the city recorder's office.
16-20
§ 12-405, as replaced by Ord. #2005-22, June 2005, and Ord. #2009-04, Feb.
2009)
16-21
CHAPTER 5
MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAY DRAINAGE CULVERTS
SECTION
16-501. Maintenance of residential driveway drainage culverts.
16-502. Maintenance of multi-family residential, commercial and industrial
driveway drainage culverts.
16-503. Time limitation to make repairs on drainage culverts.
16-501. Maintenance of residential driveway drainage culverts.
Where residential driveways cross street side drainage ditches requiring
drainage culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner served by
the driveway, to maintain the drainage culvert in such a manner as to ensure
an uninterrupted flow through the drainage culvert at all times. In the event of
the drainage culvert being declared unusable by the engineering and public
works director or his/her designee, the owner of the property served by the
driveway shall be responsible for purchasing a replacement drainage culvert.
The installation of the replacement drainage culvert will be made by the City of
Maryville. The engineering and public works director or his/her designee shall
determine drainage culvert location, alignment, material, size and length.
(1985 Code, § 12-501, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-502. Maintenance of multi-family residential, commercial and
industrial driveway drainage culverts. Where multi-family residential,
commercial and industrial driveways cross street side drainage ditches
requiring drainage culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner
served by the driveway to maintain the drainage culvert in such a manner as to
ensure an uninterrupted flow through the drainage culvert at all times. In the
event of the drainage culvert being declared unusable by the engineering and
public works director or his/her designee, the owner of the property served by
the driveway shall be responsible for purchasing a replacement drainage
culvert; and for the installation of the drainage culvert. The engineering and
public works director or his/her designee shall approve drainage culvert location,
alignment, material, size and length. (1985 Code, § 12-502, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-503. Time limitation to make repairs on drainage culverts. In
the event a property owner is told be the engineering and public works director
or his/her designee that maintenance or replacement of the drainage culvert is
required, the owner shall have sixty (60) days from the time notified by the
engineering and public works director or his/her designee to complete the
required work. However, if the public welfare and health are endangered by a
condition which needs to be corrected, the engineering and public works director
16-22
or his/her designee shall specify a time period of less than sixty (60) days in
which the work shall be completed. (1985 Code, § 12-503, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-23
CHAPTER 6
SKATEBOARDING AND OTHER SIMILAR ACTIVITIES
SECTION
16-601. Skateboards, roller blades, etc. prohibited in certain areas.
16-602. Definitions.
16-603. Exemptions from this chapter.
16-604. Violation.
16-601. Skateboards, roller blades, etc. prohibited in certain
areas. It shall be unlawful for any person utilizing or riding upon any
skateboard, roller blades or any similar device to ride or move about in or on any
public property in the downtown area of the City of Maryville or on the stage at
the Theater in the Park or on the city's Bicentennial Monument. Roller blades
are not prohibited on the greenway trail in these areas. Futhermore no person
shall use a skateboard, roller blades, or similar device outside of the downtown
area in a manner which creates a nuisance. For the purpose of this chapter
"nuisance" is defined as any activity which:
(1) Under the circumstances reasonably threatens injury to persons
or property;
(2) Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free and
unrestricted use of public property by pedestrians or motorist; or
(3) Generates loud or unreasonable noise. (Ord. #98-50, Dec. 1998, as
amended by Ord. #2001-11, May 2001, and replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb.
2009)
16-602. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words shall have the meanings ascribed:
(1) "Downtown area" shall be defined as beginning at a point, said
point being at the intersection of the southeastern right-of-way of Broadway
Avenue with the southeastern right-of-way of South Cates Street, as found on
the Blount County Tax Map 57-E Group D; thence in a southeasterly direction
one hundred eighty feet (180') more or less to a point, said point being common
to the intersection of the southeastern right-of-way of South Cates Street with
the northwestern right-of-way of Church Street; thence in a northeasterly
direction nine hundred thirteen feet (913') more or less along the northeastern
right-of-way of Church Street to a point, said point being the intersection of the
northwestern right-of-way of Church Street with the northeastern right-of-way
of Cusick Street as found on Blount County Tax Map 58-A; thence in a
northeasterly direction sixty feet (60') more or less and crossing the right-of-way
of Cusick Street to a point, said point being common to the northwestern
right-of-way of Church Street and the northeastern right-of-way of Cusick
Street; thence continuing in a northeasterly direction eight hundred sixty seven
16-24
feet (867') more or less along the northeastern right-of-way of Church Street to
a point, said point being common to the northeastern right-of-way of Church
Street and Parcel 29 of Group A on Blount County Tax Map 58-A; thence in a
northeasterly, northerly, northwesterly and northerly direction five hundred
eighty seven feet (587') more or less along the western right-of-way of Church
Street to a point, said point being the intersection of the western right-of-way
of Church Street with the northeastern right-of-way of East Harper Avenue;
thence in a southwesterly direction two hundred seventy eight feet (278') more
or less along the northeastern right-of-way of East Harper Avenue to a point,
said point being the intersection of the southeastern right-of-way of East Harper
Avenue with the northeastern right-of-way of New Street; thence in a
southwesterly direction sixty feet (60') more or less and crossing New Street to
a point, said point being common to the southwestern right-of-way of New Street
and its intersection with the southeastern right-of-way of East Harper Avenue;
thence in a southwesterly direction one thousand seventeen feet (1,017') more
or less along the southeastern right-of-way of East Harper Avenue to a point
being common to the southeastern right-of-way of East Harper Avenue with the
northeastern right-of-way of Cusick Street; thence in a southwesterly direction
sixty feet (60') more or less and crossing Cusick Street to a point, said point
being common to the southeastern right of West Harper Avenue with the
northwestern right-of-way of Cusick Street; thence in a southwesterly direction
six hundred eighty two feet (682') more or less along the southeastern
right-of-way of West Harper Avenue to a point, said point being common to the
southwesterly right-of-way of West Harper Avenue and the northern most point
of Parcel 9 as found on Blount Tax Map 57-D Group D; thence in a
southwesterly and southerly direction three hundred five feet (305') more or less
along the southwestern right-of-way of West Harper Avenue and the eastern
right-of-way of Cates Street to a point; said point being common to the eastern
right-of-way of Cates Street and the northwestern right-of-way of Broadway
Avenue; thence in a southeasterly direction sixty five feet (65') more or less and
crossing Broadway Avenue to a point, said point being the point of beginning.
(2) "Public property" shall mean any property owned or maintained by
the City of Maryville, Blount County or any public utility within the
geographical boundaries of the City of Maryville.
(3) "Skateboard" shall mean a board of any material, which has wheels
attached to it and which, if propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or
mechanical power, and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to
turn or control the wheels.
(4) "Roller blades" shall mean any footwear, or device which may be
attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels that are "in line," are attached,
and where such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion.
(Ord. #98-50, Dec. 1998, as replaced by Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-25
16-603. Exemptions from this chapter. Any device designated,
intended, and used solely for the transportation of infants, the handicapped, or
incapacitated persons, devices designed, intended, and used for the
transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other
wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposed shall be exempt
from this chapter. Furthermore the city council may, by resolution, suspend the
enforcement provisions of this chapter to accommodate special events when so
requested by the event organizer. (Ord. #98-50, Dec. 1998, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-604. Violation. Any person violating or interfering with the
enforcement of the provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined under the general
penalty clause of this municipal code. (Ord. #98-50, Dec. 1998, as replaced by
Ord. #2009-04, Feb. 2009)
16-26
CHAPTER 7
ACTIONS OF PEDESTRIANS ON CITY STREETS
SECTION
16-701. Application of chapter.
16-702. Right-of-way in crosswalks.
16-703. When use of marked crosswalks required.
16-704. Use of right half of crosswalk.
16-705. Crossing at other than crosswalks.
16-706. Pedestrian tunnels or overhead crossings.
16-707. Walking on roadways.
16-708. Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians.
16-709. Special provisions for pedestrians guided by dog or carrying white cane.
16-701. Application of chapter. Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic
control signals at intersections as provided in this chapter. At all other places
pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the
restrictions stated in this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-702. Right-of-way in crosswalks. (1) When traffic-control signals
are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the rightof-
way (slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield) to a pedestrian crossing
the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the
roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling; or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger,
but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk
or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the
driver to yield.
(2) Whenever a vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (as added by Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-703. When use of marked crosswalks required. Between adjacent
intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall
not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. (as added by
Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-704. Use of right half of crosswalk. Pedestrians shall move,
whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (as added by
Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-27
16-705. Crossing at other than crosswalks. Every pedestrian crossing
a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway. (as added by Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-706. Pedestrian tunnels or overhead crossings. Any pedestrian
crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian
crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway. (as added by Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-707. Walking on roadways. (1) Where sidewalks are provided, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon the adjacent
roadway except as may be necessary to lawfully cross said roadway.
(2) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along
and upon a street shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction. (as added by Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-708. Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person upon a roadway. (as added by Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
16-709. Special provisions for pedestrians guided by dog or
carrying white cane. (1) No person, unless totally or partially blind or
otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street or thoroughfare, shall carry
in a raised or extended position any cane or similar walking stick colored white
or white tipped with red.
(2) Whenever any pedestrian guided by a guide dog or carrying in any
raised or extended position a cane or similar stick white in color or white tipped
with red shall undertake to cross any public street or thoroughfare, the driver
of each and every vehicle approaching such pedestrian shall bring such vehicle
to a complete stop and, before proceeding, shall take all precautions necessary
to avoid injuring such pedestrian. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
making any person totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated guilty
of negligence per se or contributory negligence in undertaking to cross any street
or thoroughfare without being guided by a trained dog or carrying a cane or
stick of the type herein mentioned. (as added by Ord. #2008-31, Sept. 2008)
17-1
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL1
CHAPTER
1. SOLID WASTE AND REFUSE COLLECTION.
2. HAZARDOUS WASTES AND SUBSTANCES.
3. PRIVATE CURBSIDE RECYCLING.
CHAPTER 1
SOLID WASTE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION
17-101. Definitions.
17-102. Responsibility for administration.
17-103. Single family residential housing facilities, containers, and collection
procedures.
17-104. Commercial collection procedures; containers; and general regulations.
17-105. Premises to be kept clean.
17-106. Prohibited substances and practices.
17-107. Yard waste, bulk rubbish, and other refuse.
17-108. Violations.
17-101. Definitions. (1) "Bulk container" is a "Class II" or "Class III"
or "Class IV" container.
(2) "Bulk rubbish" means wooden and cardboard boxes, crates,
furniture, bedding, and other refuse items which by their size and shape cannot
be readily placed in city-approved containers.
(3) "Class I Container" is a City of Maryville roll out container on
wheels with a capacity of eighty to one hundred (80  100) gallons that is rolled
to the street by the user to a point of collection designated by the city.
(4) "Class II Container" is a dumpster container with a capacity of four
(4) cubic yards that remains at the point of collection designated by the city.
(5) "Class III Container" is a dumpster with the capacity of six (6)
cubic yards that remains at the point of collection designated by the city.
(6) "Class IV Container" is a dumpster with the capacity of eight (8)
cubic yards that remains at the point of collection designated by the city.
(7) "Commercial establishment" is any business, industrial,
institutional or agricultural establishment, office or professional building,
1Municipal code reference
Property maintenance regulations: title 13.
17-2
shopping center, multiple business complex, commercial housing facility, church,
hospital, club or other similar organization.
(8) "Commercial solid waste" means solid waste resulting from the
operation of any commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural
establishment, office or professional building, shopping center, multiple business
complex, commercial housing facility, church, club or other similar
organizations.
(9) "Construction waste" means materials from construction,
demolition, remodeling, construction site preparation, including but not limited
to rocks, bricks, dirt, debris, fill, plaster, guttering, and all types of scrap
materials.
(10) "EPW director" shall be defined as Engineering and Public Works
director or his/her designee.
(11) "Ferrous metals" shall mean appliances (including but not limited
to refrigerators, freezers, stoves, and air conditioners), metal roofing and siding,
and other metal items.
(12) "Hazardous waste" as defined by the State of Tennessee.
(13) "Multi family residential facility" is a structure or grouping of
structures, apartment complex, or mobile home park which contains more than
four (4) dwelling units.
(14) "Multiple business complex" is any group of more than one (1)
business located on one (1) tract of property.
(15) "Refuse" means solid waste.
(16) "Residential garbage" means all household wastes, including but
not limited to food waste, bottles, wastepaper, tin cans, clothing, mechanical
parts, small dead animals, and rubbish, excluding tree limbs, shrubbery
trimmings, leaves, construction waste, human or animal excreta or fecal matter,
large dead animals, and "bulk rubbish."
(17) "Residential garbage" means garbage resulting from the operation
and maintenance of dwelling units, excluding commercial housing facilities.
(18) "Service level" means the maximum number of times or frequency
that containers are serviced.
(19) "Single family residential facility" is a single structure containing
four (4) dwelling units or less and not operated as a part of a commercial
housing facility.
(20) "Solid waste" is unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid
or semi-solid state, including but not limited to residential garbage, ashes, street
refuse, rubbish, dead animals, animal and agricultural wastes, yard wastes,
special wastes, industrial wastes, and demolition and construction wastes,
excluding "bulk rubbish" and hazardous or infectious wastes.
(21) "Yard wastes" means grass clippings, leaves, tree and shrubbery
trimmings, and other related yard waste materials. (1985 Code, § 8-101, as
replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-3
17-102. Responsibility for administration. (1) The EPW director
shall have the authority to make and modify regulations as necessary
concerning days of collection, distribution and location of containers, and such
other matters pertaining to the collection, transporting and disposal of solid
waste, provided such regulations are not in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) The EPW director may levy charges for cost of services that exceed
authorized level of services as contained in this chapter, provided such cost is
not in conflict with this chapter.1
(3) The EPW director shall from time to time review the city's cost of
the container and set a purchase fee not to exceed actual cost to the city.
(4) The EPW director shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter. (1985 Code, § 8-102, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-103. Single family residential housing facilities, containers,
and collection procedures. (1) Containers--ownership: types.
(a) Ownership. All owners of single family residences within
the City of Maryville are to pay for an initial garbage container provided
by the city. The container will be dedicated to that specific address.
(b) Types. Owners of single family residences will be
responsible for providing and/or replacing lost containers (maximum of
four (4)). The type of container/containers provided and its/their location
for collection will be determined by the EPW director and his/her decision
shall be based primarily on operational cost effectiveness for the city. It
shall be the responsibility of the residential housing facility owner to
control the use of city owned containers assigned for the use of the
occupants and to manage allotted capacity. A Class I container shall be
authorized for each house, apartment, mobile home or other living unit
of a residential housing facility. Owners of residential housing facilities
containing more than one (1) unit may be required to supply Class II or
Class III or Class IV containers, and adjacent residential housing
facilities may be required to jointly use a Class II or Class III or Class IV
container, whichever is more cost effective for the city.
(2) Collection procedures; general regulations. (a) Residential
garbage intended for collection by the city shall be placed in a Class I
container. Frequency of collection for residential housing facilities is one
(1) time per week. If more capacity is needed above which the city
assigns, the owner shall provide additional approved containers at his
expense, make other disposal arrangements, or convert to Class II or
Class III or Class IV containers. Customer may pay a fee for extra
1Ord. #87-24 provides: "That the City of Maryville establish the purchase
price of a Class I roll out container, determined by the EPW Director.
17-4
containers. Extra containers may not be moved outside of city, but may
be moved to new residence inside city.
(b) A Class I container must be paid for by the builder,
developer, contractor, or purchaser at the time that building permits are
issued.
(c) On the scheduled day of collection, all roll out containers
must be placed at the edge of the street, curb or other designated location
approved for pick up. Containers shall be placed in such a location and
manner as to be readily accessible with city collection equipment.
Containers must not be placed in a location for pick up so as to interfere
with overhead power lines, fire hydrants, utility poles, mailboxes, tree
branches, parked cars, vehicular traffic, or in any other way that would
constitute a public hazard or nuisance.
(d) Containers shall be placed for collection no earlier than 5:00
P.M. on the day before collection and no later than 6:00 A.M. on the day
of collection. Roll out containers are not permitted to remain at the
curbside collection point later than 7:00 P.M. on the day of collection.
(e) All roll out containers shall remain the property of the city
and shall remain at the property address where delivered, regardless of
fees paid.
(f) All containers serviced by the city collection equipment
which are damaged, destroyed, or stolen through neglect, improper use
or abuse by the occupant/property owner shall be replaced or repaired at
the expense of the occupant/property owner, whichever in the opinion of
the city is most cost effective.
(g) Responsibility to keep container clean is the property
owner's.
(h) Leaving containers at curbside except during the period
specified for collection, or not otherwise secured, constitutes neglect by
the occupant/property owner.
(i) Containers which are damaged or destroyed by the city
collection equipment in the course of routine services, or through normal
wear and tear which is through no fault of the user, shall be repaired or
replaced at no charge to the user.
(j) Bulk rubbish and construction waste as defined in
§ 17-101(4) and (5) are hereby prohibited from being placed in the Class
I roll out containers.
(k) All garbage must be placed in plastic bags suitable for
garbage. Bags must be of adequate quality. (1985 Code, § 8-103, as
replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-104. Commercial collection procedures; containers; general
regulations. (1) Commercial solid waste intended for collection by the city
shall be placed in a city-approved container. The owner or developer of all new
17-5
commercial establishments including multi family facilities within the City of
Maryville shall at their expense prior to their first pick up supply a
city-approved commercial waste container suitable for handling the volume and
type of waste generated. The container size and type shall be determined by the
EPW director. The container will be replaced or maintained at the expense of
the owner of the commercial establishment.
(2) Commercial establishments shall provide containers based on the
amount of solid waste generated and cost effectiveness for city collection
operations. These containers will be serviced by the city as outlined in (a) and
(b) below:
(a) Service level for Class II containers and Class III containers
shall be one (1) time per week pick up.
(b) Service level for Class IV containers shall be as needed but
not to exceed three (3) times per week free pick up. The same shall apply
to establishments with two (2) or more containers provided containers are
located in the same general area. The engineering and public works
director, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to negotiate the cost
of service needed above the maximum three (3) times per week free
service.
(3) Bulk containers shall at all times be kept in a place easily
accessible to city equipment. No service shall be given those establishments
permitting objects, obstructions, or vehicles to hinder in any way whatsoever the
servicing of said containers. Containers will not be serviced in any other location
than what is approved by the EPW director.
(4) The EPW director may establish a special collection district due to
the density of commercial facilities, such as the downtown area, and provide a
unified service for said district. The EPW director shall submit the district
boundaries to the Maryville Regional Planning Commission and the city council
for approval.
(5) The owner/user of all bulk containers shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance, structural maintenance and the replacement of said
containers except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(6) The EPW director may, due to high volume/high density of solid
waste generated, approve a container/system that would require special
handling by other than city owned equipment at owners expense, if it is
determined to be in the cost effective interest of the city or the city is unable to
provide suitable services.
(7) Nothing in this section shall prohibit commercial establishments
from removing their own solid waste or from contracting with a private collector
for such removal provided said private collector shall have a valid permit or
license to do business within the city.
(8) A commercial establishment may elect to use the Class I residential
roll out container system and receive service the same as in residential
collection. In the event an owner of a commercial establishment elects the
17-6
residential roll out container system, then at a future date wishes to change to
a Class II or Class III or Class IV container, he shall pay the cost of such
container as required for new establishments.
(9) The owner or developer of commercial, industrial, or institutional
facilities, such as regional malls, shopping centers, hospitals, medical centers,
commercial housing facilities, and other major developments shall be required
to show methods of handling solid waste and locations of all solid waste
containers and handling equipment on an approved site plan to the EPW
director prior to beginning construction.
(10) Dumpsters no larger than eight (8) yard and no smaller than four
(4) yard are allowed.
(11) If customer uses a slant lid dumpster, they must not overload
dumpster and must make certain lids are shut properly.
(12) City is not responsible for damage of dumpsters through customer
neglect (overloading). (1985 Code, § 8-104, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec.
2008)
17-105. Premises to be kept clean. (1) It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons owning, leasing, occupying or having control of property
within the corporate limits, regardless of whether such property is vacant or
contains structures thereon, to permit the accumulation of residential garbage,
refuse, hazardous waste, or other undesirable materials thereon. It is the
responsibility of the individual(s) having control of residential housing facilities,
commercial housing facilities, and commercial establishments to maintain the
container(s) and the surrounding area in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at
all times.
(2) Owner of property is responsible to maintain driving surface, gates,
screening and dumpster pad. (1985 Code, § 8-105, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59,
Dec. 2008)
17-106. Prohibited substances and practices. (1) The following
substances are hereby prohibited and shall not be deposited in containers
serviced by the city garbage collection equipment:
(a) Flammable liquids, solids or gases, such as gasoline,
benzene, alcohol or other similar substances.
(b) Any material that could be hazardous or injurious to city
employees or which could cause damage to city equipment.
(c) Construction waste as defined in § 17-101(5).
(d) Hot materials such as ashes, cinders, etc.
(e) Human or animal waste shall be prohibited being placed in
residential garbage containers unless it is placed and secured in a plastic
bag or suitable paper bag.
(f) Infectious wastes as classified by the following:
17-7
(i) Isolation wastes. Wastes contaminated by patients
who are isolated due to communicable disease as provided in the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control Guidelines for Isolation
Precautions in Hospitals (July 1983).
(ii) Cultures and stocks of infectious agents. Cultures
and stocks of infectious agents and associated biological cultures
and stocks of infectious agents, including specimen cultures from
medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of
infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, waste
from the production of biologicals, discarded lived and attenuated
vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer,
inoculate, and mix cultures.
(iii) Human blood and blood products. Waste human
blood and blood products such as serum, plasma, and other blood
components.
(iv) Pathological wastes. Pathological wastes, such as
tissues, organs, body parts, and body fluids that are removed
during surgery and autopsy.
(v) Discarded shams. All discarded sharps (e.g.
hypodermic needles, syringes, pasteur pipettes, broken glass,
scalpel blades) used in patient care, medical research or industrial
laboratories. Discarded sharps from a single family residential
application shall be placed in puncture proof plastic resealable
containers.
(vi) Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and
bedding. Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts and bedding
of animals that were intentionally exposed to pathogens in
research, in the production of biologicals or in the in vitro testing
of pharmaceuticals.
(vii) Facility-specified infection wastes. Other wastes
determined to be infectious by a written facility policy.
(g) Human/animal remains shall be prohibited being placed in
residential garbage containers.
(h) If customer forces/wedges items in dumpster not allowing
items to empty properly, the items must be removed/loosened by
customer.
(2) The following practice is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any
person to move, remove, upset, scatter, tamper with, use, carry away, deface,
mutilate, destroy, damage or interfere with the residential garbage container.
(1985 Code, § 8-106, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-107. Yard waste, bulk rubbish, and other refuse. (1) Yard
waste-brush collection. (a) Placement of brush for collection. All brush
(tree limbs, shrubbery and hedge trimmings, etc.) must be placed on
17-8
owner's property at the edge of a street or serviceable alley easily
accessible with city collection equipment to be picked up during
bulk/brush collection zone. No item of yard waste placed out for disposal
shall be placed on top of water/gas meters or valves, piled against utility
poles, guy wires, fences or structures, phone boxes, electric boxes,
invisible fencing, or any item which could be damaged by collection
equipment.
(b) Piling of brush for collection. All brush shall be neatly
stacked in an unscattered manner. Small trimmings should be stacked
on top of larger ones with butt ends pointed in the same direction. Brush
collections shall not be made where it is loosely scattered. A notice shall
be given to the resident that collection cannot be made and the reason
why it cannot be made.
(c) Separation of items to be collected. Brush, yard wastes,
ferrous metals, and bulk rubbish must be placed in separate piles for the
purpose of collection. Bricks, rock, dirt, shingles, concrete and liquids,
shall not be collected, nor shall said items be mixed with other items to
be collected.
(d) Length and size of brush. All tree limbs longer than twelve
feet (12') in length must be cut in half and stacked as required. If
collection cannot be made due to size, a notice will be given to resident
with explanation.
(e) Grass clippings and leaves. Except during seasonal leaf
collection as outlined in (5) below, all leaves and grass clippings collected
by the city shall be placed in plastic bags or other disposable containers.
(2) Refuse generated through private enterprise. The City of Maryville
shall not be responsible for the collection and disposal of construction waste,
bulk rubbish, or any other forms of solid waste generated or produced by
contractors or persons doing work for profit or personal gain. Nor will any such
collection of refuse be made from lot or land clearing projects including
remodeling or alterations of homes or businesses or such other private projects
or improvements.
(3) Bulk rubbish (junk) service. (a) Except during a special
city/county wide cleanup campaign, bulk rubbish service will be
performed on the same schedule as brush collection. Bulk rubbish shall
not be placed at the street for collection more than three (3) days before
the zone is to be picked up.
(b) Tires must be separated from rims. A maximum of six (6)
tires can be collected in one (1) month pickup. A maximum of twelve (12)
tires can be collected per year.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership,
corporation, syndicate, joint stock company, association or other group
operating as a unit, owning, leasing, occupying or having control of
17-9
property within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville, to violate or
permit to be violated the requirements of this code section.
(d) Excessive amounts of brush or junk will not be picked up.
(4) The EPW director shall have the authority to establish a
reasonable self-help program for residents who have unusual amounts of refuse,
or unusual circumstances which would prevent hauling or disposal for
themselves.
(5) Seasonal leaf collection. Fall leaf collection will begin between
October 15 and November 15 depending on climatic conditions and will continue
through January. The engineering and public works department will schedule
a two (2) week period in early spring in order to collect leaves from late shedding
trees. The schedule will be announced through the local news media. Following
this two (2) week period, all leaves must be placed in plastic bags for collection.
(1985 Code, § 8-107, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-108. Violations. (1) Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter (with the exception of § 17-106(1)(f)) shall be served by the city with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and provide satisfactory
immediate correction thereof. The offender shall within the period of time stated
in such notice permanently cease and correct all violations.
(2) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
provided for in § 17-108(1) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable under the general penalty clause of this code.
(3) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.
(4) Any person violating § 17-106(1)(f) of this chapter shall be served
by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and provide
immediate correction. If a correction has not been made within the specified
time limit, such person shall be in violation of this chapter and may:
(a) Be charged and tried in city court for such violation and
punished under the general penalty clause of this code, or;
(b) The State of Tennessee Division of Solid Waste may be
notified and requested to assume the responsibility for the enforcement
of applicable state statutes involving such violation or violations. (1985
Code, § 8-108, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-10
CHAPTER 2
HAZARDOUS WASTES AND SUBSTANCES
SECTION
17-201. Definitions.
17-202. Disposal of hazardous wastes.
17-203. Exemptions.
17-204. Inspections.
17-205. Right of entry.
17-206. Penalties.
17-207. Injunctive relief.
17-201. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the following meaning:
(1) "Hazardous substance." Means any substance, combination of
substances or mixtures defined as a "hazardous substance" in 40 CFR, chapter
1, part 116 which is not specifically excluded under this chapter of the Maryville
Municipal Code.
(2) "Hazardous substance disposal site." Means any chemical waste
landfill or incinerator used to dispose of hazardous substances.
(3) "Hazardous waste." Means any substance, combination of
substances or mixtures defined as "hazardous waste" in 40 CFR, chapter 1, part
261, subpart A, section 261.3 which is not specifically excluded under section
261.4 (b) under said title or this chapter of the Maryville Municipal Code. The
provisions of 40 CFR, part 261, subpart A, section 261.2, 261.3 and 261.4 and
corresponding sections of subparts C and D and appendices cited therein, which
define, describe, and identify hazardous waste are hereby incorporated by
reference into this section and made a part hereof the same as if each were set
forth fully herein. All subsequent amendments to said provisions of subparts C
and D and appendices cited therein which define, describe, and identify
hazardous waste, and the sections of subpart B specifically delineated herein,
automatically become a part of this section as of the effective date of each
amendment, subject to the provisions of this section. Hazardous wastes do not
include chemical substances or mixtures listed in part I(A) (6) or any radioactive
material.
(4) "Person." Means any natural or legally created artificial person
including any individual, corporation, partnership, or association. "Person"
includes any individual partnership, association or corporation engaged in the
transportation of passengers or property, as common, contract, or private
carrier, or freight forwarder, as those terms are used in Interstate Commerce
Act, as amended.
(5) "Radioactive material." Means any material or combination of
material in which spontaneously emits ionizing radiation. Materials in which
17-11
the estimated specific activity is not greater than 0.002 microcuries per gram of
material, and in which the radioactivity is essentially uniformly distributed, are
not considered to be radioactive materials. (1985 Code, § 8-501, as replaced by
Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-202. Disposal of hazardous waste. (1) No person shall knowingly
discard, dispose, discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak, spray, place or
otherwise cast into or upon any land, whether improved or unimproved, upon
any public or private street, roadway or highway, into any drain, gutter, sewer
or culvert, into any lake or pond, water course or ditch, into any pit or
excavation, or into or atop of any aquifer, any hazardous waste and/or hazardous
substances within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville.
(2) No person shall knowingly cause any other persons by contract or
otherwise to discard, dispose, discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak, spray,
place or otherwise cast into or upon any land, whether improved or unimproved,
upon any public or private street, roadway or highway, into any drain, gutter,
sewer, or culvert, into any lake, pond, water course or ditch, or into any pit or
excavation, or into or atop of any aquifer, any hazardous waste and/or hazardous
substance within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville.
(3) No person shall negligently discard, dispose, discharge, deposit,
inject, dump, spill, leak, spray, place or otherwise cast into or upon any land,
whether improved or unimproved, upon any public or private street, roadway
or highway, into any drain, gutter, sewer, or culvert, into any lake, pond, water
course or ditch, or into any pit or excavation, or into or atop of any aquifer, any
hazardous waste and/or hazardous substance within the corporate limits of the
City of Maryville. (1985 Code, § 8-502, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-203. Exemptions. (1) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to the storage or disposal of hazardous waste and hazardous substances in any
hazardous substance disposal site that is in compliance with applicable
standards of either the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the
Tennessee Department of Health.
(2) A person may petition the city council or its designee for an
exemption from the requirements of this chapter, and the city council or its
designee may grant in writing an exemption, where not precluded by state or
federal law, if it finds that:
(a) Unreasonable risk of injury to health or environment would
not result; and
(b) The best interest of the city would be served by granting an
exemption.
(3) Any hazardous substance (e.g. herbicide, pesticide) being used in
accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. (1985 Code, § 8-503, as
replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-12
17-204. Inspections. The fire chief, fire marshal, or his/her designated
representative, any law enforcement officer, or building, housing, or zoning
inspector shall the authority to inspect all structures and premises, as often as
may be necessary for the purposes of ascertaining or causing to be corrected, any
condition which may be a violation of this chapter, or otherwise enforcing any
of the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 8-504, as replaced by
Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-205. Right of entry. Whenever necessary for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the fire chief, fire marshal,
or his/her designated representative, any law enforcement officer, or any
building, housing or zoning inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in any structure or upon any premises, any condition(s) which constitutes
a violation of this chapter, said officials may enter such structure or premises
at all reasonable times to inspect the same, or to perform any duty imposed
upon any of said respective officials by law; provided that if such structure or
premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request
entry. If such entry is refused, the official seeking entry shall recourse to every
remedy provided by the law to secure entry. (1985 Code, § 8-505, as replaced by
Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-206. Penalties. (1) Any person who knowingly or negligently
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty
of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such violation.
(2) If any violation of the provisions of this chapter is a continuing one,
each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) The city attorney shall have the authority to commence an action
in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the penalty provisions of this
section. (1985 Code, § 8-506, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-207. Injunctive relief. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a public nuisance. The city attorney shall have the authority to
commence any action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the actions
of any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code,
§ 8-507, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-13
CHAPTER 3
PRIVATE CURBSIDE RECYCLING
SECTION
17-301. Private curbside recycling business allowed.
17-302. Operators of private curbside recycling business to have permit from
the City of Maryville.
17-303. Definition of private curbside recycling business.
17-304. Permit procedure  application form.
17-305. Permit fee.
17-306. Denial or approval of permit.
17-307. Denial of the permit.
17-308. Approval of the permit.
17-309. Appeal of the denial.
17-310. Expiration of withdrawal of permit.
17-311. Requirements for curbside recycling.
17-312. City-owned recycling centers.
17-313. Penalties for violation.
17-301. Private curbside recycling business allowed. Private
curbside recycling businesses are permitted in the City of Maryville only
pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein. Operation of any private
curbside recycling business in a manner inconsistent with the terms of this
chapter shall be deemed a violation of the city code and punishable under the
general penalty clause. (as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, as replaced by
Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-302. Operators of private curbside recycling business to have
permit from the City of Maryville. It shall be unlawful for any person or
entity to operate or engage in a private curbside recycling business within the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville without first obtaining a permit
therefore in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall be
used at any time by any person or business other than the one to whom it is
issued. (as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59,
Dec. 2008)
17-303. Definition of private curbside recycling business. A
private curbside recycling business is a business run by a non-governmental
entity which seeks to collect recyclable material from residences and businesses
within the City of Maryville. Such businesses permit or require customers to
place potential recyclable materials at a certain location on their property or on
or adjacent to city rights-of-way adjacent to where a city residential garbage can
17-14
is placed for pick up by the private curbside recycling business. (as added by
Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, as replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-304. Permit procedure  application form. Each permit
application shall be in a form as required by the city recorder. All applications
shall include a photograph or description of the proposed containers to be used
for curbside recycling to the extent that such containers are intended to be
placed on or adjacent to the city right-of-way for collection in conformity with
the requirements of this chapter. The city may require the applicant to allow the
city to physically inspect a sample of the proposed container prior to permit
approval. (as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and replaced by
Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-305. Permit fee. Each applicant for a permit as a private curbside
recycling service shall submit an application form and a non-refundable fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00). (as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and replaced by
Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008, and Ord. #2010-26, Sept. 2010)
17-306. Denial or approval of permit. Upon receipt of the application
and the payment of the permit fee, an investigation shall be made of the
applicant for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. (as
added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-307. Denial of the permit. The permit shall be denied if an
investigation discloses that:
(1) Any information in the application is materially false or
misleading;
(2) The reputation or record of the applicant or those involved with the
applicant are such that allowing the permit to issue would constitute a potential
threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the citizens of the city;
or
(3) The receptacle proposed for curbside recycling is unacceptable to
the city. (as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and replaced by Ord. #2008-59,
Dec. 2008)
17-308. Approval of the permit. If the investigation discloses no
grounds for the denial of the permit, the city recorder shall issue the permit to
the applicant. (as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and replaced by
Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-309. Appeal of the denial. Any refusal to issue a permit may be
appealed to the city manager. The aggrieved applicant may within ten (10) days
following the date of the notice of the refusal to issue the permit appeal by
giving the city manager written notice of the appeal stating the grounds for the
17-15
appeal. The city manager shall set a hearing on the appeal date within ten (10)
days of the receipt of the appeal. A decision of the city manager shall be final.
(as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec.
2008)
17-310. Expiration or withdrawal of permit. The permit for a
private curbside recycling business shall last for one (1) year from the date of
issuance. An application for renewal shall be made substantially in the same
form as the original application. An additional annual license fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) is further required for each renewal permit. (as added by
Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008, and
Ord. #2010-26, Sept. 2010)
17-311. Requirements for curbside recycling. The following
requirements shall be met by all persons who engage in curbside recycling from
either residential or commercial facilities:
(1) Curbside recycling shall be permitted only in approved containers.
(2) Permit holders must obey all traffic and safety laws.
(3) Curbside recycling shall be allowed only on the same day as
residential garbage pick up service by the City of Maryville.
(4) Depending on the size of the recycling containers, the number of
curbside recycling containers to be placed curbside and on or adjacent to the city
right-of-way near the city's residential garbage receptacle may be limited.
(5) All curbside recycling containers shall be placed within four feet (4')
of city residential garbage receptacles.
(6) Curbside recycling containers shall not be placed in a location for
pick up so as to interfere with parked cars, vehicles, traffic, or in any other way
so as to create a hazard or nuisance.
(7) Curbside recycling containers are permitted to be placed for
collection adjacent to the city's residential garbage receptacles no earlier than
5:00 P.M. on the day before collection. Such containers are not permitted to
remain at the curbside collection point after 7:00 P.M. on the day of collection.
(8) Leaving containers at curbside except during the time specified for
collection constitutes neglect by the occupant/property owner and shall be an
offense punishable pursuant to the city's general penalty clause.
(9) Volume of curbside recycling must not exceed containers provided
to avoid items blowing into street. (as added by Ord. #2004-23, April 2004, and
replaced by Ord. #2008-59, Dec. 2008)
17-312. City-owned recycling centers. The City of Maryville owns,
operates, and maintains recycling centers in the city. Recyclables from these
centers are transferred by the city to a recycling facility. City-owned recycling
centers are for the use of City of Maryville residents and City of Maryville
property owners only. Private curbside recycling businesses are not permitted
17-16
to dispose of items in the city-owned recycling centers. Recyclables collected by
private curbside recycling businesses must be taken directly to a recycling
facility by the private curbside recycling business itself. (as added by
Ord. #2010-26, Sept. 2010)
17-313. Penalties for violation. A private curbside recycling business
that fails to follow the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, the requirements in city code §§ 13-311 and 13-312 is subject to having its
permit revoked by the city thereby prohibiting it from operating a private
curbside recycling business in the City of Maryville. This permit revocation is
in addition to any penalties otherwise provided for a violation of city code
punishable under the general penalty clause. (as added by Ord. #2010-26, Sept.
2010)
18-1
TITLE 18
WATER AND SEWERS1
CHAPTER
1. RULES, RATES AND CHARGES FOR THE GOVERNING OF THE
WATER QUALITY CONTROL DEPARTMENT.
2. SEWAGE AND HUMAN EXCRETA DISPOSAL.
3. CROSS CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.
4. [MOVED TO TITLE 19 CHAPTER 5.]
5. [MOVED TO TITLE 19 CHAPTER 6.]
CHAPTER 1
RULES, RATES, AND CHARGES FOR THE GOVERNING OF THE
WATER QUALITY CONTROL DEPARTMENT2
SECTION
18-101. Rules, regulations, rates and policies adopted and how they may be
repealed, amended, or adopted.
18-102. Available in recorder's office.
18-103. Violations.
18-104. Water uses regulated during periods of shortage.
1Until 1988, the electrical, water, and wastewater systems for the City of
Maryville were under the jurisdiction, control, and management of the Board of
Utilities of the City of Maryville as provided by Priv. Acts 1955, ch. 176 which
was set out, as amended, in the charter. At that time art. XIII in the city's
charter also expressly provided for the utilities board to control and manage
those three (3) utilities. However, Priv. Acts 1988, ch. 222, repealed Priv. Acts
1955, ch. 176 and art. XIII of the city's charter and provided that "all rights, title
and interest in and to all property and assets and all obligations of the Board of
Utilities of the City of Maryville are hereby transferred to the City of Maryville."
For provisions authorizing the fluoridation of the water supply of the city,
see Ord. #771 of record in the recorder's office.
For the provisions of a franchise granted October 1, 1957, to Tapoco, Inc.,
for the construction, maintenance, and operation of a water pipe line within the
city, see Ord. #764 of record in the recorder's office.
2Municipal code references
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
Refuse disposal: title 17.
18-2
18-101. Rules, regulations, rates and policies adopted and how
they may be repealed, amended, or adopted. For the purpose of governing
the operation of the City of Maryville's Water Quality Control Department
within or without the municipality, the Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies
for the City of Maryville Water Quality Control Department are adopted by the
city as set forth in Exhibit A hereto.1 Such Rules, Regulations, Rates and
Policies for the City of Maryville Water Quality Control Department may be
repealed, amended, and adopted by resolution. (1985 Code, § 13-101, as
replaced by Ord. #2004-43, Dec. 2004)
18-102. Available in recorder's office. One copy of the Rules,
Regulations, Rates and Policies for the City of Maryville Water Quality Control
Department has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept
there for use and inspection of the public. (1985 Code, § 13-102, as replaced by
Ord. #2004-43, Dec. 2004)
18-103. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall
violate a provision of the Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies for the City of
Maryville Water Quality Control Department or fail to comply therewith or with
any of the provisions thereof may be deemed guilty of a separate offense and for
each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any or the
provisions of the Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies for the City of Maryville
Water Quality Control Department is committed. Upon a finding of guilt, the
violator shall be fined as set forth in the Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies
of the City of Maryville Water Quality Control Department whose provisions
regarding fees are hereby adopted by reference. (1985 Code, § 13-103, as
replaced by Ord. #2004-43, Dec. 2004)
18-104. Water usages regulated during periods of shortage.
(1) When the flow downstream at City of Alcoa withdrawal operations
in Little River at mile 9.7 is 30 Cubic Feet per Second (CFS) or less or when the
flow downstream of the City of Maryville withdrawal operations in Little River
at mile 17.3 is less than 37.6 CFS, then Maryville will appeal to the water
customers of the system through the news media for voluntary water
conservation. During periods of drought, the City of Maryville will work
cooperatively with the City of Alcoa and Tuckaleechee Utility District
(hereinafter, along with the City of Maryville, collectively referred to as "the
utilities") to regulate and conserve water usage.
(2) All further requests for water conservation and/or curtailment of
water use shall be based on the available water supply from all sources
including, but not limited to, auxiliary raw water supply lines and supply
1Exhibit A to Ord. #2004-43, Dec. 2004 is of record in the recorder's office.
18-3
connections from other water providers and the ability of the utilities'
distribution system to maintain proper levels in their respective water storage
tanks/reservoirs.
(3) It is the intent of this section to address water supply both during:
(a) Drought conditions; and
(b) Other emergency conditions that may limit the available
potable water within one (1) or more of the utilities' water distribution
systems.
Each of the utilities shall maintain operational control within its own system to
implement water usage controls during a period of source water shortage or
other catastrophic event when any such period of source water shortage or other
catastrophic event affects their respective system exclusively or cooperatively
when deemed necessary by the Mayors and/or City Managers of Alcoa and
Maryville or the TUD District Manager. The utilities shall require further water
use reductions as follows:
(a) When the potable water demand to allow the utilities'
tanks/reservoirs to remain full is eighty-five percent (85%) or less than
the total available potable water supply from all sources, then voluntary
water conservation measures as defined below shall be put into effect; no
other measures to encourage or require conservation will be taken.
(b) When the potable water demand to allow the utilities'
tanks/reservoirs to remain full is greater than eighty-five percent (85%)
and less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the total available potable
water supply available from all sources, then water use for "non-essential
purposes," as defined below shall be prohibited.
(c) When the potable water demand to allow the utilities' tanks
to remain full is greater than or equal to ninety-five percent (95%) and
less than one hundred percent (100%) of the total available potable water
supply available from all sources, then industrial and commercial
customers will be required to implement "industrial and commercial
water conservation measures" as defined below.
(d) Water conservation definitions. (i) Industrial and
commercial water conservation measures. When called for,
"industrial and commercial water conservation measures" shall
require industrial and commercial customers, excluding medical
care facilities, to reduce their water usage by at least ten percent
(10%) of their average daily consumption until notice is given that
the restriction is no longer in effect.
(ii) Non-essential purposes. The term "non-essential
purposes" shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
filling of swimming pools, residential car washing, operation of
display fountains and the watering of trees, lawns, gardens and
other vegetation. However, upon application and good cause
shown, one (1) or more of the utilities may issue a temporary
18-4
limited watering permit, upon such terms and conditions as the
respective utility deems appropriate, for:
(A) Landscaping installed less than six (6) months
prior to the implementation of water conservation measure;
and/or
(B) Commercial nurseries; such permits shall be
for a duration of less than thirty (30) days. Such temporary
limited watering permits may be extended upon application
to the utility and for good cause shown, any such extension
not to exceed the time of the initial permit. The elimination
of water usage for "non-essential purposes" shall be included
in a call for mandatory water conservation measures.
(iii) Voluntary water conservation measures. "Voluntary
water conservation measures" means a call for water customers to
voluntarily decrease their use of potable water to assist in
alleviating the current source water shortage. Voluntary water
conservation demand measures may include any and all measures
to reduce potable water consumption by customers of the
respective utilities.
(4) When any of the conditions specified in subsections (1), (2), (3)(a),
(3)(b) and (3)(c) of § 18-104 are existing or eminent, official notice of these
restrictions will be given promptly to the public through the local news media.
The city will also notify its ten (10) largest water customers of the emergency via
telephone calls, U.S. mail, electronic messages, and/or other practical means of
communications.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership
or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this section, and
any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall upon conviction
of any violations be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each separate offence. Each
day that a violation occurs shall be construed a separate offence and punished
accordingly. (as added by Ord. #2011-02, Nov. 2010)
18-5
CHAPTER 2
SEWAGE AND HUMAN EXCRETA DISPOSAL1
SECTION
18-201. General provisions.
18-202. Discharge regulations.
18-203. Private sewage disposal and holding tank waste disposal.
18-204. Charges and fees.
18-205. Administration.
18-206. Building sewers and connections.
18-207. Grease, oil and sand traps and separators.
18-208. Enforcement.
18-201. General provisions. (1) Purpose and policy. This chapter sets
forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the
wastewater collection and treatment system for the City of Maryville,
Tennessee, hereinafter known as the city, and enables the city to comply with
all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977,
as amended, and the State of Tennessee's General Pretreatment Regulations,
and the Federal Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R., part 403).
The objectives of this chapter are:
(a) To protect the public health;
(b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system
or contaminate the resulting sludge or biosolids;
(c) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into receiving water or the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;
(d) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewaters, biosolids and sludges from the system; and
(e) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the
municipal wastewater system.
This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors
to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain
non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the
other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user
reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and
1Municipal code reference
Plumbing code: title 12, chapter 2.
18-6
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting
from the program established herein.
This chapter shall apply to the City of Maryville and to persons outside
the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the City of
Maryville's Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). Except as otherwise
provided herein, the city manager or his representative shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:
(a) "Act" or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
(b) "Absolve." To excuse; to free from an obligation or the
consequences of guilt or liability.
(c) "Administrative action." An enforcement action (a penalty
or order) authorized by the control authority's legal authority which is
taken without involvement of a court of law.
(d) "Administrative penalty." A punitive monetary charge
unrelated to actual treatment costs which is assessed by the control
authority rather than a court of law.
(e) "Administrative order." A document which orders the
violator to perform a specific act or refrain from an act. For example, an
order may require users to attend a show cause hearing, cease and desist
discharging or undertake activities pursuant to a compliance schedule.
(f) "Administrator." The administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency.
(g) "Admissible evidence." Circumstance(s) that would lead a
common person to believe that a crime or violation has occurred, is
occurring or is about to occur, and would be admissible in a court of law.
(h) "Affidavit." A sworn written statement under oath before an
authorized magistrate or officer.
(i) "Appeal authority." The local appeal authority shall consist
of the current members of the City Council of the City of Maryville, whose
chairman shall be the mayor, or any member(s) of the city council or any
officer(s) or employee(s) of the city so designated as the appeal authority
by the city council. The appeal authority shall conduct hearings
concerning appeals of the decisions of the hearing authority.
(j) "Approval authority." The Director of the Division of Water
Pollution Control, Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation (TDEC). The approval authority is responsible for approval
and oversight of the control authority pretreatment programs, including
the evaluation of the effectiveness of local enforcement.
(k) "Authorized representative of industrial user."
(i) If the user is a corporation:
18-7
(A) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar
policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(B) The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is
authorized to make management decisions that govern the
operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions
taken to gather complete and accurate information for
individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and
where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(ii) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(iii) If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to
oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the
government facility, or their designee.
(iv) The individuals described in subsections (i)
through (iii), above, may designate a duly authorized
representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the control
authority.
(l) "Best Management Practices (BMPs)" means schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 18-202(1)
[40 C.F.R. 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage
or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
(m) "Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)." The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty degrees (20E)
centigrade (sixty-eight degrees (68E) Fahrenheit) expressed in terms of
18-8
weight [pounds per day (lb/day)] and concentration [milligrams per liter
(mg/l)].
(n) "Biosolids." Sludge which complies with the requirements
of 40 C.F.R. part 503 and is applied to the land in order to condition the
soil or fertilize crops and/or vegetables.
(o) "Burden of proof." The duty of proving a disputed assertion
or charge in a court of law.
(p) "Building drain." The part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer beginning three feet (3') outside the inner face of the
building wall.
(q) "Building sewer." That part of the horizontal piping of a
drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and
which receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a
POTW, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system or other point
of disposal.
(r) "Bypass." The intentional diversion of wastestreams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(s) "Categorical standards; categorical pretreatment standards."
National categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard.
(t) "Categorical industrial user." An industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards.
(u) "Cease and desist order." An administrative order directing
a user to immediately halt illegal or unauthorized discharges.
(v) "Chain of custody." A written record of sample possession
for all persons who handle (collect, transport, analyze, dispose of) a
sample, including names, dates, times and procedures followed.
(w) "Chronic violation." The term used to describe violations of
a wastewater discharge permit when the limit for any one (1) parameter
listed in the permit is exceeded by any magnitude for sixty-six percent
(66%) or more of the total industrial self-monitoring plus control
authority compliance monitoring measurements made in the six (6)
month rolling quarter period covered by the semiannual report required
by the approval authority.
(x) "City." The City of Maryville, Tennessee.
(y) "City manager." The person designated by the city to
supervise the operation of the POTW and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this section, or his duly authorized
representative.
(z) "Civil litigation." A lawsuit filed in a civil court of law. If the
court rules that the defendant user violated the law the court may impose
civil penalties, injunctions or other equitable remedies and/or cost
recovery.
18-9
(aa) "Civil penalty." A punitive monetary award granted by a
court of law to the control authority against a non-compliant user.
(bb) "Combined sewer." A sewer receiving both sewage and
surface runoff from downspouts, storm sewers and surface or
groundwater.
(cc) "Compatible pollutant." Biochemical oxygen demand,
suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional
pollutants identified in the publicly owned treatment works NPDES
permit, where the publicly owned treatment works is designed to treat
such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree
required by the POTW's NPDES permit.
(dd) "Compliance order." An administrative order directing a
non-compliant user to achieve or restore compliance by a date specified
in the order.
(ee) "Compliance schedule." A schedule of required activities
(also called milestones) necessary for a user to achieve compliance with
all pretreatment program requirements with dates for achieving each
milestone.
(ff) "Composite sample" or "twenty-four hour flow proportional
composite sample." A sample consisting of several wastewater portions
during a twenty-four (24) hour period in which the portions are
proportional to the flow and combine to form a representative sample.
(gg) "Consent decree." A court supervised settlement agreement,
the violation of which may be considered contempt of court.
(hh) "Consent order." An administrative order embodying a
legally enforceable agreement between the control authority and the
non-compliant user designed to restore the user to compliance status.
(ii) "Control authority." The City Manager of the City of
Maryville or his designated representative.
(jj) "Cooling water." The water discharge from any use such as
air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
(kk) "Criminal intent." A state of mind which is a necessary
element of all crimes. Criminal intent may be general (intent to perform
an act) or specific (intent to break a law).
(ll) "Criminal negligence." Negligence of such a character, or
occurring under such a circumstance, as to be punishable as a crime (such
as a flagrant and reckless disregard of the safety of others or willful
indifference to the injury likely to follow).
(mm) "Criminal prosecution." A criminal charge brought by the
control authority against an accused violator. The alleged criminal action
may be a misdemeanor or a felony and is defined as willful, negligent,
knowing and/or intentional violations. A court trial-by-jury is generally
18-10
required and, upon conviction, punishment may include a monetary
penalty, imprisonment or both.
(nn) "Customer." Any individual, partnership, corporation,
copartnership, company, joint stock company, trust, estate, government
entity, or any other legal entity or their legal agents or assigns who
receives sewer service from the city under either an expressed or implied
contract requiring payment to the city for such service. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural
where indicated by context.
(oo) "Daily average loading." The average over a three (3) month
period of waste constituents found in a twenty-four (24) hour period in
the sewage entering the influent of the POTW treatment plant.
(pp) "Daily maximum limits." The maximum allowable discharge
of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are
expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharge
over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average
measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all
measurements taken that day.
(qq) "Defendant." The party against whom relief or recovery is
sought.
(rr) "Deposition." A discovery device by which one party
addresses verbal questions to the other party or to a witness for the other
party. Depositions are conducted under oath outside the courtroom,
usually in the office of an attorney. A transcript is made of the deposition
which may be used as evidence at trial.
(ss) "Deterrent value." A threat of reprisal which is sufficient to
discourage the user from future violations.
(tt) "Direct discharge." The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Tennessee.
(uu) "Discovery." A variety of pretrial devices used by one party
to obtain relevant facts and information about the case from the other
party.
(vv) "Domestic waste(s)." Liquid wastes:
(i) From the non-commercial preparation, cooking, and
handling of food; or
(ii) Containing human excrement and similar matter
from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities, and institutions.
(ww) "Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)." The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
18-11
(xx) "Federal categorical pretreatment standard" or
"pretreatment standard." Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of
industrial users.
(yy) "Felony." A crime punishable by imprisonment for greater
than one (1) year (depending on state law).
(zz) "Fees." A schedule of charges imposed to recover treatment
and or administrative costs (not punitive in nature).
(aaa) "Garbage." Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
(bbb) "Grab sample." A grab sample is an individual sample
collected from a waste stream, on a one (1) time basis, over a period of
time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.
(ccc) "Hearing authority." The administrative board responsible
for the administration and enforcement of an approved pretreatment
program and the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 69-3-123
through 69-3-129. The local hearing authority shall consist of the City
Manager of the City of Maryville, and any member(s) of the city council
or any officer(s) or employee(s) of the city so designated as the hearing
authority by the city manager. The hearing authority shall conduct
hearings concerning the pretreatment program in accordance with
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 69-3-123 through 69-9-129.
(ddd) "Holding tank waste." Any waste from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and
vacuum-pump tank trucks.
(eee) "Incompatible pollutant." All pollutants other than
compatible pollutants as defined herein.
(fff) "Indirect discharge." The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b)
or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) into the POTW (including holding tank
waste discharged into the system).
(ggg) "Industrial user." A source of indirect discharge which does
not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued
pursuant to section 502 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
(hhh) "Injunction" or "injunctive relief." A court order which
restrains or compels action by the user.
(iii) "Instantaneous maximum limit." The maximum allowable
concentration of a pollutant determined from the analysis of any discrete
or composited sample collected, independent of the flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
(jjj) "Interference." A discharge that, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
18-12
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use
or disposal; or exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works or
collection system.
(kkk) "Jurisdiction." The extent of authority of a governmental
entity's power to make and enforce laws.
(lll) "Legal authority." The source of a control authority's
jurisdictional and regulatory powers.
(mmm) "Litigation." An enforcement action brought in a judicial
(court) forum.
(nnn) "Misdemeanor." A crime punishable by imprisonment of less
than one (1) year (depending on state law).
(ooo) "National prohibitive discharge standard" or "prohibitive
discharge standard." Any regulation developed under the authority of
section 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R., section 403.5.
(ppp) "Natural outlet." Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
(qqq) "New source." Any source, the construction of which is
commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a
section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which
will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter
promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of proposal in the
Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than one
hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means any
source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of
promulgation of the standard. In order to be considered a new source, the
following provisions must be met:
(i) The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(ii) The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(iii) The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should be
considered.
(A) Construction on the site at which an existing
source is located results in a modification rather than a new
source if the construction does not create a new building,
structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of this
18-13
section but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
(B) Construction of a new source as defined under
this section has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(1) Begun, or caused to begin as a part of a
continuous on-site construction program:
(a) Any placement, assembly or
installation of facilities or equipment; or
(b) Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation or removal of
existing buildings, structures or facilities
which is necessary for the placement,
assembly or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
(2) Entered into a binding contractual
obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase contracts
which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this section.
(rrr) "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit." A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
1342).
(sss) "Normal sewage." Sewage shall be regarded as normal for
the city, if analyses show a daily average loading of not more than three
hundred (300) milligrams per liter of BOD5; not more than eight hundred
(800) milligrams per liter of COD; not more than three hundred (300)
milligrams of total suspended solids; not more than thirty (30) milligrams
per liter of ammonia-nitrogen; not more than sixty (60) milligrams per
liter of total nitrogen; and not more than one hundred (100) milligrams
per liter of ether soluble matter (oil and grease).
(ttt) "Notice of violation." A control authority document notifying
a user that it has violated pretreatment standards and requirements.
Generally used when the violation is relatively minor and the control
authority expects the violation to be corrected within a short period of
time.
(uuu) "Pass-through." Violation of the state-issued pass-through
limits established for the discharge from the POTW treatment plant.
(vvv) "Penalty." A monetary or other punitive measure, usually
associated with a court action, for a violation of the law.
(www) "Person." Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
18-14
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicted by the
context.
(xxx) "pH." The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the
concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
(yyy) "Plaintiff." A person or organization seeking remedy from
a court. For the purposes of this chapter, the plaintiff is the control
authority.
(zzz) "Pollution." The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
(aaaa) "Pollutant." Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
(bbbb) "Pretreatment" or "treatment." The reduction of the amount
of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or
in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a
POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical
or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as
prohibited by 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(d).
(cccc) "Pretreatment requirements or standards." Any substantive
or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user, including, but not
limited to, discharge limits, sampling requirements, analytical
requirements, reporting requirements and compliance schedules.
(dddd) "Priority pollutants." A list of one hundred twenty-six (126)
pollutants established by EPA and considered hazardous to the
environment or to humans.
(eeee) "Proprietary information." Information about a commercial
chemical, product or process which is considered to be confidential
business information or a trade secret by an industrial user because, if
divulged, the information could put the industrial user in an unfair
competitive disadvantage with competitors in the same industry.
(ffff) "Properly shredded garbage." The wastes from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to
such a degree that all particles are carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater
than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
(gggg) "Public sewer." A sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and are controlled by public authority.
18-15
(hhhh) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW)." A treatment
works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is
owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers
that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not
include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility
providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also
include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons
inside and outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the
city, users of the city's POTW.
(iiii) "POTW treatment plant." The portion of the POTW
designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
(jjjj) "Sanitary sewer." A sewer which carries sewage from
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutional buildings and into which storm, surface, and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
(kkkk) "Self-monitoring." Sampling and analysis of wastewater
performed by the user.
(llll) "Sewer." A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and other
waste liquids.
(mmmm) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(nnnn) "Show cause hearing." A formal hearing requiring the user
to appear before the local hearing authority and demonstrate why the
control authority should not take a proposed enforcement action against
the user.
(oooo) "Significant industrial user." Any industrial user of the
city's wastewater disposal system who:
(i) Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 C.F.R. 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N; or
(ii) Has an average discharge flow of twenty-five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater
to the POTW; or
(iii) Contributes five percent (5%) or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
(iv) Is designated as such by the control authority,
approval authority or EPA on the basis that the industrial user
has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(pppp) "Significant non-compliance." Criteria used by the control
and approval authorities to identify important violations and/or patterns
of non-compliance. This criteria is used to establish enforcement priorities
and comply with special reporting requirements. An industrial user is in
18-16
significant non-compliance if its violation(s) meets one (1) or more of the
following criteria:
(i) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of
all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter
taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in Table 18-202(4);
(ii) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined
here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of
wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by Table 18-202(4) multiplied by
the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and
1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(iii) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by § 18-202 (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, narrative standard, or best
management practices) that the control authority determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through at the POTW, including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public;
(iv) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(v) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the
scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the
discharge permit or an enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(vi) Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the
due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports,
ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(vii) Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
(viii) Any other violation or group of violations which the
control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(qqqq) "Significant violation." A violation which remains
uncorrected forty-five (45) days after notification of non-compliance; or
which is part of a pattern of non-compliance over a twelve (12) month
period; or which involves a failure to accurately report non-compliance;
18-17
or which results in the POTW exercising its emergency authority under
40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(2)(vi)(B) and 403.8(f)(2)(vii).
(rrrr) "Sludge" or "sewage sludge." The solid, semi-solid or liquid
residue generated during the treatment of domestic sewage in a POTW.
Sludge includes, but is not limited to, scum or solids removed in primary,
secondary or advanced wastewater treatment processes as well as any
material derived from sewage sludge. Sludge does not include grit and/or
screenings generated during preliminary treatment.
(ssss) "Slug discharge." Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic
nature, including, but not limited to an accidental spill or a
non-customary batch discharge.
(tttt) "Slug control plan." A plan to control slug discharges, which
shall include, as a minimum:
(i) Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;
(ii) Description of stored chemicals;
(iii) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of
slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a
discharge prohibition under this chapter, or 40 C.F.R. 403.5(b)
with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5)
days;
(iv) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact
from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of
storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
(uuuu) "State." The State of Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation.
(vvvv) "Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)." A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
(wwww) "Storm sewer" or "storm drain." A pipe or conduit which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes; it may, however, carry cooling waters and unpolluted
waters, upon approval of the mayor or his representative.
(xxxx) "Storm water." Any flow occurring during or following any
form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
(yyyy) "Surcharge." A fee charged to users in excess of the normal
sewer use charge to cover the additional expenses incurred by the POTW
for treatment of compatible pollutants of a higher concentration than the
18-18
POTW treatment plant was designed to treat, but which do not cause an
interference with the POTW.
(zzzz) "Suspended solids." The total suspended matter that floats
on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids,
and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
(aaaaa) "Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violation." The term
used to describe violations of a wastewater discharge permit when:
(i) The limit for BOD, total suspended solids,
ammonia-nitrogen, or fats, oils and grease is exceeded by forty
percent (40%) for thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the total
industrial self-monitoring plus control authority compliance
monitoring measurements made in the six (6) month rolling
quarter period covered by the semi-annual report required by the
approval authority; or
(ii) The limit for any other pollutant, except pH, is
exceeded by twenty percent (20%) for thirty-three percent (33%) or
more of the total industrial self-monitoring plus control authority
compliance monitoring measurements made in the six (6) month
period covered by the semi-annual report required by the approval
authority.
(bbbbb) "Termination of service." A physical blockage of the sewer
connection to a non-compliant user or issuance of a formal notice of
termination to the user.
(ccccc) "Testimony." A solemn declaration made by a witness under
oath in response to interrogation by a lawyer or public official which is
used as evidence.
(ddddd) "Toxic pollutant." Any pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator
of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of
CWA 307(a) or other Acts.
(eeeee) "Unpolluted water or waste." Any water or waste
containing no free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols or
other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving water; toxic and
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and
noxious or odorous gases and/or other polluting materials.
(fffff) "User." Any customer who contributes, causes or permits
the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW.
(ggggg) "Wastewater." The liquid- and water-carried industrial or
domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water
and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated,
which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
(hhhhh) "Waters of the state." All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
18-19
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulation of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
(iiiii) "Wastewater discharge permit." As set forth in § 18-205(3)
of this chapter.
(3) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the
designated meanings:
(a) BOD5 - Five (5) day Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
(b) C.F.R. - Code of Federal Regulations.
(c) COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand.
(d) CWA - Clean Water Act.
(e) EPA - Environmental Protection Agency.
(f) l - Liter.
(g) mg - Milligrams.
(h) mg/l - Milligrams per liter.
(i) NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(j) POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
(k) SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
(l) SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.
(m) TSS - Total Suspended Solids.
(n) U.S.C. - United States Code. (Ord. #99-5, Jan. 1999, as
replaced by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-202. Discharge regulations. (1) General discharge prohibitions.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any
pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the operation
or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users
of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances
to the POTW:
(a) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature
or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with
other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. No pollutant shall be
discharged which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flash point
of less than one hundred forty degrees (140E) F or sixty degrees (60E) C
using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.21. At no time shall
two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than
five percent (5%), nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the
Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the meter.
18-20
(b) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease,
garbage or improperly shredded garbage with particles greater than
one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
(c) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than
9.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the
POTW.
(d) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure
or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment
standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any
pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act.
(e) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create
a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into
the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(f) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any
other product of the POTW such as residues, biosolids, sludges, or scums
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW
cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with the sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act;
any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Clean Water Act, or federal or state
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(g) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES and/or state disposal system permit, the receiving water quality
standards, or cause a pass-through violation.
(h) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.
(i) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the
POTW which exceeds sixty-five degrees (65E) C (one hundred fifty
(150E) F) or cause the influent of the wastewater treatment plant to
exceed forty degrees (40E) C (one hundred four (104E) F) unless the
POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperature.
18-21
(j) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which
will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug discharge
have a flow rate or contain concentration or quantities of pollutants that
exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than
five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration, quantities,
or flow during normal operation.
(k) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the control authority in compliance with applicable state
or federal regulations.
(l) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or
creates a public nuisance.
(m) Any storm water (flow occurring during or following any
form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom), surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, to any sanitary sewer.
Storm water drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by
the state. Uncontaminated industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the state to a storm sewer or
natural outlet. Landfill leachate and discharge from temporary
groundwater remediation projects may be discharged to the sewer system
in accordance with this chapter upon approval by the control authority.
(n) Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradeable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin, or other
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between zero degrees (0E) C (thirty-two degrees (32E) F) and forty degrees
(40E) C (one hundred four degrees (104E) F) and/or cause interference or
pass-through at the POTW treatment plant.
(o) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(p) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW and in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
When the control authority determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW any of the above enumerated substances in
such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the control
authority shall:
(i) Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on
the POTW; and
(ii) Develop effluent limitations for such user(s) to correct
the interference with the POTW.
18-22
(2) Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the
promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular
industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations
imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately
supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. The affected users shall
come into compliance with said limitations by the date specified by the federal
regulation.
(3) Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. Where
the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of
pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the control authority may
apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal
pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the
amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the
wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent
which is achieved by the system in ninety-five percent (95%) of the samples
taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c)(2)
of (title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, part 403) - "General Pretreatment
Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant
to the Act. The control authority may then modify pollutant discharge limits in
the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 C.F.R.,
part 403, section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval
authority is obtained.
(4) Limitations on wastewater strength. No person or user shall
discharge wastewater to the POTW in excess of the concentration set forth in
Table 18-202(4) unless:
(a) An exception has been granted the user by the control
authority; or
(b) The wastewater discharge permit of the user provides as a
special permit condition a higher interim concentration level in
conjunction with a requirement that the user construct a pretreatment
facility or institute changes in operation and maintenance procedures to
reduce the concentration of pollutants to levels not exceeding the
standards set forth in Table 18-202(4) within a fixed period of time.
18-23
TABLE 18-202(4)
Limits on Wastewater Discharged by Users
Parameter
Maximum Allowable
Concentration
24-Hour Flow
Proportional
Composite Sample
(mg/l)
Maximum
Allowable
Instantaneous
Concentration in
Grab Sample
(mg/l)
Aluminum 50.0 75.0
Arsenic 1.00 2.00
Cadmium 0.4241 0.6362
Chromium, total 3.5400 5.3100
Copper 3.6100 5.4150
Cyanide 5.000 7.5000
Lead 1.4000 2.1000
Mercury 0.0010 0.0015
Nickel 2.6939 4.0409
Silver 0.2714 0.4071
Zinc 3.6100 5.4150
Benzene 0.1800 0.2700
Carbon tetrachloride 0.2100 0.3150
Chloroform 3.1900 4.7850
Ethyl benzene 0.5800 0.8700
Methylene chloride 1.4100 2.1150
Naphthalene 0.1476 0.2214
Phenols, total 6.6900 10.0350
Phthalates, total 5.8900 8.8350
Tetrachloroethylene 2.0400 3.0600
Trichloroethylene 1.4700 2.2050
Toluene 1.8005 2.7008
1,1,1-Trichloroethane 3.6700 5.5050
1,2-Transdichloroethylene 0.1000 0.1500
Any user discharging wastewater having pollutants in excess of the
concentrations listed above may be subject to fines and/or other enforcement
actions as outlined in § 18-208 hereinafter.
(5) Criteria to protect the treatment plant influent. No person or user
shall discharge any waters or wastes which cause the wastewater arriving at the
treatment facility to exceed any of the concentration limits shown in
Table 18-202(5) hereinafter. Users may be subject to reporting and monitoring
requirements for all or a part of these parameters.
The control authority shall monitor the treatment works influent for the
parameters in Table 18-202(5). In the event that the influent at the treatment
18-24
works reaches or exceeds the levels established by said table, the control
authority shall initiate technical studies to determine the cause of the influent
violation, and shall recommend to the city council such remedial measures as
are necessary, included, but not limited to, recommending the establishment of
new or revised pretreatment levels for these parameters. The control authority
shall also recommend changes to any of these criteria in the event the POTW
effluent standards are changed or in the event that there are changes in any
applicable law or regulation affecting same or in the event changes are needed
for more effective operation of the POTW.
TABLE 18-202(5)
Protection Limits at Treatment Works Influent
Parameter
Maximum Allowable
Concentration
24-Hour Flow
Proportional
Composite Sample
(mg/l)
Maximum
Allowable
Instantaneous
Concentration in
Grab Sample
(mg/l)
Aluminum 5.00 7.50
Arsenic 0.2000 0.3000
Cadmium 0.0121 0.0182
Chromium, total 0.2500 0.3750
Copper 0.2500 0.3750
Cyanide 0.3400 0.5100
Iron 5.00 7.50
Lead 0.1000 0.1500
Mercury 0.0010 0.0015
Nickel 0.0935 0.1403
Silver 0.0075 0.0113
Zinc 0.1096 0.1644
Benzene 0.0130 0.0195
Carbon tetrachloride 0.0150 0.0225
Chloroform 0.2237 0.3356
Ethyl benzene 0.0286 0.0429
Methylene chloride 0.0962 0.1443
Naphthalene 0.0045 0.0068
Phenols, total 0.2174 0.3261
Phthalates, total 0.2625 0.3938
Tetrachloroethylene 0.0926 0.1389
Trichloroethylene 0.0909 0.1364
Toluene 0.0500 0.0750
1,1,1-Trichloroethane 0.2000 0.3000
1,2-Transdichloroethylene 0.0045 0.0068
18-25
(6) Compatible pollutants. The POTW treatment plant was designed
to treat specific waste load concentrations and mass loading of certain
compatible pollutants, which include five (5) day Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD5), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), Total Suspended Solids (TSS),
Settleable Solids (SS), Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) and ammonia-nitrogen
(NH3-N). If a user discharges concentrations or mass loadings of compatible
pollutants which exceed the limits set forth in the wastewater discharge permit,
added operation and maintenance costs will be incurred by the POTW, and this
additional cost may be passed on to the user through surcharges for excess
compatible pollutants. Surcharges shall be established by the control authority
based on the cost to treat the excess compatible pollutants. The control authority
reserves the right to establish maximum allowable discharge limits for
compatible pollutants in order to protect the POTW treatment plant and to
revise surcharges based on changes in operating costs.
(7) State requirements. State requirements and limitation on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
(8) Control authority's right of revision. The control authority
reserves the right to establish by chapter more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in § 18-201 of this chapter.
(9) Dilution of discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of
process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in
any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. The
combination of process wastes and domestic wastes prior to discharge is not
considered dilution.
(10) Slug discharges. (a) Protection from slug discharges. Each user
shall provide protection from slug discharge of prohibited materials or
other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent slug
discharge of prohibited material shall be provided and maintained at the
owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities
and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to
the control authority for review, and shall be approved by the control
authority before construction of the facility. All existing users shall
complete such a plan within one hundred eighty (180) days from the
effective date of the ordinance comprising this chapter. No user who
commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the
ordinance comprising this chapter shall be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the system until a slug discharge control plan has been
approved by the control authority. Significant industrial users are
required to notify the control authority immediately of any changes at its
facility affecting potential for a slug discharge.
18-26
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In the case
of a slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions.
(b) Written notice of slug discharges. Within five (5) days
following a slug discharge the user shall submit to the control authority
a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage,
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
(c) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted
on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees
whom to call in the event of a slug discharge. Employers shall insure that
all employees who may cause or suffer such a slug discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure. In lieu of placing notices
on bulletin boards, the user may submit an approved slug control plan.
(11) Discharge of hazardous wastes. All industrial users shall notify the
control authority, the EPA Region IV Waste Management Division Director, and
the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation Division of Solid
Waste Management in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance
which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R.
part 261. The notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch or other).
If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms
of such wastes per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimate of the mass and concentration
of such constituents discharged during that calendar month, and an estimate of
the mass and concentration of such constituents expected to be discharged
during the following twelve (12) months.
Notification shall be provided within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
discharge. Notification need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged; however, advance notification of substantial change is required.
Industrial users are exempt from notification requirements during a
calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of
18-27
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
Tennessee Rule 1200-1-11-.02(4)(a) and (4)(d).
If new regulations identify additional characteristics of hazardous wastes
or list new hazardous wastes, notification of the appropriate authorities by the
industrial user is required within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such
regulations.
If notification is required, the industrial user shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
(12) Limitations on the use of garbage grinders. Garbage grinders shall
discharge only properly shredded garbage into the POTW. Such grinders must
shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal
flow conditions prevailing in the POTW sewers. Garbage grinders shall not be
used for the grinding of plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden
refuse.
(13) Limitations on point of discharge. No person shall discharge any
substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a POTW sewer other than
through an approved building sewer unless he shall have been issued a
temporary permit by the control authority. The control authority shall
incorporate in such temporary permit such conditions as it deems reasonably
necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the user
shall be required to pay applicable charges and fees therefore. (Ord. #99-5, Jan.
1999, as replaced by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-203. Private sewage disposal and holding tank waste disposal.
(1) Private sewage disposal systems. Where any residence, office,
recreational facility or other establishment used for human occupancy is not
accessible to the POTW, the user shall provide a private sewage disposal system.
Where any residence, office, recreational facility or other establishment used for
human occupancy has the building drain located below the elevation necessary
to obtain a sufficient grade in the building sewer, but is otherwise accessible to
the POTW, the owner shall provide a private on-site sewage pumping station
subject to review and approval by the control authority.
A private sewage disposal system may not be constructed within the city
limits unless a certificate is obtained from the control authority stating that the
POTW is not accessible to the property and no POTW extension is proposed for
construction in the immediate future. No certificate shall be issued for any
private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than that specified by the City of Maryville and
the Blount County Environmental Health Department.
Any private sewage disposal system must be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the State of Tennessee, the Blount County
Environmental Health Department and the City of Maryville, and must be
inspected and approved by an authorized representative of the city manager.
18-28
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times. When access to the POTW becomes available,
the building sewer shall be connected to the POTW within sixty (60) days of the
date of availability, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of
solids and filled with suitable material. No statement contained in this chapter
shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the Blount County Health Department.
(2) Septic tank pumping, hauling and discharge. No person owning
vacuum, septic tank or "cess pool" pump trucks or other liquid waste transport
trucks shall discharge directly or indirectly such sewage into the POTW, unless
such person shall first have applied for and received a truck discharge operation
permit from the control authority. All applicants for a truck discharge operation
permit shall complete such forms as required by the control authority, pay
appropriate fees, and agree in writing to abide by the provisions of this chapter
and any special conditions or regulations established by the control authority.
The owners of such vehicles shall affix and display the permit number on the
side of each vehicle used for such purposes. Such permits shall be valid for a
period of one (1) year from date of issuance provided that such permit shall be
subject to revocation by the control authority for violation of any provision of
this chapter or reasonable regulation established by the control authority. Such
permits shall be limited to the discharge of domestic sewage waste containing
no industrial waste collected from septic tanks located in Blount County,
Tennessee.
(3) Other holding tank waste. No person shall discharge any other
holding tank waste into the POTW unless he shall have applied for and have
been issued a permit by the control authority. Unless otherwise allowed under
the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for
each separate discharge. The permit shall state the specific location of
discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge,
and shall limit the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the discharge.
Such user shall pay any applicable charges or fees therefore, and shall comply
with the conditions of the permit issued by the control authority and the Solids
Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.). Provided, however, no permit will
be required to discharge domestic waste from a recreational vehicle holding
tank, provided such discharge is made into an approved facility designed to
receive such waste.
(4) Fees. For each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter,
an annual service charge set as specified in § 18-204 shall be paid to the city.
Any such permit granted shall be for one (1) full fiscal year or fraction of the
fiscal year, and shall continue in full force and effect from the time issued until
the ending of the fiscal year unless sooner revoked, and shall be
nontransferable. The number of the permit granted under the provisions of this
chapter shall be plainly painted on each side of the motor vehicle used when
conducting the business permitted hereunder. All users discharging septic tank
18-29
or holding tank wastes to the POTW shall pay appropriate fees to be established
as specified under § 18-204.
(5) Designated disposal locations. The control authority shall
designate approved locations for the emptying and cleansing of all equipment
used in the performance of the services rendered under the permit herein
provided for, and it shall be a violation hereof for any person, firm, association
or corporation to empty or clean such equipment at any place other than a place
so designated. The control authority may refuse to accept any truckload of waste
at his absolute discretion where it appears that the waste could interfere with
the effective operation of the POTW.
(6) Revocation of permit. Failure to comply with all the provisions of
this chapter shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of the disposal permit by
the control authority. The possession within the service area by any person of
any motor vehicle equipped with a body type and accessories of a nature and
design capable of serving as a septic tank or wastewater or excreta disposal
system cleaning unit shall be prima facie evidence that such person is engaged
in the business of cleaning, draining or flushing septic tanks or other
wastewater or excreta disposal systems within the service area of the POTW.
(Ord. #99-5, Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-204. Charges and fees. (1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this
section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW for the
implementation of the program established herein and to provide a schedule of
charges and fees which will enable the city to comply with the revenue
requirements of section 204 of the Clean Water Act. Specific charges and fees
shall be adopted by a separate ordinance; this section describes the procedure
to be used in calculating the charges and fees. Additional charges and fees to
recover funds for capital outlay, bond service costs and capital improvements
may be assessed by the city. These charges and fees shall be recovered through
the user classification established hereinafter. The applicable charges or fees
shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees.
(2) Types of charges and fees. The city may adopt charges and fees
which may include, but are not limited to:
(a) User classification charges;
(b) Fees for monitoring requested by a user;
(c) Fees for permit application;
(d) Appeal fees;
(e) Charges and fees based on wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(f) Fee for use of garbage grinders;
(g) Fees for holding tank wastes;
(h) Fees for reimbursement of administrative costs related to
the pretreatment program;
(i) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
18-30
(j) Fees for reviewing slug discharge prevention procedures and
construction;
(k) Fees for allowing connection of building sewers to the
POTW;
(l) Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards;
(m) Other fees as the control authority may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements of this chapter.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. (Ord. #99-5, Jan. 1999, as
replaced by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-205. Administration. (1) Use of public sewers required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City of Maryville or in any area under the jurisdiction
of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
(b) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the City of Maryville or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(c) Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct
or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(d) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated
within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that
said public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of the building drain
as defined herein.
(2) Wastewater dischargers require permit. It shall be unlawful to
discharge to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the control
authority in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Wastewater discharge permits. (a) General permits. All
significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the
POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to
or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant industrial users
connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater
18-31
discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective
date of this chapter.
(b) Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the control authority an
application in the form prescribed by the control authority accompanied
by any application fee that may be required. Existing significant
industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within
sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter, and proposed new
users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or
contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the significant
industrial user may be required to submit all or some of the following
information, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation;
(i) Name, address, and location (if different from the
address);
(ii) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
(iii) Measurement of pollutants:
(A) The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process and any new
categorically regulated processes for existing sources;
(B) Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are
or could be discharged including time and duration of
contribution;
(C) Instantaneous, daily maximum, long-term
average concentrations or mass loading, where required,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
(D) Wastewater constituents and characteristics
representative of daily operations including, but not limited
to, those mentioned in § 18-202 as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in
40 C.F.R., part 136, as amended. Where the standard
requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention
alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the control authority or the applicable
standards to determine compliance with the standard.
(iv) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;
(v) Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or
federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding
18-32
whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, whether additional Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for
the significant industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;
(vi) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the significant industrial user will provide such
additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall
apply to this schedule:
(A) The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g. hiring
an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
(B) No increment referred to in subsection (1) shall
exceed nine (9) months.
(C) Not later than fourteen (14) days following
each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance,
the user shall submit a progress report to the control
authority including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such
date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with
this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the
steps being taken by the user to return the construction to
the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine
(9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
control authority.
(vii) Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;
(viii) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average
and maximum per day);
(ix) Number and type of employees, and hours of
operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of
pretreatment system;
(x) Any other information as may be deemed by the
control authority to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
18-33
The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the
significant industrial user and may require additional information. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the control authority
may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
(c) Permit modifications. Within nine (9) months of the
promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the
wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be
revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a significant industrial user, subject
to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required
by § 18-205(3), the significant industrial user shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after
the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard. In addition, the significant industrial user with an existing
wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the control authority within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by
subsections (viii) and (ix) of § 18-205(3)(b).
(d) Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provision of this chapter, EPA's pretreatment
standards and regulations promulgated under the authority of
section 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (as
provided for in 40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(1)(iii), and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may
contain the following:
(i) Statement of duration (five (5) years or less);
(ii) Statement of non-transferability;
(iii) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements;
(iv) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees
for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW;
(v) All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user's discharge;
(vi) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(vii) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
(viii) Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities;
(ix) Specifications and best management practices for
monitoring programs which may include sampling locations,
18-34
frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and
reporting schedule;
(x) Compliance schedule;
(xi) Requirements for maintaining and retaining records
relating to wastewater discharge and best management practices
as specified by the control authority for a period of at least three
(3) years, and affording the control authority access thereto. This
period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or the city's
POTW or when requested by the TDEC or EPA;
(xii) Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports (see § 18-205(4));
(xii) Requirements for notification of the control authority
of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any
substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system;
(xiv) Requirements for notification of slug discharges. All
categorical and non-categorical industrial users shall notify the
control authority immediately of all discharges that could cause
problems to the control authority, including any slug loadings, in
accordance with § 18-202(10); and
(xv) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
control authority to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(e) Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one
hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification of the control authority during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in § 18-202 are modified or other
just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in
his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of any
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(f) Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued
to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval
of the control authority. Any succeeding owner or user shall receive a
copy of and also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing
permit.
18-35
(4) Reporting requirements for permittee. (a) Baseline monitoring
reports. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative
decision on a category determination under 40 C.F.R. 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the
control authority a report which contains the information listed below. At
least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent
to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit
to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall
give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(i) The name and address of the facility, including the
name of the operator and owner.
(ii) A list of any environmental control permits held by or
for the facility.
(iii) A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production (including each product produced by type, amount,
processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram, which
indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
(iv) Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined wastestream formula in accordance with
40 C.F.R. 403.6(e).
(v) Measurement of pollutants.
(A) The user shall provide the information
required in § 18-205(3)(b)(iii);
(B) The user shall take a minimum of one (1)
representative sample to compile that data necessary to
comply with the requirements of this subsection;
(C) Samples should be taken immediately
downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or
immediately downstream from the regulated process if no
pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with
the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user
should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to
18-36
allow use of the combined wastestream formula in
40 C.F.R. 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the
pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration
or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with
40 C.F.R. 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting
data shall be submitted to the control authority;
(D) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with § 18-205(4)(c)(iii);
(E) The control authority may allow the
submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical
data so long as the data provides information sufficient to
determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures;
(F) The baseline report shall indicate the time,
date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and
shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
(vi) Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by
the user's authorized representative as defined in § 18-201(2) and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and,
if not, whether additional Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(vii) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards,
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must
meet the requirements set out in § 18-205(3)(b)(ix) of this chapter.
(viii) Signature and report certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with § 18-205(4)
and signed by an authorized representative as defined in
§ 18-201(2).
(b) Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following
the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or,
in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction
of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge
from the regulated processes which are limited by pretreatment
standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for
18-37
these process units in the user facility which are limited by such
pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether
the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on
a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment
is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed
and certified by an authorized representative of the user.
(c) Periodic compliance reports. (i) Any user subject to a
pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such
pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to
the control authority during the months of June and December,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or
by the control authority, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period, which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In
addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which,
during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow
reported in the permit application. At the discretion of the control
authority and in consideration of such factors as local high or low
flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the control authority may
agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires
compliance with a Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution
prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the control authority or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
(ii) The control authority may impose mass limitation on
users which the control authority has reason to believe are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the periodic compliance
report required by subsection (i) of this section shall indicate the
mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the significant industrial user. These reports shall
contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge,
including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production
and mass where requested by the control authority, of pollutants
contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment
standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the
wastewater discharge permit.
(iii) All analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the administrator pursuant to
18-38
section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R., part 136 and
amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved
by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance
with the techniques approved by the administrator. Where
40 C.F.R. part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
the EPA publication "Sampling and Analytical Procedures for
Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," dated
April, 1977 and amended thereto, or with any other sampling and
analytical procedures approved by the administrator.
(d) Permit limit violations. If sampling performed by a user
indicates a violation, the user shall notify the control authority within
twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis for the parameter(s) violated and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also
provide written notice of the violation within five (5) days of becoming
aware of the violation.
(5) Monitoring facilities. The control authority shall require to be
provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated
on the user's premises, but the control authority may, when such location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not
be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility,
sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. The failure of a user
to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the
user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the control authority's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written
notification by the control authority.
(6) Inspection and sampling. The control authority shall inspect the
facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being
met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of
premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the control
authority or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
18-39
or in the performance of any of their duties. The control authority, state, and
EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are
necessary for them to conduct sampling inspections, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations.
The control authority will establish those pollutants to be sampled, at the
user's expense, at the prescribed minimum frequency shown in the user's
permit. The user must collect samples using twenty-four (24) hour
flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority.
Where time-proportional sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the control
authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four
(24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide,
total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or
in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters
unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the control authority, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
limits. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 as amended. Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not
include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the EPA publication "Sampling and Analytical Procedures for Screening
of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," dated April, 1977 and amended
thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
administrator. The user shall submit monitoring reports to the control authority
of those priority pollutants to be sampled at the frequency prescribed in the
wastewater contribution permit. The results of any and all sampling of the
user's discharge shall be reported, including sampling which exceeds the
required minimum frequency. Failure to comply with these requirements may
result in enforcement action as set forth in § 18-207.
For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety (90)
day compliance reports required in § 18-205(4), a minimum of four (4) grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do
not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
control authority may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by
§ 18-205(4), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.
18-40
Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state, and EPA
will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.
(7) Pretreatment. Users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance
with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations
as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to
pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the control authority shall be
provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Tennessee
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the control authority for review, and shall be acceptable to the control
authority before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
control authority under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes
in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
acceptable to the control authority prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the city, EPA or state upon request.
(8) Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained
from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon request
to the state and/or EPA for uses related to this chapter, the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit
and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state, any state agency, or the EPA in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
(9) Public notification. In compliance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.8, the
control authority must annually publish in the local newspaper a list of
industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in
18-41
significant non-compliance with the pretreatment program requirements.
(Ord. #99-5, Jan. 1999, as replaced by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-206. Building sewers and connections. (1) Building sewer
permit. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any POTW or appurtenances thereof.
Authorization may be obtained from the control authority upon review of
pertinent plans and payment of the appropriate fees.
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permit:
(a) For residential customers; and
(b) For non-residential customers.
In either case, the customer or his/her agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the control authority. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information such as grease
traps needed by restaurants, dining halls or other types of eating
establishments, considered pertinent in the judgment of the control authority.
A fee schedule is in effect for residential and non-residential connections. Said
fees shall be paid to the control authority at the time the application is filed.
Applicant for non-residential sewer permits shall provide a description of the
constituents of the waste and may be required to provide a laboratory analysis
of the waste, or of a similar waste stream if there are other facilities in
operation.
(2) Connections. All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the customer. The customer
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The connection to the
POTW shall be inspected by the control authority before the underground
portion is buried.
(3) Installation and maintenance. The new building sewer may be
brought into the building below the basement floor when gravity flow from the
building to the POTW at a minimum grade consistent with the requirements of
the control authority is possible. Where basement or floor elevations to be served
are lower than the ground overflow elevation of the upstream manhole of the
POTW line servicing the property, adequate precautions by the installation of
check valves or other approved backflow prevention devices to help protect
against flooding shall be provided by the owner. The control authority shall have
the right to review and approve all check valves and backflow prevention
devices. Said check valves or backflow prevention devices shall be located such
as to provide access for maintenance and shall be installed in a valve pit to allow
access without excavation for normal maintenance operations. In all buildings
in which a building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the POTW, wastes
carried by said building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer at the expense of the customer. Pumps or other
devices shall be reviewed and approved by the control authority.
18-42
No person shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to the POTW. If, during periodic system inspections, the city locates a point of
entry of infiltration/inflow in an owner's building sewer, the owner shall repair
the defect(s) at his/her own expense and furthermore notify the city upon
completion so that an inspection of the repair can be made prior to covering of
the repair.
All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights or other means so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the control
authority.
All building connections and maintenance shall be subject to the currently
adopted version of the plumbing code as amended by the City of Maryville and
the Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies of the City of Maryville Water Quality
Control Department. The Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies of the City of
Maryville Water Quality Control Department are available through the water
quality control department and on file with the State of Tennessee. In cases of
conflict the stricter requirements shall rule. (Ord. #99-5, Jan. 1999, as replaced
by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-207. Grease, oil and sand traps and separators. (1) General
requirements. Gravity-type separators, interceptors or other such devices for
the removal of oil, grease, sand, grit, glass, entrails or other such material likely
to create or contribute to a blockage of the wastewater collection system or
otherwise interfere with the operation of the POTW are required at commercial
sources as described in ordinance 2007-13 of the Maryville Municipal Code,
where required by the plumbing code or where required by other ordinance or
regulation of the City of Maryville. Such devices shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the control authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning, pumping and inspection.
(2) Design, review and approval of traps and separators. During the
site plan review conducted by the City of Maryville personnel of proposed
commercial and industrial developments, the need for traps or separators will
be determined. If a trap or separator is required, detailed plumbing plans shall
be submitted to the control authority prior to commencement of construction.
Minimum grease trap size shall be one thousand (1,000) gallons.
All grease traps shall meet design criteria as described in Rules,
Regulations, Rates and Policies Manual. Persons wishing to install precast
concrete septic tanks or concrete tanks shall submit to the control authority
design drawings. A field inspection shall be required to ensure the installation
complies with the approved drawings and adequate baffling was installed.
18-43
(3) Exemptions. Commercial sources in operation prior to January 19,
1993 are excluded from the minimum requirements of this section, but shall be
required to install and maintain a gravity-type separator, interceptor or other
such device at the kitchen sink for removal of oil and grease. Such devices shall
be the largest type available that will fit under the sink and shall not be
connected to any dishwashers. Such devices will be allowed to remain in service
until such time as the control authority determines the device is not preventing
prohibited substances from entering the POTW or the device is not being
maintained with adequate frequency. If the control authority makes such a
determination, the establishment shall install a device in full compliance with
this section.
(4) Maintenance of traps and separators. It shall be the duty of every
establishment required to have traps or separators to maintain the devices, have
the devices pumped whenever the level of grease or other substance has reached
the top of the effluent pipe from the device, or when it appears to the control
authority that prohibited substances are leaving the device and are being
discharged into the POTW.
Each establishment is required to maintain a maintenance log with an
original copy of the manifest on all traps and separators. The log shall show the
date of all cleanings, the name of the person and organization performing the
cleaning and the disposition of the removed substances. The establishment must
obtain a manifest confirming the pumping, hauling, and disposal of waste from
the hauler. The maintenance log and manifests shall be available during
business hours for examination by the control authority and copies shall be
submitted to the control authority quarterly (by February 15, May 15, August15,
and November 15). Failure to comply with the reporting requirements shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter of the Maryville Municipal Code.
(5) Disposal of trap and separator wastes. Acceptable disposal options
for the wastes removed from traps and separators include recycling collectors
and trash disposal or commercial collectors. Disposal methods shall comply with
all state and local regulations.
(6) Periodic inspection of traps and separators. Personnel from the
City of Maryville shall be permitted ready access to inspect all traps and
separators for compliance with the municipal code. If found in violation, the user
shall be issued a seven (7) day notice to come into compliance. Failure to correct
non-compliance within the seven (7) day period will result in termination of
water service. If termination of water service will possibly result in a threat to
public health, the trap or separator will be pumped and cleaned by City of
Maryville personnel. The user shall be reimburse the City of Maryville for all
labor, equipment, supplies and disposal costs incurred by the city to pump and
clean the trap or separator. The charges will be added to the user's utility bill.
(7) Charges and fees. Users required to install and maintain a
gravity-type separator, interceptor or other such device shall be subject to an
annual fee as required by ordinance 2007-13, as amended, of the Maryville
18-44
Municipal Code. All fees will appear on the user's utility bill. In the event that
the user fails to pay the fee, water service shall be terminated until such time
as all fees and any other charges, including late charges, have been paid.
(8) Violations. Any person who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this section or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall be
subject to enforcement action as set forth in § 18-208 herein. (Ord. #99-5, Jan.
1999, as replaced by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-208. Enforcement. (1) Enforcement policy. All enforcement actions
taken by the control authority against users that are in violation of this chapter
shall be in accordance with the City of Maryville's Pretreatment Enforcement
Response Plan, as adopted and amended by the Maryville City Council, and with
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 69-3-123 through 69-3-129, from which the
authority for such action is derived.
(2) Administrative enforcement remedies. (a) Notification of
violation. Whenever the control authority finds that any user has
violated an order of the control authority or willfully or negligently failed
to comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, the control authority may
serve upon such person a written notice by registered mail stating the
nature of the violation. Within ten (10) days of the date of the notification
of violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted to the control authority by
the user. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability
for any violation occurring before or after the receipt of the notice of
violation.
(b) Consent orders. The control authority is hereby empowered
to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible
for the non-compliance. Such orders will include specific action to be
taken by the user to correct the non-compliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as administrative orders issued pursuant to § 18-207(2)(d) and (e), below.
(c) Show cause hearing. The control authority may order any
user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW
or contributes to violation of this chapter or wastewater permit or order
issued hereunder to show cause before the hearing authority why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting to be held by the
hearing authority regarding the violation, the proposed enforcement
action and the reasons for such action, and directing the user to show
cause before the hearing authority why this proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least
18-45
ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
principal executive, general partner or corporate officer. Whether or not
a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action
may be pursued.
The hearing authority may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee
of the city to:
(i) Issue in the name of the hearing authority notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses
and the production or evidence relevant to any matter involved in
such hearings;
(ii) Take the evidence;
(iii) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing,
including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the hearing authority for action thereon.
At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken
shall be under oath and may, at the request of either party, be recorded
stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to
any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of
the usual charges thereof.
After the hearing authority has reviewed the evidence, it may issue
an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following
a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have
been installed on existing treatment facilities, and/or these devices or
other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued, including the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and
management practices.
Decisions of the hearing authority may be appealed to the appeal
authority within thirty (30) days. If an appeal is not made to the local
appeal authority within thirty (30) days of notification of such decision,
user shall be deemed to have consented to such decision and it shall
become final.
(d) Compliance order. In accordance with Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-123, when the control authority finds that a user has
violated an order of the control authority or willfully or negligently failed
to comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, an order may be issued to the
user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specific time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and
are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements
as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
18-46
non-compliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology,
additional self-monitoring and management practices.
(e) Cease and desist order. In accordance with Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 69-3-123, when the control authority finds that a user who
is found to have violated an order of the control authority or who willfully
or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, and the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, the control
authority may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in non-compliance to:
(i) Comply forthwith;
(ii) Take such appropriate remedial or preventative
action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating
the discharge.
(f) Administrative penalties. Any user who is found to have
violated an order of the control authority or who willfully or negligently
failed to comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder shall be fined not more than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day as authorized by Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 69-3-115 for each offense. Each day on which
non-compliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation. In addition to the fines provided herein, the control
authority may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court
reporter' s fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules
regulations and permits issued hereunder. Such assessments may be
added to the user' s next scheduled sewer service charge, and the control
authority shall have the same collection remedies that the city has to
collect service charges.
(g) Emergency suspension. The control authority may, without
notice, suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater
discharge permit of a user when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the control authority, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment,
causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.
Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop
or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the control
authority shall take such steps as·deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or endangerment to any
18-47
individuals. The control authority shall reinstate the wastewater
discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of
the elimination of the non-complying discharge, unless the
termination-proceedings set forth in § 18-207(2)(h) are initiated against
the user.
Any user whose wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater
discharge permit is suspended shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures taken
to prevent any future occurrence to the control authority within five (5)
days of the occurrence.
(h) Revocation of permit. Any user who is found to have
violated an order of the control authority or who willfully or negligently
failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder or any applicable state and
federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance
with the procedures of this section of this chapter:
(i) Violation of conditions of the permit;
(ii) Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
(iii) Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or
(iv) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
(3) Judicial remedies. (a) Legal action. If any person discharges
sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater
disposal system, in any other way violates this sewer use chapter or its
industrial wastewater discharge permit, contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the
control authority, the control authority, through the city attorney, may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
chancery court for the county in which the violation occurred.
(b) Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is found to have violated
an order of the control authority or willfully or negligently failed to
comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, the control authority, through
counsel, may initiate proceedings in the chancery court of the county in
which the activities occurred for the issuance of injunctive relief or any
other relief available in law or equity.
(c) Civil penalties. (i) Any user who is found to have violated
an order of the control authority or who willfully or negligently
failed to comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders,
rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not
more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each offense. Each
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
18-48
separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided
herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs,
court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate
suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter
or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
(ii) (A) The control authority may assess any person or
user for damages to the POTW resulting from that person's
or user's pollution, violation, or failure or neglect in
complying with any permit(s) or order(s) issued pursuant to
the provisions of the pretreatment program, this chapter, or
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 69-3-123, 69-3-124, or
69-3-125.
(B) If any appeal from such assessment is not
made to the local appeal authority within thirty (30) days of
notification of such assessment, the person or user shall be
deemed to have consented to such assessment and it shall
become final.
(C) Damages may include any expenses incurred
in investigating and enforcing the pretreatment program,
this chapter or Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 69-3-123
through 69-3-129; in removing, correcting, and/or
terminating any pollution; and also compensation for any
actual damages caused by the pollution or violation.
(D) Whenever any assessment has become final
because of a person's or user' s failure to appeal within the
time provided, the control authority may apply to the
appropriate court for judgment, and seek execution of such
judgment. The court, in such proceedings, shall treat failure
to appeal such an assessment as a confession of judgment in
the amount of the assessment.
(iii) The control authority may petition the court to
impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of
liability, the court shall take into account all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm
caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefits gained through the user's
violation, corrective actions taken by the user, the compliance
history of the user, and any other factors as justice requires.
(d) Criminal prosecution. Any user who is found to have
violated an order of the control authority or who willfully or negligently
failed to comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a penalty not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day.
18-49
(4) Supplemental enforcement remedies. (a) Annual publication of
significant violations. The control authority shall publish annually, in a
newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice
within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at
any time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant non-compliance shall be applicable to
all significant industrial users which are found to be in significant
violation in accordance with § 18-205(9) of this chapter.
(b) Performance bonds. The control authority may decline to
reissue a permit to any user who is found to have violated an order of the
control authority or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder unless such user first files with the control authority a
satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the hearing authority to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
(c) Liability insurance. The control authority may decline to
reissue a permit to any user who has failed to comply with the provisions
of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder unless
such user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances
sufficient to restore or repair any POTW damage caused by its discharge.
(d) Water supply severance. Whenever a user is found to have
violated an order of the control authority or willfully or negligently failed
to comply with any provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may
be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after
the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(e) Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the control authority. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code
governing such nuisances as well as all provisions of this chapter,
including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating
or remedying said nuisance.
(f) Informant rewards. The control authority is hereby
authorized to pay for information leading to the discovery of
non-compliance by a user. In the event that the information provided
results in an administrative penalty levied against the user, the control
authority is authorized to disperse up to ten percent (10%) of the collected
penalty to the informant up to a maximum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) per reward payment.
18-50
(5) Affirmative defenses. (a) Treatment upsets. (i) Any user which
experiences an upset in operations that places it in a temporary
state of non-compliance, which is not the result of operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance or careless
and improper operation, shall inform the control authority thereof
immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. Where such
information is given orally, a written report shall be filed by the
user within five (5) days. The report shall contain:
(A) A description of the upset, its cause(s), and
impact on the discharger's compliance status;
(B) The duration or expected duration of
non-compliance, including exact dates and times of
non-compliance, and, if the non-compliance is continuing,
the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to be
restored;
(C) All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate
and prevent recurrence of such an upset.
(ii) A user which complies with the notification provisions
of this section in a timely manner shall have an affirmative
defense to any enforcement action brought by the control authority
for any non-compliance with this chapter, or any order or permit
issued hereunder to the user, which arises out of violations
attributable to and alleged to have occurred during the period of
the documented and verified upset.
(b) Treatment bypasses. (i) A bypass of the treatment system
or any portion thereof is prohibited unless all of the following
conditions are met:
(A) The bypass was unavoidable in order to
prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property
damage;
(B) There was no feasible alternative to the
bypass, including the use of auxiliary treatment or retention
of the wastewater; and
(C) The user properly notified the control authority
as described in § 18-207(5)(b)(ii) below.
(ii) Users must provide immediate notice to the control
authority upon discovery of an unanticipated bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time
the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
18-51
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The control authority may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report
has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(iii) A user may request approval of the control authority
for a bypass which does not cause pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential
maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system.
Users anticipating such a bypass must submit notice to the control
authority at least ten (10) days in advance. The control authority
may only approve the anticipated bypass if the circumstances
satisfy those set forth in § 18-207(5)(b)(i). (Ord. #99-5, Jan. 1999,
as replaced by Ord. #2012-10, April 2012)
18-52
CHAPTER 3
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES, ETC.1
SECTION
18-301. Definitions.
18-302. Regulations.
18-303. Approved backflow prevention assemblies.
18-304. Installation and maintenance requirements for backflow prevention
assemblies.
18-305. Fire protection systems.
18-306. Lawn irrigation systems.
18-307. Assembly evaluations and testing.
18-308. Existing assemblies.
18-309. Additional water source.
18-310. Plumbing.
18-311. Corrections of violations.
18-312. Fees.
18-313. Penalty.
18-301. Definitions. The following definitions are adopted in this
chapter:
(1) "City." The City of Maryville, Department of Water Quality
Control.
(2) "Cross-connection." Any physical connection whereby the public
water supply is connected with any other water supply system whether public
or private, either inside or outside of a building in such a manner that a flow of
water into the water supply is possible either through the manipulation of
valves, ineffective check or back pressure valves or because of any other
arrangement.
(3) "Interconnection." Any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the city's water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain,
conduit or other device, which does carry or may carry sewage.
(4) "Hazard assessment." A detailed inspection of the facilities within
a water customer's plumbing system. (1985 Code, § 8-301, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
1Municipal code references
Plumbing code: title 12.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
The regulations in this chapter are recommended by the Tennessee
Department of Health for adoption by cities.
18-53
18-302. Regulations. Under no circumstances will a cross-connection,
auxiliary intake, bypass, or interconnection be allowed unless approved by the
city upon proof of compliance with the criteria set forth by the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation, Division of Water Supply and
the provisions of this chapter. All commercial cross-connections will require
backflow prevention assembly installation.
Authorized employees of the City of Maryville, with proper identification,
shall have free access to all areas of a premise or building to which potable
water is supplied for the purpose of conducting hazard assessments.
If a customer refuses access to their premises, the plumbing system shall
be classified as a high hazard connection and appropriate protection shall be
required at the service connection based on potential health hazards in
accordance with regulations of the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation, Division of Water Supply. In this event the city will give the
customer twenty-four (24) hours to allow access to their facility prior to such
action being taken. Customers who do not comply to provide timely access
within the time limit set forth shall have all water services terminated until
compliance is met. (1985 Code, § 8-302, as replaced by Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-303. Approved backflow prevention assemblies. (1) All backflow
prevention assemblies used in the corporate limits and/or in the city's water
system shall be fully approved and listed as acceptable by the Tennessee
Department of Conservation, Division of Water Supply as to manufacturer,
model, size, application, orientation and alterations. The assembly shall have
a status of "passed" determined by performance evaluations to suffice as an
approved backflow prevention assembly.
(2) There are three (3) categories for hazards for potential crossconnections:
(a) Health hazards;
(b) Non-health hazards;
(c) Fire safety.
Reduced pressure principle assembly may be used for health hazards and
non-health hazards. Double check valve assemblies may only be used for nonhealth
hazards and is limited to Class 1-3 fire systems only.
(3) The following assemblies will meet recommendations and
requirements for protection of the water system, depending on the degree of
hazard:
(a) Reduced pressure principle assembly;
(b) Reduced pressure principle detector assembly;
(c) Double check valve assembly; and
(d) Double check valve detector assembly. (1985 Code, § 8-303,
as replaced by Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-54
18-304. Installation and maintenance requirements for backflow
prevention assemblies. Acceptable installation of backflow prevention
assemblies shall meet the criteria of the State of Tennessee and the following
requirements:
(1) All backflow prevention assemblies installed on fire protection
systems must be performed by person(s) possessing a fire sprinkler contractor
license.
(2) All assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions and by the State of Tennessee's
installation guide unless such instructions are in conflict with the ordinance set
forth by the city, in which case the city ordinance shall control. All assemblies
shall possess all test cocks and fittings required for testing the assembly.
(3) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies
installed inside a premises shall be located so that the relief valve discharge port
is a minimum of twenty-four inches (24"), plus nominal diameter of the supply
line, above the finished floor level. The maximum height above the finished floor
level shall not exceed seventy-two inches (72") and be positioned where
discharge from a relief port will not create any adverse or undesirable
conditions.
(4) Any backflow prevention assembly(s) installed inside a premises
(i.e., basements, closets, fire riser rooms, mechanical rooms, etc.) shall have
adequate lighting to provide for inspections and/or repairs.
(5) Backflow prevention assemblies installed outside a premises (i.e.,
irrigation devices, domestic assemblies located outside a facility or fire
protection system assemblies) shall be located so that the relief valve discharge
port of reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies or lowest
point of double check valve assemblies is a minimum of fourteen inches (14"),
plus nominal diameter of the supply line, above the finished grade level/surface.
The maximum height above the finished grade level shall not exceed seventytwo
inches (72").
(6) All reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies installed inside
a premises shall have adequate drainage and be equipped with a drain line from
the relief valve that is a minimum of two (2) times the nominal diameter of the
supply line of the backflow assembly.
(7) Clearance from wall surfaces or other obstructions for backflow
prevention assemblies shall be a minimum of six inches (6"). However, if a
person must enter an enclosure to repair or test, the minimum distance shall be
twenty-four inches (24").
(8) Backflow prevention assemblies devices shall be adequately
protected from freezing, vandalism, theft, and mechanical abuse, overgrowth of
vegetation and from any corrosive, sticky, greasy, abrasive or other damaging
substances.
(9) Backflow prevention assemblies devices shall be accessible to the
city at all times. Assemblies shall not be installed in areas such as locked
18-55
enclosures, fenced areas, backyards, pool houses, garages, under decks, porches,
or in heavy shrubbery that could be damaged due to the testing process.
(10) An approved air gas shall separate the relief port from any
drainage system. Such air gap shall not be altered without the specific approval
of the city.
(11) Backflow prevention assemblies devices shall be located in an area
free from submergence or flood potential and cannot in any circumstances be
located in a pit or hole.
(12) All backflow prevention assemblies devices shall be adequately
supported to prevent sagging or swaying.
(13) An approved strainer shall be installed immediately upstream of
all backflow prevention assemblies or shutoff valve, except on fire lines, using
only noncorrosive fittings in the device's assembly.
(14) Where the use of water is critical for the continuance of normal
operations, the protection of life, property and/or equipment, including but not
limited to, apartment or residential housing buildings, barber shops or beauty
salons with four (4) or more chairs, dental or medical facilities, multi-tenant
buildings served by a single water service line or restaurants, duplicate
backflow prevention assemblies shall be provided to avoid the necessity of
discontinuing water service to test or repair the backflow prevention
assembly(s).
(15) A device for the control of thermal expansion shall be installed on
the customer's water system where the thermal expansion of the water in the
system will cause the water pressure to exceed the pressure setting of the
pressure relief valve of the water heater. The thermal expansion device shall
control the water pressure to prevent the pressure relief valve of the water
heater from discharging.
(16) Fire hydrant drains/weep holes shall not be connected to the
sanitary sewer.
(17) Full-open valves, followed by a drain plug, shall be installed on the
supply line of every irrigation system whether supplied off the customer's main
domestic service line or by its own separate city public water supply meter prior
to the irrigation backflow prevention assembly.
(18) Full-open valves shall also be installed on the discharge side of
every irrigation backflow prevention assembly and must meet all requirements
set forth in the city's "Rules, Regulations, Rates and Policies" manual.
(19) Where compressed air is used to winterize irrigation systems,
proper fittings must be installed downstream of the irrigation backflow
prevention assembly for that purpose.
(20) Irrigation backflow prevention assemblies must be installed and
have water service up to the number two shutoff valve of the assembly, whether
or not the irrigation system is activated or in use, no later than May 1st of each
year and remain in service until September 30th of each year to allow for
required annual inspection and testing of the backflow prevention assembly.
18-56
Irrigation systems with backflow prevention assemblies not installed or not in
service during said period will be viewed as a failure of the annual inspection.
(21) Installation shall be at the sole expense of the owner or occupant
of the premises. (1985 Code, § 8-304, as replaced by Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-305. Fire protection systems. (1) An approved backflow prevention
assembly shall be installed on each fire service line at the property line where
possible. Alternatively, the approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be
installed immediately inside the building served before the first branch line
leading off the service line.
(2) Class 1, 2 and 3 fire protection systems shall require at minimum
a double check valve assembly.
(3) Class 4, Class 5, Class 6 fire protection systems shall require an air
gap or a reduced pressure principle assembly as determined by the city.
(4) Where a fire sprinkler system is installed on the premises, a
minimum of a double check valve assembly shall be required.
(5) Where a fire sprinkler system uses chemicals, such as liquid foam,
to enhance fire suppression a reduced pressure principle assembly shall be
required.
(6) In any premises with an auxiliary water supply for fire protection,
the city's public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a
reduced pressure principle assembly.
(7) In the case of any premises where toxic substances are used for fire
protection that could pose an undue health hazard, the city may require an air
gap separation or reduced pressure principle assembly at the service connection
to protect the city's public water system. (1985 Code, § 8-305, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-306. Lawn irrigation systems. (1) For all public water systems to
protect their distribution system, lawn irrigation systems will be protected by
a reduced pressure principle assembly or reduced pressure principle detector
assembly.
(2) Double check valves cannot be used for lawn irrigation systems for
either public or well water systems. (1985 Code, § 8-306, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-307. Assembly evaluations and testing. (1) All backflow
prevention assemblies used to protect the city's public water supply system must
be inspected and tested on every new and repaired assembly before its
acceptance by the city and before use.
(2) All backflow prevention assemblies must be tested no less than
once every twelve (12) months or more often as deemed necessary by the city.
(3) All backflow prevention assemblies will be tested by persons
possessing a valid Certification of Competency in Testing and Evaluation of
18-57
Backflow Prevention Assemblies issued by the Tennessee Department of
Conservation, Division of Water Supply and using a valid test kit certification.
(4) Proof of annual test kit certifications and tester's certifications
must be sent with each test report submitted to the city. Test reports must be
compiled and accurately documented.
(5) If any test does not meet the minimum requirements set forth in
the approved testing procedure, the assembly shall be deemed as "failed."
Should conditions around the assembly not allow the assembly to be tested, the
assembly shall be deemed as "failed."
(6) Documentation of backflow prevention assemblies, along with any
assembly's location, make, model, size and serial number will be maintained by
the city. If an existing assembly is replaced, the city shall be notified so that
initial testing and documentation can be completed to ensure the protection of
city's public water supply system. (1985 Code, § 8-307, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-308. Existing assemblies. (1) All backflow prevention assemblies
which were installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance comprising this
chapter and which met with the standards of the Tennessee Department of
Conservation, Division of Water Supply, may at the sole discretion of the city,
remain in service. However if the condition of the assemblies constitutes a
health hazard or replacement is required of the assembly, such assembly will be
brought up to current requirements as set forth in this chapter.
(2) Location or space requirements shall not be cause for re-location
or replacement of any backflow prevention assembly that is installed as of the
date of the adoption of the ordinance comprising this chapter so long as the
location or spacing of the backflow assembly is installed in a safe location for
testing and inspection purposes. (1985 Code, § 8-308, as replaced by
Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-309. Additional water source. Any person whose premises are
supplied with water from the city's public water system who also has on the
same premises a separate source of water, such as a well or an uncovered or
unsanitary storage reservoir where water is circulated through a piping system,
shall have the city's water source protected with an approved backflow
prevention assembly. (1985 Code, § 8-309, as replaced by Ord. #2013-27, Dec.
2013)
18-310. Plumbing. Prior to any new installation(s), alteration(s) or
change(s) of any backflow prevention assembly connected to the city's public
water supply, fire protection or any other purpose, a cross-connection permit
from the city is required. (1985 Code, § 8-310, as replaced by Ord. #2013-27, Dec.
2013)
18-58
18-311. Corrections of violations. (1) Where cross-connections,
auxiliary intakes, bypasses, interconnections, or failed assemblies are in
violation of this chapter, the premises shall be classified as a high risk hazard.
The customer will be given a time certain by which to come into compliance.
(2) Failure to maintain a backflow prevention assembly or the
removal, bypass or alteration of a protective device or installation without the
approval of the city, shall be cause for the denial, discontinuance, or termination
of water service. The city shall give the customer written notification within five
(5) business days that water services are to be discontinued. If necessary, the
public water system shall be physically separated from the customer's system
at the customer's expense to be added to the customer's water bill.
(3) Any repairs to backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected
and/or tested by persons possessing a certification of competency in testing and
evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies.
(4) All expenses relating to correction of violations shall be borne by
the utility customer. (as added by Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-312. Fees. A fee shall be assessed for all backflow prevention
assemblies requiring inspection or testing by the city's public water supply
system, as well as for the disconnection and/or re-connection of water service for
non-compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The amount of these fees
shall be set and adjusted from time to time by the council of the City of
Maryville to reflect the cost of providing an effective cross-connection control
program. (as added by Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-313. Penalty. Any person who fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty clause of the
city for each violation. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. The city may further resort to
a court of equity to require compliance with this chapter. In addition to the
penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court
costs, court reporters' fees and any and all other expenses of litigation by
appropriate suit at law or in equity against the violator of this chapter. (as
added by Ord. #2013-27, Dec. 2013)
18-59
CHAPTER 4
[MOVED TO TITLE 19 CHAPTER 5.]1
1Rules, rates, and charges for the stormwater utility service was moved
in conjunction with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
18-60
CHAPTER 5
[MOVED TO TITLE 19 CHAPTER 6.]1
1Stormwater discharges was moved in conjunction with Change 8, April
1, 2008.
19-1
TITLE 19
STORMWATER1
CHAPTER
1. LAND DEVELOPMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS.
2. FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE.
3. GRADING, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
4. MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAY DRAINAGE CULVERTS.
5. RULES, RATES AND CHARGES FOR THE STORMWATER UTILITY
SERVICE.
6. STORMWATER DISCHARGES.
7. VEGETATED BUFFER ZONE AND STORMWATER QUALITY
MANAGEMENT.
CHAPTER 1
LAND DEVELOPMENT AND PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS2
SECTION
19-101. Adoption of standards.
19-102. Available in recorder's office.
19-103. Violations.
19-101. Adoption of standards. The rules and regulations of the City
of Maryville entitled "Maryville Land Development and Public Works
Standards", which have heretofore been enacted and is a public record of the
municipality, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as authorized
under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-501 et seq. (1985 Code, § 4-1201)
19-102. Available in recorder's office. At least one (1) copy of said
public record shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of the City of Maryville
and be kept therein available for public use, inspection, and examination.
The council of the City of Maryville hereby declares that pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of said rules and regulations
has been placed on file in the City of Maryville Recorder's office for a period of
fifteen days prior to the passage of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 4-1202)
1This title was created in conjunction with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
2See Ord. #88-1, and any amendments thereto, of record in the recorder's
office, for The Land Development Regulations of Maryville, Tennessee.
19-2
19-103. Violations. These standards are enforceable in a court of equity
through injunction or any other equitable means. Any person, firm, corporation,
or agent violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of these
standards shall be guilty of a civil offense. Additionally, such violation further
constitutes a violation of a city ordinance punishable in city court with a fine of
up to fifty ($50.00) per day for violation. Enforcement powers of the city shall
be to the maximum extent permitted by law. Pursuant of one means of
enforcement by the city as provided herein will not prevent pursuit of other
additional means of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code,
§ 4-1203; as replaced by Ord. #2006-27, May 2006)
19-3
CHAPTER 2
FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
19-201. Statutory authorization.
19-202. Findings of fact.
19-203. Statement of purpose.
19-204. Objectives.
19-205. Definitions.
19-206. General provisions.
19-207. Designation of ordinance administrator.
19-208. Permit procedures.
19-209. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
19-210. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
19-211. Review and variance procedures.
19-212. Legal status provisions.
19-201. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of
Tennessee has in Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-210
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced by
Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-202. Findings of fact. (1) The Council of the City of Maryville
wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and in
order to do so must meet the requirements of 60.3 of the Federal Insurance
Administration Regulations found at 44 CFR ch. 1 (10-1-04 edition).
(2) Areas of Maryville are subject to periodic inundation which could
result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(3) Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; by uses in flood
hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is
inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood
damages. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced by
Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-203. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public
19-4
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This ordinance is
designed to:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to flooding or erosion
hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or
velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community
facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation
floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage or erosion; and
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced by Ord. #2010-01,
Jan. 2010)
19-204. Objectives. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) To protect human life, health and property;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control
projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodable areas;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize blight in
flood areas;
(7) To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is
in a floodable area; and
(8) To maintain eligibility for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced by
Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-205. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this ordinance shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application
given its stated purpose and objectives.
(1) "Accessory structure" shall represent a subordinate structure to the
principal structure and, for the purpose of this section, shall conform to the
following:
(a) Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation.
19-5
(b) Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.
(c) Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.
(d) Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures.
(e) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or flood-proofed.
(2) "Act" means the statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance
Program that are incorporated in 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128.
(3) "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by
a common load bearing wall other than a fire wall Any walled and roofed
addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent
perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction."
(4) "Appeal" means a request for a review of the local enforcement
officer's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a
variance.
(5) "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with one percent (1%) or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (1'  3')
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. (Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.)
(6) "Area of special flood-related erosion hazard" is the land within a
community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion
losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary
Map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion
hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further
refined.
(7) "Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.
(8) "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
(9) "Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
(10) "Breakaway wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
19-6
(11) "Building" means any structure built for support, shelter, or
enclosure for any occupancy or storage (see "structure").
(12) "Development" means any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
(13) "Development permit" means any number of permits which are
issued for specific phases of a project including but not limited to the following:
grading permits; site plan approval; or building permits and elevation
certifications. Site plan approval process can be found in the Maryville Zoning
and Land Use Ordinance.
(14) "Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have
the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by
means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or
shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a base flood event.
(15) "Emergency flood insurance program" or "emergency program"
means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with
section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer
amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the
initial FIRM.
(16) "Erosion" means the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses. This peril is not per se covered under the program.
(17) "Exception" means a waiver from the provisions of this ordinance
which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order
or other determination made or issued pursuant to this ordinance.
(18) "Existing construction" means any structure for which the "start
of construction" commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that
community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
(19) "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by
the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
(20) "Existing structures" see "existing construction."
(21) "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision"
means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
19-7
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
(22) "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(23) "Flood elevation determination" means a determination by the
administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood
level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any given
year.
(24) "Flood elevation study" means an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards.
(25) "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of
a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A.
(26) "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, delineating
the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
(27) "Flood insurance study" is the official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, evaluating flood hazards and
containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood.
(28) "Floodplain" or "floodprone area" means any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding") and
shall be that area referenced on the FEMA flood boundary and floodway maps
which are hereby part of the floodway district referenced and part of the
Maryville Zoning and Land Use Ordinance.
(29) "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works
and floodplain management regulations.
(30) "Flood protection system" means those physical structural works
for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which
have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the
extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
(31) "Flood-proofing" means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
19-8
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
(32) "Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as
a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding.
(33) "Flood-related erosion area" or "flood-related erosion prone area"
means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which
due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or
wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.
(34) "Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of
an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and flood plain
management regulations.
(35) "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height. The area designed as "flooding" and referenced on the FEMA
flood boundary maps and flood insurance rate maps are hereby made part of the
floodway district referenced and part of the Maryville Zoning and Land Use
Ordinance.
(36) "Floor" means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building
(including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for parking vehicles.
(37) "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet
above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
(38) "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
(39) "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of
the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a
structure.
19-9
(40) "Historic structure" means any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on the Tennessee inventory of historic
places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
(i) By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
(ii) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior.
(41) "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen
embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering
practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide
protection from temporary flooding.
(42) "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of
a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound
engineering practices.
(43) "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of this ordinance.
(44) "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1)
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle," unless
such transportable structures are placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days or longer.
(45) "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
(46) "Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the agency.
19-10
(47) "Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages
of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within
the floodplain. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
(48) "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
(49) "New construction" means any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced after the effective date of this ordinance or the
effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
(50) "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after
the effective date of this ordinance or the effective date of the first floodplain
management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structure.
(51) "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" as corrected in 1988 is
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
(52) "100-year flood" see "base flood."
(53) "Person" includes any individual or group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and
local governments and agencies.
(54) "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
(a) Built on a single chassis;
(b) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;
(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and
(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
(55) "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
(56) "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
19-11
(57) "Special hazard area" means an area having special flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or
FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.
(58) "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; and includes the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
(59) "State coordinating agency." The Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation as designated by the State of Tennessee.
(60) "Stormwater program manager" means the City of Maryville
engineer or other person as appointed by the city manager and is referred to as
administrator in this document.
(61) "Structure," for purposes of this section, means a walled and roofed
building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid
storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures.
(62) "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
(63) "Substantial improvement" means any repairs, reconstructions,
rehabilitations, additions, alterations or other improvements to a structure,
taking place during a five (5) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals
or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. The market value of the structure
should be:
(a) The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the
initial repair or improvement; or
(b) In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the
damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed.
19-12
For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include
either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair
project; or
(b) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
(64) "Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or
improvement commenced.
(65) "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this
ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
(66) "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(67) "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988, (or other datum, where
specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
riverine areas. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, replaced by
Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010, and amended by Ord. #2016-29, Nov. 2016)
19-206. General provisions. (1) Application. This ordinance shall
apply to all areas within the incorporated area of Maryville, Tennessee where
applicable. The area designed and shown on the FEMA flood boundary and
floodway maps and referenced in section (2) of this section shall also be
designated as the floodway district referenced in the Maryville Zoning and Land
Use Ordinance, as amended, and Maryville Subdivision Regulations, as
amended.
Further, it is the intent of these provisions to supplement and
complement those rules and regulations found in both the Maryville Zoning and
Land Use Ordinance, as amended, and the Maryville Subdivision Regulations,
19-13
as amended. These documents are in full force and effect and can be found in the
planning office or City Recorder's Office of the City of Maryville.
(2) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas
of special flood hazard identified on the Maryville, Tennessee, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), map number 47009CINDOC, community number
470439, panel numbers 0119, 0120, 0137, 0138, 0139, 0143, 0232, 0234, 0235,
0251, 0253, 0254, and 0275, dated September 19, 2007, along with the following
panels 0115, 0141, 0142, 0144, 0165, 0250 dated September 17, 2007 and all
supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this ordinance.
(3) Requirement for development permit. A development permit shall
be required in conformity with this ordinance prior to the commencement of any
development activities.
(4) Compliance. No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
(5) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance is not intended
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this ordinance conflicts or overlaps with another
regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
(6) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
ordinance, all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements;
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under Tennessee statutes.
(7) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Maryville, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced
by Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-207. Designation of ordinance administrator. The stormwater
program manager, or his designee is hereby appointed as the administrator to
implement the provisions of this ordinance. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July
2007, and replaced by Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-14
19-208. Permit procedures. Application for a development permit
shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior
to any development activities. The development permit may include, but is not
limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment,
and drainage facilities.
(1) Application stage. (a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings where
BFEs are available, or to the highest adjacent grade when applicable
under this ordinance.
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
non-residential building will be flood-proofed where BFEs are available,
or to the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this ordinance.
(c) Design certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the proposed non-residential flood-proofed building will
meet the flood-proofing criteria in this section.
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(2) Construction stage. Within unnumbered A zones, where flood
elevation data is not available, the administrator shall record the elevation of
the lowest floor on the development permit. The elevation of the lowest floor
shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building
relative to the highest adjacent grade.
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder
shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor
elevation or flood-proofing level upon the completion of the lowest floor or
flood-proofing. Within unnumbered A zones, where flood elevation data is not
available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the
measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent
grade.
Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor and
certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential building,
said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder's risk. The administrator shall review the above-referenced
certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required
hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. (as added by
Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced by Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-15
19-209. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of
the administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Review of all development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied, and that proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(2) Advice to permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require
that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the
development permit. This shall include section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(3) Notification to adjacent communities and the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submission of evidence of such notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(4) For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering
data/analysis within six (6) months to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map
revision process. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(5) Record the elevation, in relation to mean sea level or the highest
adjacent grade, where applicable of the lowest floor including basement of all
new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with § 19-208.
(6) Record the actual elevation; in relation to mean sea level or the
highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new or substantially
improved buildings have been flood-proofed, in accordance with § 19-208.
(7) When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator
shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional
engineer or architect, in accordance with § 19-208.
(8) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance.
(9) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency then the administrator
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal, state, or other sources, including data developed
as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A on the community
FIRM meet the requirements of this ordinance.
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not been
established and where alternative data is not available, the administrator shall
require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or flood-proofed to a level of
19-16
at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest
adjacent grade being defined in § 19-205 of this ordinance). All applicable data
including elevations or flood-proofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth
in § 19-208.
(10) All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be
maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public
inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be
maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined
files. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, replaced by Ord. #2010-01, Jan.
2010, and amended by Ord. #2016-29, Nov. 2016)
19-210. Provisions for flood hazard reduction. (1) General
standards. In all flood prone areas the following provisions are required:
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to existing
buildings shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure;
(b) Manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with
applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces;
(c) New construction and substantial improvements to existing
buildings shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage;
(d) New construction or substantial improvements to existing
buildings shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage;
(e) All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
(f) New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;
(g) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
(h) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding;
(i) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this
ordinance; and
19-17
(j) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is not in compliance with the provision of this ordinance,
shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not further extended or
replaced.
(2) Specific standards. These provisions shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazard as provided herein:
(a) Residential construction. Where base flood elevation data
is available, new construction or substantial improvement of any
residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated no lower than two feet (2') above the base
flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood
hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls and to ensure unimpeded
movement of floodwater shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of this subsection.
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the
administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated
or flood-proofed to a level of at least three feet (3') above the highest
adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in
§ 19-205 of this ordinance). All applicable data including elevations or
flood-proofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in § 19-208.
(b) Non-residential construction. New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or
non-residential building, when BFE data is available, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated or flood-proofed no lower than
two feet (2') above the level of the base flood elevation.
Within unnumbered A zones, where base flood elevations have not
been established and where alternative data is not available, the
administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated
or flood-proofed to a level of at least three feet (3') above the highest
adjacent grade (lowest floor and highest adjacent grade being defined in
§ 19-205 of this ordinance). All applicable data including elevations or
flood-proofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in § 19-208.
Buildings located in all A zones may be flood-proofed, in lieu of
being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required
elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and are built with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall
provide such certification to the administrator as set forth in § 19-208.
19-18
(c) Elevated building. All new construction or substantial
improvements to existing buildings that include any fully enclosed areas
formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation, or required height above the highest adjacent grade, shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.
(i) Designs for complying with this requirement must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet
the following minimum criteria.
(A) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having
a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot (1') above the finish grade; and
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(ii) Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the elevated living
area (stairway or elevator); and
(iii) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms in such a way as to
impede the movement of floodwaters and all such petitions shall
comply with the provisions of § 19-210(2) of this ordinance.
(d) Standards vehicles for manufactured homes and
recreational. (i) All manufactured homes placed, or substantially
improved, on:
(A) Individual lots or parcels;
(B) In expansions to existing manufactured home
parks or subdivisions; or
(C) In new or substantially improved
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all
the requirements of new construction, including elevations
and anchoring.
(ii) All manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
must be elevated so that either:
(A) When base flood elevations are available the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a
permanent foundation no lower than two feet (2') above the
level of the base flood elevation; or
19-19
(B) Absent base flood elevations the manufactured
home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers
(or other foundation elements) at least three feet (3') in
height above the highest adjacent grade.
(iii) Any manufactured home, which has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood or that has
substantially improved, must meet the standards of § 19-210(2)(d)
of this ordinance.
(iv) All manufactured homes must be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
(v) All recreational vehicles placed on identified flood
hazard sites must either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed,
on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached structures or additions.
(C) The recreational vehicle must meet all the
requirements for new construction, including the anchoring
and elevation requirements of this section above if on the
site for longer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days.
(e) Standards for subdivisions. Subdivisions and other proposed
new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be
reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe
from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new
development is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be
reviewed to ensure that:
(i) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage.
(ii) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(iii) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(iv) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
fifty (50) lots and/or five (5) acres in area.
(3) Standards for areas of special flood hazard with established base
flood elevations and with floodways designated. Located within the areas of
19-20
special flood hazard established in § 19-206(2) are areas designated as
floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain
free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without
increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall
apply:
(a) Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill
material, new construction, substantial improvements or other
developments within the regulatory floodway. Development may be
permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or
new development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not result in any increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood level, velocities or floodway widths during the occurrence
of a base flood discharge at any point within the community. A registered
professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and
certification thereof.
(b) New construction or substantial improvements of buildings
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of
§ 19-210.
(4) Standards for areas of special flood hazard zones AE with
established base flood elevations but without floodways designated. Located
within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 19-206(2), where
streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been
designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply:
(a) No encroachments, including fill material, new structures
or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood
hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. The
engineering certification should be supported by technical data that
conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
(b) New construction or substantial improvements of buildings
shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance
with § 19-210(2).
(5) Standards for streams without established base flood elevations or
floodways (A zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 19-206, where streams exist, but no base flood data has been
provided (A zones), or where a floodway has not been delineated, the following
provisions shall apply:
19-21
(a) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not
been provided in accordance with § 19-206, then the administrator shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer the provisions of § 19-210. Only if data is
not available from these sources, then the following provisions (b) and (c)
shall apply:
(b) No encroachments, including structures or fill material,
shall be located within sixty feet (60') of the stream bank, measured from
the top of bank unless certification by registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. The
engineering certification should be supported by technical data that
conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
(c) In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation
data, new construction or substantial improvements of existing shall have
the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated
no less than three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade at the
building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements
of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of
§ 19-210(2), and "elevated buildings."
(6) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in§ 19-206(2), are
areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (1'  3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements of
residential and non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to at least two feet (2') above the flood depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, above
the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the
lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least three feet (3')
above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance
with standards of § 19-210(2), and "elevated buildings."
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential buildings may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The
structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be
flood-proofed and designed watertight to be completely flood-proofed to
at least two feet (2') above the specified FIRM flood level, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
19-22
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is
specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be flood-proofed to
at least three feet (3') above the highest adjacent grade. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions of this ordinance and shall provide
such certification to the administrator as set forth above and as required
in § 19-208.
(c) Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(d) The administrator shall certify the elevation or the highest
adjacent grade, where applicable, and the record shall become a
permanent part of the permit file.
(7) Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A-99
zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 19-206
are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection system but
where base flood elevations and flood hazard factors have not been determined.
Within these areas (A-99 zones) all provisions of §§ 19-207 through 19-210(1)
shall apply.
(8) Standards for unmapped streams. Located within Maryville,
Tennessee are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are
neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) In areas adjacent to such unmapped streams, no
encroachments including fill material or structures shall be located
within sixty feet (60') of the stream bank, measured from the top of bank
unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot (1') at any point within the locality.
(b) When new elevation data is available, new construction or
substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed
to elevations established in accordance with § 19-207. (as added by
Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced by Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-211. Review and variance procedures. (1) Board of zoning
appeals. The provisions of this section shall apply exclusively to areas of special
flood hazard areas. An appeal to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by
any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental offices,
department, or bureau affected by any decision of the administrator based on
whole or in part upon the provisions of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the board of zoning appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the
19-23
grounds thereof. Processes and procedures for hearing the appeal are outlined
in the Maryville Zoning and Land Use Ordinance.
The board of zoning appeals has been created and established by the
Council of the City of Maryville under authority granted in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 13-7-207. Specific powers and authority of the board of zoning
appeals are found in the Maryville Zoning and Land Use Ordinance.
(a) Administrative review. The City of Maryville Board of
Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision,
determination, or refusal made by the administrator or other
administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision
or regulation of this ordinance.
(b) Variance procedures. In the case of a request for a variance
the following shall apply:
(i) The City of Maryville, Tennessee Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this ordinance.
(ii) Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures (see definition) upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(iii) In passing upon such applications, the board of zoning
appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance;
and
(A) The danger that materials may be swept onto
other property to the injury of others;
(B) The danger to life and property due to flooding
or erosion;
(C) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage;
(D) The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;
(E) The necessity of the facility to a waterfront
location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility;
(F) The availability of alternative locations, not
subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(G) The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program
for that area;
(H) The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
19-24
(I) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate
of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(J) The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(iv) Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the
purposes of this ordinance, the board of zoning appeals may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary
to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance.
(v) Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(2) Conditions for variances. (a) Variances shall be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary,
considering the flood hazard; and in the instance of a historical building,
a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary so as
not to destroy the historic character and design of the building.
(b) Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and
sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; or a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(c) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance, and that such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
(d) The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and
replaced by Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-212. Legal status provisions. (1) Conflict with other ordinances.
In case of conflict between this ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or
part of any existing or future ordinance of City of Maryville, Tennessee, the most
restrictive shall in all cases apply.
(2) Validity. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause,
provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or
19-25
unconstitutional. (as added by Ord. #2007-24, July 2007, and replaced by
Ord. #2010-01, Jan. 2010)
19-26
CHAPTER 3
GRADING, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
SECTION
19-301. Purpose.
19-302. Rules applying to chapter.
19-303. Definitions.
19-304. Authority.
19-305. Existing eroding areas.
19-306. Grading permit required.
19-307. Exemptions.
19-308. Application and plan review process.
19-309. EPSC and sketch plan required components.
19-310. Conformity and amendments to approved plans.
19-311. Pre-construction inspection and meeting.
19-312. Grading permits--time limitations, phasing and conditions.
19-313. Documentation kept at the project site.
19-314. Inspections.
19-315. Bond requirements.
19-316. Fees.
19-317. General criteria.
19-318. Variances.
19-319. Right of entry.
19-320. Unlawful acts.
19-321. Penalties and enforcement.
19-322. Notice of violation.
19-323. Appeals.
19-324. Special fund created.
19-325. [Deleted.]
19-301. Purpose. The City of Maryville has in the past experienced
development causing the displacement of large quantities of earth. Soil erosion
and sediment deposition can result from such development. Sediment is one
cause of the contamination of water supplies and water resources, and is a cause
of pollution. A build-up of sediment can negatively impact resources, clog
watercourses and cause flooding, which can result in damage to public and
private lands. The result is a threat to the health, safety, and general welfare
of the community. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to provide
regulations within the City of Maryville to accomplish the following:
(1) To safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens;
(2) To preserve the value of land throughout the city;
(3) To establish reasonable and accepted standards of design and
procedures for development that prevent sediment damage;
19-27
(4) To prevent the pollution of streams, ponds and other watercourses
by erosion and sediment deposition;
(5) To minimize property damage by means of flooding;
(6) To preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community;
(7) To enable the City of Maryville to comply with the NPDES General
Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems,
TMDLs and other applicable state and federal regulations. (1985 Code, § 4-901,
as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and
Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-302. Rules applying to chapter. For the purpose of this chapter,
certain rules of construction shall apply herein as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense and
the singular includes the plural, unless otherwise indicated in the text.
(2) The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in nature.
(3) Except as herein provided, all words used in this chapter shall have
their common dictionary definition. (1985 Code, § 4-902, as replaced by Ord.
#2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-303. Definitions. (1) "Applicant." Person submitting the application
for a grading permit. Typically, this is the owner or operator of the landdisturbing
activity.
(2) "Construction related waste." Waste that is generated through
construction, land development and land-disturbing activities that may cause
adverse impacts to water quality. Construction related waste includes, but is not
limited to, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals,
litter, hazardous materials, oil and sanitary waste at the construction site.
(3) "Cut and fill slopes." Sloped areas constructed by excavating or
adding soil, rock or other materials.
(4) "Clearing." The removal of vegetation and disturbance of soil prior
to grading or excavation in anticipation of construction activities. Clearing may
also refer to wide area land disturbance in anticipation of non-construction
activities; for instance, clearing forested land in order to convert forest land to
pasture for wildlife management purposes. In the definition of discharges
associated with construction activity, clearing, grading, and excavation do not
refer to the clearing of vegetation along existing or new roadways, highways,
dams, or power lines for sight distance or other maintenance and/or safety
concerns, or cold planning, milling, and/or removal of concrete and/or
bituminous asphalt roadway pavement surfaces.
(5) "Development." The process of grading, clearing, filling, quarrying,
construction, or reconstruction to improved or unimproved real estate or other
similar activities when not excluded by exemptions from this chapter.
19-28
(6) "Erosion." The wearing away of land by action of wind, water, ice,
or gravity.
(7) "Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control plan (EPSC plan)." A
formal plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from landdisturbing
activity. The EPSC plan mirrors the SWPPP and shall be reviewed
and approved before a grading permit may be issued. The plan may be included
as part of a site plan required under another city ordinance or a separate plan
following the specifications set out in this chapter.
(8) "Grading." Any operation or occurrence by which the existing site
elevations are changed by cutting, filling, borrowing, stock piling, or where any
ground cover, natural or man-made, is removed, or any building or other
structures are removed or any water course or body of water, either natural or
man-made, is relocated on any site, thereby creating an unprotected area.
"Grading" shall be synonymous with "land-disturbing activity."
(9) "Grading permit." A permit issued to authorize excavation and/or
fill to be performed under the guidelines of this chapter.
(10) "Grading policy manual." The document entitled Grading and
Construction Site Pollution Management Policies and Procedures Manual. A
document prepared and maintained by the City of Maryville which contains
policies, procedures, technical criteria and guidelines and other supporting
documentation or tools for implementation of the provisions of this chapter.
(11) "Land-disturbing activity." Any activity on private or public land
that may result in soil erosion and the movement of sediments. Land disturbing
activities include, but are not limited to, development, re-development,
demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, logging and/or
tree chipping operations, haul roads associated with the development, and
excavation.
(12) "NPDES." National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(13) "Operator." For the purpose of this chapter and in the context of
stormwater associated with construction activity, operator means any person
associated with a construction project that meets either of the following two (2)
criteria:
(a) This person has operational control over construction plans
and specifications, including the ability to authorize modifications to
those plans and specifications. This person is typically the owner or
developer of the project or a portion of the project; or
(b) This person has day-to-day operational control of those
activities at a project which are necessary to ensure compliance with a
site plan, EPSC plan or sketch plan for the site or other permit
conditions. This person is typically a contractor or commercial builder
and is often authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities
required by approved plans or comply with other permit conditions.
(14) "Owner." The legal owner of the property as recorded in the Blount
County Register of Deeds office at the time of application of the grading permit.
19-29
(15) "Priority construction activity." Any land-disturbing activity that
is one (1) acre or greater that discharges into, or immediately upstream of,
waters the State of Tennessee recognizes as impaired for siltation or habitat
alterations or are recognized by the State of Tennessee as Exceptional
Tennessee Waters. Also, priority construction activities can include landdisturbing
activities of any size that, in the judgment of the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee, require coordination with
adjacent construction activities or have conditions that indicate a higher than
normal risk for discharge of sediment or other construction related wastes.
(16) "Project." The entire proposed development regardless of the size
of the area of land to be disturbed.
(17) "Redevelopment." The improvement of a lot or lots that have been
previously developed.
(18) "Sketch plan." An erosion prevention and sediment control plan
required for land-disturbing activities that are greater than one-tenth (0.1) acre
and less than one (1) acre.
(19) "Soil stabilization." Measures which protect soil from erosion.
(20) "Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)." A written plan
required by and prepared in conformance with the State of Tennessee General
NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction
Activities.
(21) "Variance." a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permit construction or activities in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter, where specified enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
(1985 Code, § 4-903, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14,
March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-304. Authority. (1) The director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee has the authority to promulgate rules, regulations, policies and
guidance consistent with this chapter in order to carry out the meaning and
intent in a Grading and Construction Site Pollution Management Policies and
Procedures Manual (henceforth referred to as the "grading policy manual"). The
policies, criteria and requirements stated in the grading policy manual shall be
enforceable, consistent with other provisions of this chapter.
(2) In the event that the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee determines that a violation of any provision of this chapter has
occurred, or that work does not have a required grading permit, or that work
does not comply with an approved plan or grading permit, the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee may issue a notice of violation
to the permittee or property owner and/or any other person or entity having
responsibility for construction work performed at a site development, at which
time the penalty provisions of this chapter shall be implemented. (1985
Code, § 4-904, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14, March
2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-30
19-305. Existing eroding areas. Upon written notification from the
director of engineering and public works or his/her designee, the owner or
operator of a parcel of land which exhibits unstable or eroding soil conditions
shall correct the problem within the time specified in the written notice. This
period may be extended upon request if conditions warrant. Minimum correction
measures shall include soil stabilization and revegetation of all exposed soil
surfaces and otherwise engaging in vegetative erosion prevention and sediment
control practices. Before commencing corrective measures, the owner or operator
shall consult with the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee to determine an acceptable method of correction. (1985 Code, § 4-905,
as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and
Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-306. Grading permit required. No individual, partnership, firm,
association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate,
commission, board, public or private institution, utility, county, city, or other
political subdivision, cooperative, or any other legal entity shall engage in any
land-disturbing activity within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville
without meeting the requirements of this chapter, unless exempted under
§ 19-307.
(1) The owner or operator of the following land disturbing activities
must obtain a grading permit prior to commencing land-disturbing activities,
unless exempted from this requirement under § 19-307:
(a) Any new development or redevelopment that will result in
land-disturbing activity that is greater than one-tenth (0.1) of an acre.
(b) Installation, maintenance and repair of any underground
public utility lines when such activities occur within fifty feet (50') of
waters of the state.
(2) Owners or operators of land-disturbing activities are responsible
for obtaining all applicable state and federal permits or approvals prior to
requesting a grading permit from the City of Maryville.
(3) Land-disturbing activities not exempted under § 19-307 shall
require:
(a) Grading permit application;
(b) Five (5) copies of an EPSC plan (required for land disturbing
activities equal to or greater than one (1) acre, including those activities
less than one (1) acre that are part of a larger plan of development or
sale) or, one (1) copy of a sketch plan (required for land disturbing
activities less than one (1) acre), prepared in conformance with this
chapter;
(c) Appropriate fee, if applicable;
(d) Review of the EPSC plan or sketch plan by director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee for compliance with City
of Maryville regulations and policies;
19-31
(e) Grading permit;
(f) Site inspection, performed in accordance with this chapter;
(g) Ongoing and final inspection.
(4) The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
may require land disturbing activities that are less than one (1) acre to develop
a full EPSC plan, as set forth in this chapter and the grading policy manual, as
deemed necessary to protect streams and adjacent properties from erosion and
off-site sediment deposition.
(5) Land-disturbing activities not exempted under § 19-307 of this
chapter shall not commence until:
(a) The owner or operator obtains a Notice of Coverage (NOC)
under the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharge of
Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities, or certification that
the land-disturbing activity does not require coverage under the state
permit, prior to obtaining a grading permit. A copy of the NOC and the
associated Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) or
certification that the site does not require coverage under the state
permit must be submitted with the EPSC plan or sketch plan.
(b) The owner or operator obtains all applicable permits for the
applicable development or redevelopment from state and federal agencies.
A copy of the permit(s) obtained must be submitted with the EPSC plan
or sketch plan. (1985 Code, § 4-906, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July
2005, Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-307. Exemptions. The exemptions listed in this section shall not be
construed as exempting these land-disturbing activities from providing adequate
erosion prevention and sediment control measures to protect adjoining property
owners, nearby watercourses and the public right-of-way from sediment
impacts. The owner or operator whose activities have been exempted from the
requirements for a grading permit shall nevertheless be responsible for
otherwise conducting all land-disturbing activities in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws including responsibility for
controlling erosion, sediment deposition and runoff. The director of engineering
and public works or his/her designee may require owners or operators of exempt
activities to obtain a grading permit as deemed necessary to protect adjacent
properties or streams from erosion and off-site sediment deposition.
Grading permits are not required for the following land-disturbing
activities:
(1) Installation, maintenance and repair of any underground public
utility line when such activity has a land-disturbance less than one (1) acre,
occurs on an existing right-of-way, and a cut or excavation permit has been
obtained, except within fifty feet (50') of waters of the state, in which event a
grading permit is required.
19-32
(2) Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation or
harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and planting of pasture
land, forestry land management practices including harvesting, farm ponds,
dairy operations, and livestock and poultry management practices.
(3) Emergency work to protect life or property. Upon completion of
emergency work the disturbed area shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance
with this chapter. The city must be contacted within seventy-two (72) hours of
the incident.
(4) Minor residential and land-disturbing activities such as home
gardens and individual home repairs, landscaping, or maintenance work. (1985
Code, § 4-907, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14, March
2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-308. Application and plan review process. (1) No grading permit
shall be issued until an EPSC or sketch plan (if required) has been approved by
the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee.
(2) The EPSC plan shall comply with the requirements set forth in
State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater
Associated with Construction Activities, this chapter and in the grading policy
manual. The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee may
require additional information if deemed necessary prior to reviewing a plan.
(1985 Code, § 4-908, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14,
March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-309. EPSC and sketch plan required components. (1) EPSC
plans submitted to the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee shall be prepared in accordance with the Tennessee Construction
General Permit.
(2) EPSC plans submitted to the director of engineering and public
works or his/her designee shall contain the required components of a SWPPP,
as listed in and in accordance with the Tennessee General NPDES Permit for
Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities, and shall
include any additional required elements listed in the grading policy manual
and as applicable to the proposed land-disturbing activity.
(3) Sketch plans submitted to the director of engineering and public
works or his/her designee shall contain the required components, as listed in
and in accordance with the grading policy manual and as applicable to the
proposed land-disturbing activity.
(4) The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
may request that additional information be submitted as necessary to allow a
thorough review of the site conditions and proposed erosion prevention and
sediment control measures.
19-33
(5) Omission of any required items shall render the plans incomplete
and they will be returned to the applicant prior to review by the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee.
(6) All EPSC and sketch plans shall be developed by the owner or
his/her agent.
(7) All EPSC plans shall be prepared and certified by qualified persons
as set forth in the Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of
Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities.
(8) Any legally protected state or federally listed threatened or
endangered species and/or critical habitat located in the area of land-disturbing
activities (if any) shall be identified in the EPSC plan. If such species are
identified in the EPSC plan or by the city, then the EPSC plan shall also include
written documentation from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service that
indicates:
(a) Approval of the best management practices that will be
utilized to eliminate potential impacts to legally protected state or
federally listed threatened or endangered species and/or critical habitat.
Said best management practices shall also be included on the EPSC plan;
or
(b) A finding of no potential impact as a result of the proposed
land-disturbing activity. (1985 Code, § 4-909, as replaced by Ord.
#2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan.
2013)
19-310. Conformity and amendments to approved plans. (1) The
approved EPSC or sketch plan, upon which subsequent permits may be issued
by the City of Maryville, shall be adhered to during all grading and construction
activities. Under no circumstance is the owner or operator allowed to deviate
from the approved EPSC or sketch plan without prior approval of a plan
amendment by the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee.
(2) The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
shall require the grading permit holder to take corrective actions, which may
include amendment of an approved EPSC or sketch plan, if it is determined that
the approved plan does not adequately protect against erosion, off-site sediment
deposition or discharges of other construction related wastes despite the
adherence of the owner or operator with approved protective practices.
(3) The owner or operator is required to resubmit an EPSC or sketch
plan for approval by the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee if site plans or conditions change during land-disturbing activities.
(4) Plan amendments must comply with this chapter and the grading
policy manual. (1985 Code, § 4-910, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005,
and Ord. #2008-14, March 2008)
19-34
19-311. Pre-construction inspection and meeting. (1) For all landdisturbing
activities greater than 0.10 acres, a grading permit shall be issued
only after a pre-construction inspection by the director of engineering and public
works or his/her designee indicates that perimeter erosion prevention and
sediment control measures have been installed in accordance with the approved
plan.
(2) Attendance at a pre-construction meeting with the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee prior to issuance of a grading
permit is required for owners and operators of developments or redevelopments
that are:
(a) New residential subdivisions; or
(b) A priority construction activity, as defined in this chapter;
or
(c) Will discharge stormwater runoff to Exceptional Tennessee
Waters.
(3) Owners and operators of land development activities not listed in
subsection (2) of this section may be required to attend a pre-construction
meeting when coordination with adjacent construction activities is needed or
when conditions indicate a higher than normal risk for pollutant discharges.
(1985 Code, § 4-911, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14,
March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-312. Grading permits--time limitations, phasing and
conditions. (1) Grading permits shall expire one (1) year from the date of
permit issuance. After one (1) year, the grading permit will become null and void
and the plan must be resubmitted for approval.
(2) If a tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate grading
permit may be required for each phase.
(3) The issuance of a grading permit does not authorize the discharge
of hazardous substances or oil resulting from a spill that occurs on the site of the
land-disturbing activity. (1985 Code, § 4-912, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July
2005, Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-313. Documentation kept at the project site. Owners or operators
of land disturbing activities that require an EPSC or sketch plan shall keep the
documentation listed below at the site of the land-disturbing activity from the
date that the grading permit is approved to the date of termination of coverage
of the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater
Associated with Construction Activities, as identified on the Notice of
Termination (NOT). Owners or operators with day-to-day operational control
over implementation of the EPSC or sketch plan shall have a copy of the plan
available at a central location on-site for the use of all operators and those
identified as having responsibilities under the plan whenever they are on the
site of the land-disturbing activity:
19-35
(1) A copy of the approved EPSC or sketch plan;
(2) Documentation of inspection of the erosion prevention and
sediment control practices located on the site of the land-disturbing activity,
prepared in accordance with the inspection documentation requirements of
State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater
Associated with Construction Activities;
(3) Any other records required by the Tennessee General NPDES
Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Constructed Activities.
(1985 Code, § 4-913, as replaced by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14,
March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-314. Inspections. The owner or operator, or his/her designee, shall
perform regular, documented inspections of the land-disturbing activity in
accordance with the inspection requirements of the State of Tennessee NPDES
Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities,
this chapter and the City of Maryville Grading and Construction Pollution
Management Policies and Procedures Manual. (1985 Code, § 4-914, as replaced
by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02,
Jan. 2013)
19-315. Bond requirements. (1) When reviewing any application for a
grading permit, the city shall consider the past record of the permit applicant
in complying with previous grading permits, plans, and this chapter. The city
may require the permit applicant to post a performance bond prior to issuing the
grading permit. If a permit applicant has had three (3) or more violations of
previous permits or this chapter as amended within three (3) years prior to the
date of filing of the application under construction with city shall require a
performance bond with the permit application.
(2) Upon forfeiture, the city at its election may use the performance
bond proceeds or any part thereof to hire a contractor to stabilize and place
erosion control measures on the site of the land-disturbing activity.
(3) A performance bond in the form of government security, cash,
irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination must be provided for the
following conditions:
(a) Rough grading, site development, large residential
developments, or commercial development when there is a disturbed area
greater than five (5) acres.
(b) Where there exists a substantial likelihood for runoff or
sediment problems to adversely impact city rights-of-way, other property,
or waters of the state.
(c) When a site drains into sinkholes or when the site is used for
a borrow pit or waste area.
19-36
(4) Any bond amount shall be based on a remediation and completion
estimate as determined by the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee based on the size of the disturbed area.
(5) The city may refuse brokers or financial institutions the right to
provide surety bonds, letter of credit, etc. based upon past performance, ratings
or the financial institution, or other appropriate sources of reference
information.
(6) Within sixty (60) days of the final inspection, the balance of all
bonds not extended or obligated shall be refunded or terminated except as
otherwise provided therein.
(7) Performance bond is released upon receiving NOT from TDEC
along with site visit and release approval by the director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee. (as added by Ord. #2007-27, July 2005, and
replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-316. Fees. The city council at its discretion may set fees for obtaining
a grading permit. Such fee schedule may be established by resolution.
All development activities which require right-of-way cuts or excavation
within the development site and shown on a site plan shall be subject to all
applicable fees. Grading activities which involve no construction or right-of-way
cuts shall be subject to the grading permit fee schedule only.
After the city completes three (3) documented final land disturbance
inspections requested by the permit holder for the same permit, a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall be required for each additional inspection request of the
same land disturbance permit. (as added by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, and
replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-317. General criteria. The following general rights are minimum
requirements for the control of pollutants from land-disturbing activities. All soil
erosion prevention and sediment control measures and practices shall conform
to the requirements of this chapter. The application or measures and practices
shall apply to all features of the site including street, utility installations,
drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements.
Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sediment pollution
during all stages of any land-disturbing activity.
(1) Requirements for best management practices. Owners and
operators of land-disturbing activities shall implement appropriate erosion
prevention and sediment control Best Management Practices (BMPs) in
accordance with the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges
of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities and the Tennessee
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
(2) Technical design criteria. The design of erosion prevention and
sediment and pollution management controls, including BMPs, stabilization
practices and structural practices, shall be performed in accordance with criteria
19-37
and requirements stated in State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for
Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities and the
Tennessee Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, except where more
stringent criteria are required by the director of engineering and public works
or his/her designee.
(3) Control measure construction and maintenance standards. The
installation, inspection and maintenance of erosion prevention and sediment
control practices, stabilization practices and structural practices shall be
performed in accordance with the standards provided in the State of Tennessee
General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with
Construction Activities and the Tennessee Sediment and Erosion Control
Handbook, latest edition, except where more stringent standards are required
by the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee. If periodic
inspections or other information indicate that a control measure has been used
inappropriately, or incorrectly, the owner or operator must replace or modify the
control for relevant site situations.
(4) More stringent criteria or standards. The director of engineering
and public works or his/her designee may require more stringent criteria and
standards where deemed necessary to reduce the potential for pollution impacts
to streams, public property or adjacent property from sediment-laden
stormwater runoff or discharges of other construction related wastes.
(5) Control of other construction related wastes. Owners and operators
of land-disturbing activities shall control other construction related wastes, as
defined in this chapter, in accordance with the State of Tennessee General
NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction
Activities, except where more stringent criteria are required by the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee. The discharge of such wastes
in the stormwater discharges from a land-disturbing activity shall be prevented
or minimized in accordance with the EPSC or sketch plan for the site of the
activity.
(6) Installation of controls before grading begins. Erosion prevention
and sediment controls and measures for the control of other construction related
wastes shall be in place and functional before earth moving operations begin,
and must be constructed and maintained throughout land-disturbing activities.
Temporary controls and measures may be removed at the beginning of the work
day, but must be replaced at the end of the work day.
(7) Establishment of permanent vegetation. A permanent vegetative
cover shall be established on disturbed areas not otherwise permanently
stabilized. Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until a
ground cover is achieved in accordance with the final stabilization requirements
of the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater
Associated with Construction Activities and if the vegetation is, in the opinion
of the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee, mature
enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive seasonal weather
19-38
conditions. If it is determined by the director of engineering and public works
or his/her designee that the vegetation will not withstand seasonal weather
conditions, the release of unobligated monies or bonds shall be determined by
the development standards board of appeals and may be reasonably delayed.
(8) Protection of adjacent properties. Sediment controls shall be
designed to retain mobilized sediment on the site of the land-disturbing activity.
Properties adjacent to the site of a land-disturbance activity shall be protected
from sediment deposition. If sediment escapes the construction site, off-site
accumulations of sediment that have not reached a stream must be removed at
a frequency sufficient to minimize offsite impacts or in accordance with the
State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges of Stormwater
Associated with Construction Activities, whichever is more stringent. (For
example, fugitive sediment that has escaped the construction site and has
collected in a street must be removed so that it is not subsequently washed into
storm sewers and streams by the next rain and/or so that it does not pose a
safety hazard to users of public streets). Owners or operators shall not initiate
remediation/restoration of a stream without first receiving approval from the
City of Maryville and TDEC. Approval for remediation/storation efforts from the
City of Maryville does not authorize access to private property. Arrangements
concerning removal of sediment on adjoining property must be settled by the
owner or operator with the adjoining landowner.
(9) Timing and stabilization of sediment trapping measures. Sediment
basins and traps, perimeter dikes, and other measures intended to trap
sediment on-site must be constructed as a first step in grading and be made
functional before up slope land disturbance takes place. Earthen structures such
as dams, dikes, and diversions must be stabilized within seven (7) days of
construction or in accordance with the State of Tennessee General NPDES
Permit for Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities,
whichever is more stringent. These measures must be maintained in good
working order and must remain in place until such time as the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee deems the area to be stabilized
or in accordance with the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for
Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities, whichever
is more stringent.
(10) Sediment basins. Temporary sediment basins shall be designed in
accordance with the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for Discharges
of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities, except where more
stringent criteria are required by the director of engineering and public works
or his/her designee. Any equivalent control measure that is substituted for a
temporary sediment basin must be justified and approved by the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee.
Permanent detention ponds that will be used as sediment basins during
construction shall be designed so that the permanent detention pond outlet
structure serves as the outlet structure of the sediment basin. All permanent
19-39
detention ponds used as sediment basins shall be cleaned of loose sediments, regraded
to ensure design capacity, and stabilized prior to conversion. Converted
detention ponds must be approved by the director of engineering and public
works or his/her designee prior to release of bond. In addition, sod shall be used
as the stabilization method on sediment basins that must remain in place for an
indefinite period of time, such as during residential subdivision development.
Sod shall be installed from the permanent pool elevation to the top of the berm.
Stabilization measures other than sod may be approved by the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee.
(11) Sodding detention ponds, ditches and draining swales. Sod shall be
used on detention ponds, ditches and drainage swales or if velocities warrant
stabilization. Stabilization methods other than sod may be approved by the
director of engineering and public works or his/her designee. The owner or
operator shall maintain sodded areas until vegetation is permanently
established.
(12) Cut and fill slopes. Cut and fill slopes must be designed and
constructed in a manner which will prevent erosion. Consideration must be
given to the length and steepness of the slope, the soil type, up slope drainage
area, groundwater conditions, and other applicable factors. Slopes which are
found to be eroding excessively within one (1) year of project completion must
be provided with additional slope stabilizing measures until the problem is
corrected.
The following guidelines shall be utilized to prepare and implement an
adequate design for cut and fill slopes:
(a) Topsoil for the area should be stockpiled and then used for
replacement on the graded area.
(b) Roughened soil surfaces are generally preferred to smooth
surfaces on slopes.
(c) Diversions should be constructed at the top of long steep
slopes which have significant drainage areas above the slope. Diversions
or terraces may also be used to reduce slope length.
(d) Concentrated stormwater should not be allowed to flow
down cut or fill slopes unless contained within an adequate temporary or
permanent channel, flume, or slope drain structure.
(e) Wherever a slope face crosses a water seepage plane which
endangers the stability of the slope, adequate drainage or other
protection should be provided.
(f) Slopes 3:1 or greater shall be stabilized with erosion control
matting or other method(s) approved by the director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee. The owner or operator shall maintain
matted areas until permanent vegetation is established.
(13) Working in or crossing watercourses. Construction vehicles shall
be kept out of watercourses. The channel (including bed and banks) must always
be re-stabilized immediately after in-channel work is completed. Where a live
19-40
watercourse must be crossed by construction vehicles regularly during
construction, a temporary stream crossing must be provided, the design of which
must be approved by the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee and the State of Tennessee where appropriate.
(14) Underground utility construction. The construction of underground
utility lines shall be subject to the following criteria:
(a) Where consistent with safety and space considerations,
excavated material shall be placed on the uphill side of trenches.
(b) Trench dewatering devices shall discharge in a manner
which will not adversely affect flowing streams, drainage systems, or offsite
property.
(15) Temporary stone construction entrance. Wherever construction
access routes intersect paved public roads, provisions must be made to minimize
the transport of sediment by runoff or vehicle tracking onto the paved surface
by installation of a temporary stone construction exit in accordance with the
Tennessee Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. The temporary
construction exit shall be maintained for the duration of the project or until a
permanent access drive is constructed. The stone layer shall be replaced or
overlain with new stone when necessary to ensure that sediment is not
transported off the site of the land-disturbing activity. Where sediment is
transported onto a public road surface, the roads shall be cleaned thoroughly at
the end of each day or more often if deemed necessary. Sediment shall be
removed from roads by shoveling or sweeping and be transported to a sedimentcontrolled
disposal area. Street washing shall be allowed only after sediment is
removed in this manner.
(16) Disposition of temporary measures. All temporary erosion
prevention and sediment control measures shall be disposed of within thirty (30)
days after final site stabilization is achieved or after the temporary measures
are no longer needed, unless otherwise authorized by the director of engineering
and public works or his/her designee. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soft
areas resulting from the disposition of temporary measures shall be properly
disposed of and/or permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and off-site
sediment deposition.
(17) Stripping, clearing and grading to be minimized. Stripping of
vegetation, re-grading, and other development activities shall be conducted so
as to minimize erosion. Clearing and grubbing must be held to the minimum
necessary. Pre-construction vegetative cover shall not be destroyed, removed, or
disturbed more than ten (10) calendar days prior to grading or earth moving.
Construction must be sequenced to minimize the exposure time of cleared areas.
(as added by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March
2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-318. Variances. The director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee may waive or modify any of the general criteria which are
19-41
deemed inappropriate or too restrictive for site conditions, by granting a
variance as set forth herein. Variances may be granted in writing under the
following conditions:
(1) At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request variances
to become part of the approved erosion prevention and sediment control plan.
The applicant must explain the reasons for requesting variances in writing.
Specific variances which are allowed must be documented on the approved
erosion prevention and sediment control plan.
(2) During construction, a permit holder may request variances to the
approved erosion prevention and sediment control plan. Until such time as the
amended plan is approved by the city, the land-disturbing activity shall not
proceed, except in accordance with the erosion prevention and sediment control
plan as originally approved.
(3) Absent universal circumstances, a response to the variance request
should be given by the city within twenty (20) working days. Without a written
approval, no variance shall be considered valid. (as added by Ord. #2005-27, July
2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan.
2013)
19-319. Right of entry. The director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee may enter upon any property which discharges or contributes,
or is believed to discharge or contribute, to stormwater runoff or the stormwater
system; stream; natural drainage way; or other stormwater system during
reasonable hours to monitor, remove foreign objects or blockages, and to inspect
for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2005-27,
July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan.
2013)
19-320. Unlawful acts. The following are unlawful acts, any person who
may:
(1) Violate any provision of this chapter;
(2) Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter;
(3) Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful notice to abate issued by
the manager, which has not been timely appealed to the development standards
board of appeals, within the time specified by such notice; or
(4) Violate any lawful order of the city or the development standards
board of appeals within the time allowed by such order shall be guilty of a
violation. Each day of such violation or failure or refusal to comply shall be
deemed a separate offense and punishable accordingly. (as added by Ord. #2005-
27, July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02,
Jan. 2013)
19-42
19-321. Penalties and enforcement. (1) Any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
provided in the general provisions of the city code. Each day that a continuing
violation of this chapter is maintained or permitted to remain shall constitute
a separate offense.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be assessed
a civil penalty by the city of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each day of the violation. Each
violation shall constitute a separate violation. The city may also recover all
damages proximately caused to the city by such violation.
(3) In assessing the civil penalty, the city shall follow the provisions
of the chart set forth herein and for any violation not listed may consider the
following in determining the appropriate amount:
(a) The harm done to the public health or the environment;
(b) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be of substantial
economic detriment to the illegal activity;
(c) The economic benefit gained by the violator;
(d) The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation;
(e) Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by
the municipality;
(f) The amount of penalty established by ordinance or
resolution for specific categories for violations; and
(g) All equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of
imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
(4) In addition to the civil penalty, the city may recover all damages
proximately caused by the violator to the city which may include any reasonable
expenses and attorney's fees incurred in investigating, enforcing and/or
correcting the violations of this chapter.
(5) The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation
of this chapter and the existence of any other remedy in law or equity shall be
no defense to any such action. The city attorney may also initiate civil
proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages
for any damages caused to publicly owned stormwater facilities by any person.
(6) The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not
exclusive, and is not to be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one (1)
or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted.
(7) If the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
finds any person, firm, or entity has engaged in or directed land-disturbing
activities without having obtained a required grading permit from the City of
Maryville, the following shall occur:
(a) First offense. A stop work order and a notice of violation will
be issued.
19-43
(b) If work continues. Assessment of civil penalties in the
minimum amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum amount of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each day work continues without a
grading permit.
(c) The permit fees will automatically double.
(8) If the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
finds any person, firm, or entity has engaged in or directed land-disturbing
activities that is subject to the State of Tennessee General NPDES Permit for
Discharges of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activities without
having obtained the required NPDES permit, the following shall occur:
(a) First offense. A stop work order and a notice of violation will
be issued. TDEC will be notified of the violation. The owner/operator will
be required to obtain a grading permit per § 19-306(3). The stop work
order will not be rescinded until the required NPDES and grading
permits are obtained.
(b) If work continues. Assessment of civil penalties in the
minimum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a maximum
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each day work continues
without the required permits.
(c) The permit fees will automatically double.
(9) Enforcement and penalties for all other violations of this chapter
shall occur in the following manner:
(a) First offense. Written warning with a maximum of two (2)
days for compliance. If conditions warrant in the judgment of the director
of engineering and public works or his/her designee, a stop work order
will be immediately issued.
(b) Second offense. Notice of violation, stop work order,
suspension of all city inspections until violation is corrected.
(c) Third offense. Notice of violation, stop work order,
suspension of all city inspections until the violation is corrected, TDEC
notification and the imposition of a civil penalty in accordance with the
following:
Violation Max. Penalty Min. Penalty
Failure to obtain grading permit
coverage
$5,000.00 $2,500.00
Notice of coverage and grading permit
not posted on site
$5,000.00 $500.00
No SWPPP and/or EPSC plan on site $5,000.00 $1,000.00
19-44
Violation Max. Penalty Min. Penalty
EPSC plan incomplete or not kept
current with site conditions and best
management practices
$5,000.00 $500.00
Failure to resubmit EPSC plan for
approval (after direction to do so by
the director of engineering and public
works or his/her designee)
$5,000.00 $500.00
EPSC measures not constructed in
accordance with approved plan
$5,000.00 $1,000.00
EPSC measures not properly
maintained
$5,000.00 $1,000.00
Disturbance more than that allowed
by the State of Tennessee General
NPDES Permit for Discharges of
Stormwater Associated with
Construction Activities at one time
$5,000.00 $1,000.00
Failure to designate and maintain
buffer zone (where applicable)
$5,000.00 $1,000.00
Failure to have certified inspector $5,000.00 $500.00
Failure to retain sediment on site $5,000.00 $1,000.00
Pollutant (sediment or other
construction related waste) discharge
into waters of the state
$5,000.00 $2,500.00
Violating any other term or condition
of this chapter and/or a stormwater
NPDES permit
$5,000.00 $500.00
(d) An additional penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall
be added to the schedule of penalties, up to a maximum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00), for any person or entity that has more than three (3)
related offenses or has a documented history of three or more offenses at
multiple development or redevelopment sites in the City of Maryville.
(10) Any performance bond posted may be forfeited based on the
circumstances if compliance is not achieved after notice of violation within the
time specified in the notice. Any grading permit granted may also be suspended.
19-45
(11) All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance
and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has
occurred, and the City of Maryville has released the stop work order after
inspection of the site indicates conformance. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or an agent of the owner, or the
person in charge of the job site, or conspicuously posted at the project location,
and shall state the necessary corrective actions with a completion date before
other activities can resume.
(12) Any person or entity who receives three (3) related written notices
of violations shall be required to retake or, in the case of an entity, to have its
management retake the Level I Fundamentals of Erosion Prevention and
Sediment Control Workshop sponsored by the TDEC or approved equal. If after
completing the course again, the same person or entity receives a subsequent
written environmental violation within three (3) years of completing the course,
requests for other city grading permits will be denied to that person. The person
may appeal within thirty (30) days of the denial by requesting a hearing by the
city manager or his designee to attempt to obtain the desired permits. (as added
by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and
Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-322. Notice of violation. Whenever the director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee determines that a violation of any provision of
this chapter has occurred, or that a land-disturbing activity is being performed
without a required plan or permit, or that the land-disturbing activity does not
comply with an approved plan or permit, the director of engineering and public
works or his/her designee may issue a notice of violation to the property owner
or operator, utility, facility operator, lessee, tenant, contractor, permittee, the
equipment operator and/or any other person or entity doing work on the site of
the land-disturbing activity. The notice of violation shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of
where the violation has occurred;
(3) List the violation;
(4) State the action required;
(5) Provide a deadline for compliance or to stop work. (as added by
Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and
Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-323. Appeals. Appeal or review of a civil penalty or damage
assessment under this section shall be made to the City Council of the City of
Maryville by any person incurring a damage assessment or civil penalty. Such
review shall be requested within thirty (30) days after the damage assessment
or civil penalty is served by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
manager's office. If a petition for review of such damage assessment or civil
19-46
penalty is not filed within thirty (30) days after the damage assessment or civil
penalty is served in any manner authorized by law, the violator shall be deemed
to have consented to the damage assessment or civil penalty and it shall become
final. The alleged violator may appeal a decision of the city council, pursuant to
the provisions of state law found in title 27, chapter 8. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days or a
later date mutually agreed upon by both parties. Ten (10) days prior, notice of
the time, date and location of said hearing shall be published in the Maryville-
Alcoa Daily Times or its equivalent local paper. Ten (10) days notice shall be
provided to the aggrieved party at the address provided at the time of the
appeal. (as added by Ord. #2005-27, July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-14,
March 2008, and Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-324. Special fund created. All damages and civil penalties collected
under this chapter, following adjustment for the expenses incurred in making
such collections, shall be allocated and appropriated for the administration of
the city's stormwater program. (as added by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and
Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-325. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #2008-14, March 2008, and deleted
by Ord. #2013-02, Jan. 2013)
19-47
CHAPTER 4
MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAY DRAINAGE CULVERTS1
SECTION
19-401. Maintenance of residential driveway drainage culverts.
19-402. Maintenance of multi-family residential, commercial and industrial
driveway drainage culverts.
19-403. Time limitation to make repairs on drainage culverts.
19-401. Maintenance of residential driveway drainage culverts.
Where residential driveways cross streetside drainage ditches requiring
drainage culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner served by
the driveway, to maintain the drainage culvert in such a manner as to ensure
an uninterrupted flow through the drainage culvert at all times. In the event
of the drainage culvert being declared unusable by the city engineer, the owner
of the property served by the driveway shall be responsible for purchasing a
replacement drainage culvert. The installation of the replacement drainage
culvert will be made by the City of Maryville. The city engineer shall determine
drainage culvert location, alignment, material, size and length. (1985 Code,
§ 12-501)
19-402. Maintenance of multi-family residential, commercial and
industrial driveway drainage culverts. Where multi-family residential,
commercial and industrial driveways cross streetside drainage ditches requiring
drainage culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner served by
the driveway to maintain the drainage culvert in such a manner as to ensure an
uninterrupted flow through the drainage culvert at all times. In the event of the
drainage culvert being declared unusable by the city engineer, the owner of the
property served by the driveway shall be responsible for purchasing a
replacement drainage culvert; and for the installation of the drainage culvert.
The city engineer shall determine drainage culvert location, alignment,
material, size and length. (1985 Code, § 12-502)
19-403. Time limitation to make repairs on drainage culverts. In
the event a property owner is told by the city engineer that maintenance or
replacement of the drainage culvert is required, the owner shall have sixty (60)
days from the time notified by the city engineer to complete the required work.
However, if the public welfare and health are endangered by a condition which
needs to be corrected, the city engineer shall specify a time period less than sixty
(60) days in which the work shall be completed. (1985 Code, § 12-503)
1This chapter renumbered in conjunction with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
19-48
CHAPTER 5
RULES, RATES AND CHARGES FOR
THE STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE1
SECTION
19-501. Rules, rates, and charges adopted.
19-502. Findings.
19-503. Definitions.
19-504. Determination and modification of stormwater service charges.
19-505. Effective date of stormwater service charges.
19-506. Stormwater service charges.
19-507. Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges.
19-508. Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, and collections.
19-509. Application of utility service charges billed in common.
19-510. Removal or cessation of utility services.
19-511. Appeals.
19-512. City of Maryville, Tennessee Stormwater Utility Credit Manual for
Stormwater Fees.
19-501. Rules, rates and charges adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by §§ 68-221-1101 through 68-221-1113 of the Tennessee Code
Annotated and for the purpose of providing stormwater management operations
and establishing a stormwater utility service charge within the City of
Maryville, the "Rules, Rates, and Charges for the Stormwater Utility Service
Charge", are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this code.
(as added by Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-502. Findings. The Council of the City of Maryville makes the
following additional findings:
(1) An equitable approach to funding stormwater management services
and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service charges upon
properties that is related to burden of stormwater quantity and quality control
service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city.
(2) Such schedule of service charges can be complemented by other
funding methods that address specific needs, including but not limited to
allocations of local option sales taxes to stormwater drainage improvement
projects, collection of fees for special services including but not limited to plans
review and inspections, and establishment of a capital recovery fee or fees
consistent with state law.
1This chapter renumbered in conjunction with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
19-49
(3) A service charge credit is an appropriate means of adjusting service
charges in recognition that private stormwater systems and/or actions can
effectively reduce or eliminate the burden of stormwater quantity and quality
control service requirements and costs that a property or properties pose for the
city. In addition, the value to the stormwater utility of certain actions and
practices performed by property owners and other stormwater utility customers
may be recognized by credits based on other factors, including but not limited
to the avoided cost of public information and education realized by the utility
when public information and education about stormwater management is
provided by the public school system.
(4) Impervious area is the most important factor influencing
stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the
city, and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating stormwater
service charges and associated credits. (as added by Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-503. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply:
(1) "Credit" shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a
stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and
continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site
stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by the
property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the
stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits
for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that
such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the individual property.
Credits shall be defined and implemented in a City of Maryville Stormwater
Credit Policy Manual which shall be produced by the city engineer, and changed
as deemed necessary at the sole discretion of the city engineer.
(2) "Customers of the stormwater utility" shall include all persons,
properties, and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition,
management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the stormwater
management programs, systems, and facilities and regulation of public and
private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and
persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as
a result of the stormwater management program.
(3) "Detached dwelling unit" shall mean developed land containing one
structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or
more rooms with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by
one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes,
and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land.
Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the
presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as
garages, carports, or small storage buildings. Detached dwelling unit can also
include developed land that has a non-residential use of a dwelling unit
19-50
designed for occupancy for one family so long as such use does not result in
additional impervious areas, such as parking spaces, impervious surfaced
playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices,
storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar nonresidential
uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land
containing: manufactured homes and mobile homes located within
manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others
than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes: or multiple-unit
residential properties.
(4) "Developed land" shall mean property altered from a natural state
by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of impervious
surfaces as defined in this chapter.
(5) "Duplexes and triplexes" shall mean developed land containing two
(duplex) or three (triplex) attached residential dwelling units located on one or
more parcels of land.
(6) "Equivalent residential unit (ERU)" of impervious area shall mean
the median impervious coverage of detached dwelling unit properties in the City
of Maryville as determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for
determining stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties or
classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other properties. Two thousand
four hundred (2,400) square feet of impervious area shall be one equivalent
residential unit (ERU).
(7) "Flood control facilities" shall mean all natural and manmade
conveyances and structures for which the partial or full purpose or use is to
convey surface flood runoff water within the jurisdictional boundaries of
Maryville. This includes all natural conveyances for which the city has assumed
a level of maintenance responsibility, to which the city has made improvements,
against the flooding of which the city must make provision to protect public and
private property, or for which the city is accountable under federal or state
regulations for protecting the water quality within its jurisdictional boundaries.
(8) "Impervious surfaces" shall mean those areas which prevent or
impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural
conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not
limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots,
storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or
plastic coverings.
(9) "Multiple dwelling unit residential properties" shall mean
developed land whereon four or more attached residential dwelling units are
located and shall include, but not be limited to, apartment houses,
condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses,
group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in
which four or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside.
In the application of stormwater service charge rates, multiple dwelling unit
properties shall be treated as other developed lands. However, multiple
19-51
dwelling unit residential properties where individual residential dwelling units
are owned independently, such as residential condominiums, may be treated as
detached dwelling unit properties in the application of stormwater service
charge rates.
(10) "Other developed land" shall mean, but shall not be limited to,
multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile
home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures,
industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas
covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties,
public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and
convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces,
water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants.
(11) "Stormwater" shall mean stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff,
surface runoff, street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance,
infiltration (other than infiltration contaminated by seepage from sanitary
sewers or by other discharges) and drainage.
(12) "Stormwater service charge" shall mean the stormwater
management service charge or charges applicable to a parcel of developed land,
which charge shall be reflective of the City of Maryville stormwater utility's cost
of providing stormwater management services and facilities. Stormwater
service charge may also be termed "stormwater utility service charge."
(13) "Stormwater management facilities" shall mean those natural and
man-made drainage structures, conveyances, conduits, combined sewers,
sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which storm water is
collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of. (as added by
Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-504. Determination and modification of stormwater service
charges. Stormwater service charges may be determined and modified from
time to time by the council of the City of Maryville so that the total revenue
generated by said charges and any other sources of revenue that may be made
available to the stormwater utility will be sufficient to meet the cost of services
and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest
on debt incurred for stormwater management purposes, and such other
expenses reasonably necessary or convenient in the acquisition, construction,
operation, maintenance, and regulation of the stormwater system and of
properties affecting the stormwater system. These fees shall be reasonable in
amount and used exclusively by the municipality for purposes set forth in this
part. Such a graduated storm water user's fee shall be based on actual or
estimated use of the storm water and/or flood control facilities of the
municipality, and each user or user class shall only be required to pay its
proportionate share of the construction, administration, operation and
maintenance including replacement costs of such facilities based on the user's
actual or estimated proportionate contribution to the total storm water runoff
19-52
from all users or user classes. To ensure a proportionate distribution of all costs
to each user or user class, the user's contribution shall be based on factors such
as the amount of impervious area utilized by the user, the water quality of user's
storm water runoff or the volume or rate of storm water runoff.
The use of any particular parameter as a service charge rate parameter
shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or of grouping of properties
having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down
to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more
classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's
cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities are relatively
consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to
individual customers for services or facilities related to stormwater
management, including but not limited to charges for development plan review,
inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and
enhanced levels of stormwater services above those normally provided by the
city. (as added by Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-505. Effective date of stormwater service charges. Stormwater
service charges shall accrue beginning January 1, 2004 and shall be billed
periodically thereafter to customers except as specific exemptions and
adjustments may apply. (as added by Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-506. Stormwater service charges. In order to fully recover the cost
of providing stormwater services and facilities while fairly and reasonably
apportioning the cost among developed properties throughout the city, the
following stormwater rates shall apply.
(1) Detached dwelling units. Detached dwelling units shall be charged
the rate applicable to one (1) equivalent residential unit as specified in
§ 18-406(3), or as amended by ordinance in the future.
(2) Other developed lands. All developed lands not classified as
detached dwelling units shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit
(ERU) as specified below in § 18-406(3) for each two thousand four hundred
(2,400) square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof, or as amended
by ordinance in the future.
(3) The stormwater service charge rate per equivalent residential unit,
as defined in this chapter, shall be $3.97 per month until and unless the service
charge rate is changed by the Council of the City of Maryville. (as added by
Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-507. Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service
charges. Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall
be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset
against such service charges. No exemption, credit, offset, or other reduction in
stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic
19-53
status, race, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the
stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities.
(1) The following exemptions from stormwater service charges shall
be allowed:
(a) Undeveloped land as defined this chapter shall be exempt
from stormwater charges;
(b) Railroad tracks shall be exempt from stormwater service
charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other
developed land uses for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from
stormwater charges.
(c) Improved public road rights-of-way of federal, state, or local
governments that are available for vehicular transportation by the
general public are exempt from storm water service charges. Platted
private roads and platted private rights-of-way are further exempt from
storm water charges.
(2) Stormwater service charge credits shall be allowed for the following
activities/occurrences shall be effective when initiated at the discretion of the
City of Maryville and in accordance with a credit manual described
subsequently:
(a) Other developed lands that have, and maintain in proper
working order, on-site stormwater detention and retention systems that
reduce the peak rate of stormwater discharge.
(b) Detached dwelling units whose total impervious surface area
is less than eighteen-hundred (1800) square feet.
(c) Schools that teach approved water conservation curricula.
This credit will be allowed at such time as the City of Maryville's NPDES
Phase II permitted program is in place.
(d) Other developed lands that have, and maintain in proper
working order, on-site stormwater best management practices that
reduce the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality in accordance
with water quality standards set forth by the City of Maryville. This
credit will be allowed at such time as City of Maryville's NPDES Phase
II permitted program is in place.
(e) Other developed lands that have, and maintain, a Tennessee
Multi-Sector General Permit for industrial activities. This credit will be
allowed at such time as the City of Maryville's NPDES Phase II
permitted program is in place.
(3) A stormwater service charge credit manual shall be prepared by
the City of Maryville Department of Engineering, Planning and Codes specifying
the design and performance standards of on-site systems, facilities, activities,
and services which qualify for application of a service charge credit, and how
such credits shall be calculated.
(4) The stormwater service charge credit shall be determined based on
the technical requirements and standards contained in the stormwater service
19-54
charge credit manual. The stormwater service charge credit may be up to fifty
(50) percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be
proportional to the extent that on-site systems, facilities, services, and activities
provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner reduce or mitigate
the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities.
(5) Groups of detached dwelling units represented by a homeowner's
association providing on-site systems or facilities that reduce or mitigate the
stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and
facilities may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The stormwater
service charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements
and standards contained in the stormwater service charge credit manual. The
stormwater service charge credit available to groups of detached dwelling units
may be up to fifty (50) percent of the service charge applicable to the individual
properties, and shall be proportional to the extent that on-site systems and
facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the homeowners association
reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and
facilities.
(6) Any credit allowed against the stormwater service charge is
conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance
standards as stated in the stormwater service charge credit manual and/or upon
continuing provision of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided,
operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the
credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for noncompliance.
Thirty (30) days notice of a non-complying condition and intent to
revoke a stormwater service charge credit shall be provided to the stormwater
service charge customer receiving a credit before the credit is revoked thereby
allowing the customer the opportunity to attain compliance. (as added by
Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003, and amended by Ord. #2005-23, June 2005; and
Ord. #2006-22, April 2006)
19-508. Stormwater service charge billing, delinquencies, and
collections. A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United
States mail or by alternative means, notifying all customers of the amount of the
bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due.
Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless
of the status of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each
parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay the stormwater
service fee. If a customer is under billed or if no bill is sent for developed land,
the city may backbill for a period of up to ten years, but shall not assess
penalties for any delinquency. A late charge will be based upon the unpaid
balance in accordance with the City of Maryville Customer Service Policy
Manual. (as added by Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-55
19-509. Application of utility service charges billed in common.
Insofar as allowed by existing bond covenants, of the stormwater utility charge
is billed and collected along with other city utility services, any payment of
utility service charges billed in common shall be applied to the customer's bill
as established through other related requirements imposed by TVA and the City
of Maryville Customer Service Policy Manual. (as added by Ord. #2003-31, Oct.
2003)
19-510. Removal or cessation of utility services. The City of
Maryville may remove or cease to provide any utility services as it determines
necessary to enforce the payment of all city utility service charges. (as added by
Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-511. Appeals. Any stormwater utility service customer who believes
the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the
following manner:
(1) An appeal must be filed in writing with the City of Maryville
Department of Engineering, Planning and Codes. In the case of service charge
appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property
area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which
influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events.
(2) Using the information provided by the appellant, the director of the
department of engineering, planning and codes shall conduct a technical review
of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within
thirty (30) days.
(3) In response to an appeal the director of the department of
engineering, planning and codes may adjust the stormwater service charge
applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of
the article.
(4) A decision of the director of the department of engineering,
planning and codes which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed
to the city manager within thirty (30) days of the adverse decision. Notice of the
appeal shall be delivered to the city manager by the appellant, stating the
grounds for the further appeal. The city manager shall issue a decision on the
appeal within thirty (30) days. All decisions of the city manager shall be served
on the customer personally or by registered or certified mail. Service shall be
based upon the service charge billing address of the customer.
(5) A decision of the city manager that is adverse to an appellant may
be further appealed to the city council within thirty (30) days of the adverse
decision.
(6) The appeal process contained in this section shall not prevent an
appellant from seeking relief in the approved manner and form from a court of
competent jurisdiction. (as added by Ord. #2003-31, Oct. 2003)
19-56
19-512. City of Maryville, Tennessee Stormwater Utility Credit
Manual for Stormwater Fees. The City of Maryville, Tennessee Stormwater
Utility Credit Manual for Stormwater Fees as attached hereto as Exhibit A is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of the municipal code. A
copy of this manual shall be available for review and copying at the city
recorder's office during regular business hours. (as added by Ord. #2005-23,
June 2005)
19-57
CHAPTER 6
STORMWATER DISCHARGES
SECTION
19-601. Purpose.
19-602. Rules applying to chapter.
19-603. Definitions.
19-604. Prohibitions.
19-605. Notification of spills and illicit discharges.
19-606. Requirements for monitoring.
19-607. Right of entry.
19-608. Notice of violation.
19-609. Penalties.
19-601. Purpose. The purpose of the illicit discharge ordinance is as
follows:
(1) To safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens;
(2) To prevent the pollution of streams, ponds and other watercourses
from illicit discharges
(3) To preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community;
(4) To enable the City of Maryville to comply with the NPDES General
Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems,
TMDLs and other applicable state and federal regulations. (as added by Ord.
#2005-26, July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-602. Rules applying to chapter. For the purpose of this chapter,
certain rules of construction shall apply herein as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense and
the singular includes the plural, unless otherwise indicated in the text.
(2) The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in nature.
(3) Except as herein provided, all words used in this chapter shall have
their common dictionary definition. (as added by Ord. #2005-26, July 2005, and
replaced by Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-603. Definitions. The following phrases as used in this section shall
contain the following definitions:
(1) "Illicit discharge." Any discharge to the stormwater system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically exempted in this
chapter.
(2) "Industrial waste." Liquid or other waste resulting from any
process of industry, manufacturer, trade or business or from the development
of any natural resources.
19-58
(3) "Other wastes." Discarded brush, sawdust, shaving, leaves, lawn
clippings, animal waste, used or previously applied lime, garbage, trash, refuse,
used newspaper, paper products, plastic containers or metal containers, ashes,
offal, discarded tar, discarded paint, discarded or uncontained solvents, used,
discarded or spilled petroleum products, antifreeze, motor vehicle fluids, used
or discarded gas tanks or chemicals, or any other used, uncontained,
unpackaged, or disposed of materials which may discharge to or otherwise enter
the stormwater system.
(4) "Person." Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, organization or entity, including governmental entities, or any
combination thereof.
(5) "Restaurant." An establishment or facility where food is prepared
and sold.
(6) "Runoff." The water resulting from precipitation that is not
absorbed by the soil.
(7) "Sanitary sewer." A system of underground conduits that collect
and deliver sanitary wastewater to a wastewater treatment plant.
(8) "Sanitary wastewater." Wastewater from toilets, sinks and other
plumbing fixtures.
(9) "Sewage." Human wastes carried by water from residences,
buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such
industrial wastes, stormwater or other water as may be present; or any
substance discharged from a sanitary sewer collection system.
(10) "Sinkhole." (a) A naturally occurring depression where drainage
collects in the earth's surface that is a minimum of two (2) feet deep, or
(b) A hole, fissure or other opening in the ground, often
underlain with limestone, dolomite or other rock formation that provides
for and is being designated as a natural conduit for the passage of
stormwater.
(11) "Stormwater." Rainfall or ice melt that is not absorbed by the
ground.
(12) "Stormwater system." The system of roadside drainage, curbs and
gutters, curb inlets, swales, catch basins, manholes, gutters, ditches, pipes,
lakes, ponds, sinkholes, channels, creeks, streams, storm drains, and similar
conveyances and facilities, both natural and manmade, located within the city
which are designated or used for collecting, storing, or conveying stormwater,
or through which stormwater is collected, stored or conveyed, whether owned or
operated by the City of Maryville or any other person.
(13) "Construction." Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment (including contractual obligations to purchase such
facilities or equipment) at the premises where such equipment will be used,
including preparation work at such premises.
(14) "Pollutant hotspot." An area where the land use or activities
generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess
19-59
of those typically found in stormwater. (as added by Ord. #2005-26, July 2005,
and replaced by Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-604. Prohibitions. (1) No person shall:
(a) Connect or allow to be connected any sanitary sewer to the
stormwater system, including any sanitary sewer connected to the
stormwater system as of the date of adoption of this chapter, or
(b) Cause or allow an illicit discharge to the stormwater system,
or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks, streets, parking
lots, sinkholes, creek banks, or other areas draining to the stormwater
system. Illicit discharges include, but are not limited to:
(i) Sewage discharges except as deemed unavoidable due
to collection system operation maintenance and extreme weather
events;
(ii) Discharges of wash water from mobile operations
such as mobile automobile washing, steam cleaning, power
washing, or carpet cleaning;
(iii) Discharges of pool or fountain water containing
chlorine, biocides, or other chemicals at the point of entry of an
enclosed stormwater system or stream, or discharges of pool or
fountain filter backwash water;
(iv) Discharges resulting from the cleaning, repair, or
maintenance of any type of equipment, machinery, or facility
including motor vehicles, cement-related equipment, or
port-a-potty servicing;
(v) Discharges of wash water from the cleaning or hosing
of impervious surfaces in industrial and commercial areas,
including parking lots, streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios,
plazas, work yards, or outdoor eating or drinking areas;
(vi) Discharges of heated water from commercial or
industrial operations;
(vii) Discharges of dyes without proper permission;
(viii) Discharges of laundry waste water;
(ix) Known discharges from leaking water or sewer lines
remaining uncorrected for seven (7) days;
(x) Discharges or discarding of animal fecal waste or
dead animals;
(xi) Discarding of vehicles equipment or vehicle parts;
(xii) Discarding lawn clippings, leaves or branches;
(xiii) Discarding trash or debris into containers or areas not
intended for the purpose of trash/debris disposal;
(xiv) Discarding or applying herbicides, pesticides,
fertilizers or other chemicals;
19-60
(xv) Discharges of runoff from materials storage areas
where chemicals, fuels, grease, oils, or other hazardous materials
are stored;
(xvi) Discharges from the following land uses, areas or
activities that are identified herein as pollutant hotspots:
(A) Vehicle, truck or equipment maintenance,
fueling, washing or storage areas including but not limited
to: gas stations, automotive dealerships, automotive repair
shops, and car wash facilities;
(B) Any property containing more than four
hundred (400) parking spaces, or one hundred twenty
thousand (120,000) square feet of impervious area;
(C) Recycling and/or salvage yard facilities;
(D) Restaurants, grocery stores and other food
service facilities;
(E) Commercial facilities with outside animal
housing areas, including animal shelters, fish hatcheries,
kennels, livestock stables, veterinary clinics, or zoos;
(F) Construction areas;
(G) Other producers of pollutants identified by the
director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
by information provided to or collected by him/her or his/her
representatives, or reasonably deduced or estimated by
him/her or his/her representatives from engineering or
scientific study.
(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (3), the following discharges
shall not be in violation of this chapter:
(a) Water line flushing;
(b) Landscape irrigation;
(c) Diverted stream flows or rising groundwater;
(d) Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater (as defined by
federal regulations) to separate storm drains;
(e) Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater;
(f) Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains,
uncontaminated air conditioning condensation, irrigation waters, springs,
water from crawl space pumps, or footing drains;
(g) Lawn watering;
(h) Individual noncommercial car washing on residential
properties; or car washing of less than (2) consecutive days in duration for
a charity, nonprofit fund raising, or similar noncommercial purpose;
(i) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(j) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(k) Incidental street wash water from street cleaning equipment
designed for cleaning paved surfaces and limiting waste discharges;
19-61
(l) Street deicing for public safety;
(m) Any activity authorized by a valid NPDES permit; and
(n) Any flows resulting from firefighting.
(3) If the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
finds that any of the activities listed in subsection (2) above are found to cause
or may cause sewage or industrial wastes or other wastes to be discharged into
the stormwater system, the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee shall notify the person performing such activity and shall order that
such activities be stopped or conducted in such manner as to avoid improper
discharge into the stormwater system. Failure to comply with such order shall
be a violation of this section. (as added by Ord. #2005-26, July 2005, and
replaced by Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-605. Notification of spills and illicit discharges. As soon as any
person has knowledge of any illicit discharge to the stormwater system in
violation of this chapter, such person shall immediately notify the City of
Maryville Stormwater Department by telephone of the discharge. If such person
is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge or responsible for the
operation of the system involved in such discharge then such person shall also
take immediate action to ensure the containment and clean-up of such discharge
and shall confirm such telephone notification with a written report to the
stormwater department within three (3) calendar days. At a minimum, the
written report for any illicit discharge shall include:
(1) Date and time of discharge.
(2) Location of the discharge.
(3) Material or substance discharged.
(4) Duration and rate of flow.
(5) Total volume discharged.
(6) Total volume recovered.
(7) Cause or reason of the discharge.
(8) Remediation or containment action taken.
(9) Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for the discharged material.
(10) Action taken to prevent further discharges.
(11) Description of any environmental impact. (as added by
Ord. #2005-26, July 2005, and replaced by Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-606. Requirements for monitoring. The stormwater department
may require any person engaging in any activity or owning any property,
building or facility (including but not limited to at site of industrial activity) to
undertake such reasonable monitoring of any discharge(s) to the stormwater
system and to furnish periodic detailed reports of discharges and/or illicit
discharges. (as added by Ord. #2005-26, July 2005, and replaced by
Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-62
19-607. Right of entry. The director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee may enter upon the property which discharges or contributes,
or is believed to discharge or contribute, to stormwater runoff or to the
stormwater system stream or natural drainageway during all reasonable hours
to monitor, to remove foreign objects or blockages, or to inspect for compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2005-26, July 2005, and
replaced by Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-608. Notice of violation. Whenever the director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee determines that a violation of any provision of
this section has occurred, the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee may issue a notice of violation to the property owner, utility, facility
operator, lessee, contractor, permittee or equipment operator of the site of the
discharge. The notice of violation shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of
where violation has occurred;
(3) List the violation;
(4) State the action required;
(5) Provide a deadline for compliance or to stop work. (as added by
Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-609. Penalties. (1) Any person violating the provisions of his section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in the general
penalty clause of the city code. Each day of a continuing violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may further be
assessed by the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee a
civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each violation. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(3) In assessing a civil penalty, the municipality may consider:
(a) The harm done to the public health or the environment;
(b) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial
economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
(c) The economic benefit gained by the violator;
(d) The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation;
(e) Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by
the municipality;
(f) The amount of penalty established by ordinance or
resolution for specific categories of violations, if any; and
(g) The equities of the situation that outweigh the benefit of
imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
19-63
(4) In addition to the civil penalty set forth in subsection (2) above, the
city may recover all damages proximately caused by the violator to the
municipality, including, but not limited to, reasonable expenses incurred in
investigating violations and enforcing violations of this chapter.
(5) The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation
of this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall
be no defense to such actions.
(6) The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not
exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one
(1) or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted.
(7) Any civil penalty assessed by the city may be appealed to Blount
County Circuit Court. (as added by Ord. #2008-15, March 2008)
19-64
CHAPTER 7
VEGETATED BUFFER ZONE AND
STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
SECTION
19-701. Purpose.
19-702. Rules applying to chapter.
19-703. Definitions.
19-704. Authority.
19-705. Requirement for submittal of a water quality management plan
(WQMP).
19-706. General requirements.
19-707. Water quality treatment requirements.
19-708. Channel protection requirements.
19-709. Requirement for submittal of a special pollutant abatement permit
(SPAP).
19-710. General requirements for water quality buffers.
19-711. Minimum width and vegetation standards for buffers on streams and
rivers.
19-712. Minimum width and vegetation standards for buffers on ponds and
lakes.
19-713. Minimum width and vegetation standards for buffers on wetlands.
19-714. Additional vegetation requirements for water quality buffers.
19-715. Requirements for steep slopes in water quality buffer areas.
19-716. Activities within the water quality buffer.
19-717. Protection of water quality buffers during construction.
19-718. Protection and maintenance of water quality buffers after construction.
19-719. Plats prepared for recording.
19-720. Conflicts with state requirements for buffer areas.
19-721. Performance bond.
19-722. NPDES permits.
19-723. As-built drawings.
19-724. Right of entry.
19-725. Inspection and maintenance.
19-726. Corrective actions.
19-727. Feature integrity.
19-728. Conflict and severability.
19-729. Responsibility.
19-730. Enforcement during construction.
19-731. Enforcement after construction.
19-732. Variances.
19-733. Unlawful acts.
19-734. Penalties.
19-65
19-735. Notice of violation.
19-736. Judicial proceedings and relief.
19-737. Appeals.
19-738. Special fund created.
19-701. Purpose. The purpose of the Stormwater Quality Management
and Vegetated Buffers Ordinance is as follows:
(1) To apply to all areas located within the jurisdiction of the City of
Maryville;
(2) To safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens;
(3) To preserve the value of land throughout the city;
(4) To establish reasonable and accepted standards of design and
procedures that prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants from developed or
redeveloped land;
(5) To preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community;
(6) To enable the City of Maryville to comply with the NPDES General
Permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems,
TMDLs and other applicable state and federal regulations. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-702. Rules applying to chapter. For the purpose of this chapter,
certain rules of construction shall apply as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense and
the singular includes the plural, unless otherwise indicated in the text.
(2) The term "shall" or "must" is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in nature.
(3) Except as herein provided, all words used in this chapter shall have
their common dictionary definition. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-703. Definitions. (1) "Applicant." Person submitting the application
for a grading permit. Typically, this is the owner or operator of the
land-disturbing activity.
(2) "As-built drawings." As-built, field verified plans signed and sealed
by a registered professional engineer and/or a registered land surveyor, both
licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee, showing contours, elevations,
grades, and location of drainage and hydraulic structures and permanent best
management practices.
(3) "Best Management Practices (BMP or BMPs)." Schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, water quality
management facilities, structural controls and other management practices
designed to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States and
to provide water quality treatment and channel protection in accordance with
this ordinance. Water quality BMPs may include structural devices, such as
stormwater ponds, extended detention ponds or bioretention areas, or
19-66
non-structural practices such as vegetated buffers, water quality buffers or
natural open spaces.
(4) "Buffer enhancement plan." A plan required by the City of
Maryville for any alteration to a water quality buffer.
(5) "City manager." The City Manager for the City of Maryville,
Tennessee.
(6) "Construction." Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment (including contractual obligations to purchase such
facilities or equipment) at the premises where such equipment will be used,
including preparation work at such premises.
(7) "Construction related waste." Waste that is generated through
construction, land development and land-disturbing activities that may cause
adverse impacts to water quality. Construction related waste includes, but is
not limited to, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals,
litter, hazardous materials, oil and sanitary waste at the construction site.
(8) "Covenants for permanent maintenance of water quality best
management practices." A legal document executed by the property owner, or
a homeowners' association as an owner of record, and recorded with the Blount
County Register of Deeds which guarantees perpetual and proper maintenance
of BMPs.
(9) "Detailed plans." Plans required by the City of Maryville Land
Development and Public Works Standards that present detailed information on
the stormwater drainage structures and control measures that will be
constructed for a proposed development or redevelopment.
(10) "Developer." The person, firm or corporation, either public and
private, engaged in the development of land, as defined below.
(11) "Development." A development includes any of the following
activities:
(a) The improvement of one (1) lot or two (2) or more contiguous
lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(i) One (1) or more residential or non-residential
buildings, or a single non-residential building on a lot or lots
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or,
(ii) The division or allocation of land or space, between or
among two (2) or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of, or for the purposes of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
(b) A subdivision of land.
(12) "Development standards board of appeals." The body that has been
delegated the authority by the Council of the City of Maryville to hear appeals
concerning decisions made by the city manager or his designee regarding the
interpretation of the meaning of this code.
19-67
(13) "Easement." A legally-dedicated right-of-way on property for the
purposes of allowing the city to manage and maintain infrastructure, site access
or stormwater flow within specified boundaries.
(14) "Grading permit." A permit issued to authorize excavation and/or
fill to be performed under the guidelines of this chapter.
(15) "Hotspot." An area where the land use or activities generate or
have the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations
in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
(16) "Impervious surfaces." Areas that prevent or impede the
infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it infiltrated in natural conditions
prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to,
rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage
areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic
coverings.
(17) "Land-disturbing activity." Any activity on private or public land
that may result in soil erosion and the movement of sediments. Land disturbing
activities include, but are not limited to, development, re-development,
demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, logging and/or
tree chipping operations, haul roads associated with the development, and
excavation.
(18) "Lake." See "pond."
(19) "Native vegetation." Plants indigenous to East Tennessee.
(20) "NPDES." National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(21) "Operator." In the context of construction activity stormwater,
operator means any person associated with a construction project that meets
either of the following two (2) criteria:
(a) This person has operational control over construction plans
and specifications, including the ability to authorize modifications to
those plans and specifications. This person is typically the owner or
developer of the project or a portion of the project; or
(b) This person has day-to-day operational control of those
activities at a project site which are necessary to ensure compliance with
a site plan, EPSC plan, WQMP, or sketch plan for the site or other permit
conditions. This person is typically a contractor or commercial builder
and is often authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities
required by approved plans or comply with other permit conditions.
(22) "Owner or property owner." The legal owner of the property as
recorded in the Blount County Register of Deeds office at the time of application
of the grading permit.
(23) "Person." Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, organization or entity, including governmental entities, or any
combination thereof.
(24) "Pond." For the specific purpose of water quality buffers, a pond or
a lake is an inland body of standing water.
19-68
(25) "Policy manual" The Policy Manual for Stormwater Quality
Management prepared and maintained by the City of Maryville that contains
policies, technical criteria, tools and guidelines and other supporting
documentation for implementation of the provisions of this ordinance.
(26) "Project." The entire proposed development regardless of the size
of the area of land to be disturbed.
(27) "Redevelopment." The improvement of a lot or lots that have been
previously developed.
(28) "River." See "stream."
(29) "Sediment." Solid material, both inorganic (mineral) and organic,
that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from the site of
origin by wind, water, gravity, or ice as a result of erosion.
(30) "Sedimentation." The action or process of forming or depositing
sediment.
(31) "Slope." The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal,
usually expressed in percent or degrees.
(32) "Stormwater." Also "stormwater runoff" or "runoff." Surface water
resulting from rain, snow, or other form of precipitation, which is not absorbed
into the soil and results in surface water flow and drainage.
(33) "Stream." For the specific purpose of water quality buffers, a
stream is defined as a linear surface water conveyance that can be characterized
with either perennial or ephemeral base flow and:
(a) Has published floodplain elevations that have been
computed as part of an approved flood study; or
(b) Are identified as a blue line on a seven and one-half (7.5)
minute USGS quadrangle, unless otherwise designated by Tennessee
Department of Environmental Conservation (TDEC); or
(c) Are determined to be streams by the City of Maryville, the
United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) or Tennessee
Department of Environmental Conservation (TDEC).
(34) "Structure." Anything constructed or erected such that the use of
it requires a more or less permanent location on or in the ground. Structures
include but are not limited to buildings, towers, smokestacks, overhead
transmission lines, carports and walls.
(35) "Top of bank." The uppermost limit of an active stream channel,
usually marked by a break in slope.
(36) "Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)." A calculation of the
maximum amount of a pollutant that a water body can receive and still meet
water quality standards, and an allocation of that amount to the source(s) of the
pollutant.
(37) "Variance." A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter,
that permits construction or activities in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter, where specified enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
19-69
(38) "Water quality buffer." A use-restricted, vegetated area that
borders waters of the state located within the City of Maryville, containing
natural, enhanced or restored vegetation and grasses, and exists or is
established to protect those waterbodies. The water quality buffer shall be
located and platted per the requirements of this chapter.
(39) "Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP)." An engineering plan
for the location and/or design of BMPs within a proposed development or
redevelopment. A WQMP includes a map showing the extent of the land
development activity and location of BMPs, design calculations for BMPs, and,
when applicable, includes as-built plans and covenants for permanent
maintenance of best management practices.
(40) "Water quality volume reduction." A decrease in the water quality
volume for one (1) or more areas of a proposed development that is may be
obtained for qualified site development features or approaches that can reduce
or eliminate the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. Water quality
volume reductions can only be obtained when technical criteria, as defined by
the City of Maryville, are met.
(41) "Water quality volume reduction areas." Areas within the proposed
development or redevelopment for which a water quality volume reduction can
be obtained.
(42) "Waters of the state." Any and all water, public or private, on or
beneath the surface of the ground, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon Tennessee or any portion thereof except those bodies of water
confined to and retained within the limits of private property in single
ownership which do not combine or affect a junction with natural surface or
underground waters.
(43) "Watercourse." Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river,
creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or
wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and that has
a defined channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto
subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
(44) "Wetland." An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetland determination
shall be made by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the
Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, and/or the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, or a qualified professional that has been
trained in the identification and delineation of wetland areas. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-704. Authority. (1) The city manager and the staff under the city
manager's supervision shall administer the provisions of this ordinance.
19-70
(2) The city manager or his/her designee has the authority to
promulgate rules, regulations, policies and guidance consistent with this chapter
in order to carry out the meaning and intent through a City of Maryville Policy
Manual for Stormwater Quality Management (or Policy Manual). The policies,
criteria and requirements stated in the Policy Manual shall be enforceable,
consistent with other provisions of this chapter.
(3) In the event that the city manager or his/her designee determines
that a violation of any provision of this ordinance has occurred, or that work
does not have a required permit, or that work does not comply with an approved
plan or permit, the city manager or his/her designee may issue a notice of
violation to the permittee or property owner and/or any other person or entity
having responsibility for activities performed at a development, at which time
the penalty provisions of this chapter shall be implemented. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-705. Requirement for submittal of a Water Quality
Management Plan (WQMP). (1) No individual, partnership, firm,
association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate,
commission, board, public or private institution, utility, county, city, or other
political subdivision, cooperative, or any other legal entity shall engage in any
land-disturbing activity within the corporate limits of the City of Maryville
without meeting the requirements of this chapter, unless exempted from
obtaining a grading permit under chapter 3 of this title of the City of Maryville
Municipal Code.
(2) Any non-residential development or redevelopment of any size or
any residential development or redevelopment that will result in a
land-disturbing activity that is equal to or greater than one (1) acre that must
obtain a grading permit, unless exempted from obtaining a grading permit
under chapter 3 of this title of the City of Maryville Municipal Code, shall
submit a WQMP for approval by the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee.
(3) The WQMP shall be submitted as part of the erosion prevention
and sediment control plan, or detailed plans, in accordance with and as required
by the Maryville Land Development and Public Works Standards.
(4) No grading or building permit shall be issued until a WQMP has
been approved by the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee.
(5) Developments or redevelopments of any size that received approval
of detail plans prior to the effective date of this chapter or developments or
redevelopments for which a WQMP was not required prior to the effective date
of this chapter shall be exempted from the requirements of this chapter. (as
added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-71
19-706. General requirements. (1) The WQMP shall include all of the
required elements that are listed and/or described in the policy manual. The
director of engineering and public works or his/her designee may require
submittal of additional information in the WQMP as necessary to allow an
adequate review of the existing or proposed site conditions. Omission of any
required items shall render the plans incomplete and they will be returned to
the applicant prior to review by the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee.
(2) The WQMP shall be subject to any additional requirements set
forth in the minimum subdivision regulations, zoning ordinance, the Land
Development and Public Works Standards or other City of Maryville
regulations.
(3) The WQMP shall be prepared and stamped by a professional
engineer, landscape architect, or architect competent in civil and site design and
licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee. Portions of the WQMP that
require hydraulic and/or hydrologic calculations and design shall be prepared
and stamped by a professional engineer competent in civil and site design and
licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee.
(4) The approved WQMP shall be followed during grading and
construction activities. Under no circumstance is the owner or operator of land
development activities, or any person(s) acting on the owner's behalf, allowed
to deviate from the approved WQMP without prior written approval of a plan
amendment by the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee.
(5) The approved WQMP shall be amended if the proposed site
conditions change after plan approval is obtained, or if it is determined by the
director of engineering and public works or his/her designee during the course
of grading or construction that the approved plan is inadequate.
(6) The WQMP shall include a listing of any legally-protected state or
federally-listed threatened or endangered species and/or critical habitat located
in the area of development or redevelopment (if any) and a description of the
measures that will be used to protect them during and after grading and
construction. United States Fish and Wildlife approval is required for all
protection measures.
(7) Other state and/or federal permits that may be necessary for
construction in and around streams and/or wetlands shall be approved through
the appropriate lead regulatory agency prior to submittal of a WQMP to the City
of Maryville.
(8) BMPs, water quality buffers and water quality volume reduction
areas shown in WQMPs shall be maintained through the declaration of a
protective covenant, entitled "Covenants for Permanent Maintenance of Water
Quality Best Management Practices" (covenant). The covenant must be
approved by and shall be enforceable by the City of Maryville. The covenant
shall be recorded with the deed and shall run with the land and continue in
perpetuity.
19-72
(9) BMPs, water quality buffers and water quality volume reduction
areas shall be placed into a permanent easement that is recorded with the deed
to the parcel and held by the City of Maryville. A maintenance right-of-way or
easement, having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet from a driveway, public
road or private road shall also be provided.
(10) The owner or operator of any land development activities may be
subject to additional watershed or site specific requirements other than those
stated in this chapter in order to satisfy local, state or federal requirements, or
where the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee has
determined through stormwater master plans, engineering studies, a history of
existing or documented water quality problems, or engineering judgment that
additional restrictions are need to limit adverse impacts of the proposed
development on water quality or channel protection. Areas subject to additional
requirements may also include developments, redevelopments or land uses that
are considered pollutant hotspots.
(11) The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
may waive or modify the requirements of the chapter if adequate water quality
treatment and channel protection are suitably provided by a downstream or
shared off-site BMP, or if engineering studies determine that installing the
required BMP(s) would actually cause adverse impact to water quality or cause
increase channel erosion or downstream flooding. (as added by Ord. #2008-08,
Feb. 2008)
19-707. Water quality treatment requirements. All new
developments or redevelopments that submit a WQMP shall provide treatment
of stormwater runoff in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Stormwater runoff generated from the development or
redevelopment must be treated for water quality prior to discharging from the
property, in accordance with the stormwater pollutant removal treatment
standard and criteria provided in the policy manual.
(2) The treatment of stormwater runoff shall be achieved through the
use of one (1) or more BMPs that are designed and constructed in accordance
with the design criteria, guidance and specifications provided in the policy
manual.
(3) Methods, designs or technologies for BMPs that are not specified
in the policy manual may be submitted for approval by the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee if it is proven that such
methods, designs or technologies will meet or exceed the stormwater treatment
standards set forth in the policy manual and this chapter. Proof of such
methods, designs, or technologies must meet the minimum testing criteria set
forth in the policy manual.
19-73
(4) BMPs shall not be installed within the public right-of-way without
prior approval of the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-708. Channel protection requirements. (1) All new developments
or redevelopments that are required to submit a WQMP shall provide
downstream channel erosion protection by capturing the channel protection
volume (the runoff volume from the one (1) year frequency, twenty-four (24)
hour storm) and discharging such volume over no less than a twenty-four (24)
hour period using the design methods provided in the policy manual.
(2) Downstream channel erosion protection can be provided by an
alternative approach in lieu of controlling the channel protection volume subject
to prior approval by the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee. Sufficient hydrologic and hydraulic analysis showing that the
alternative approach will offer adequate channel protection from erosion must
be presented in the WQMP. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-709. Requirement for submittal of a Special Pollutant
Abatement Permit (SPAP). Technical requirements for the permit shall be
based on the current policy manual subject to the approval of the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee.
(1) Specific land uses are known to produce pollutants that are
detrimental to water quality and would not be corrected by standard water
quality treatment methods. A special pollution abatement permit is required to
ensure that structural and management BMPs are used to control water quality
for these uses and that the BMPs employed are designed to reduce the special
pollutant to an acceptable level. Before the approval of structural stormwater
treatment devices, the engineering and public works director or his/her designee
may require valid documentation from full-scale testing by an independent third
party to verify that the pollutants of concern will be properly controlled. A
special pollution abatement permit will be valid for a period of five (5) years, at
which point it must be renewed. At the time of renewal, any deficiency in the
management method must be corrected. Any development that occurs without
a required permit shall be a violation of this chapter of the code.
(2) A special pollution abatement permit shall be required for the
following land uses:
(a) Vehicle, truck or equipment maintenance, fueling, washing
or storage areas including but not limited to: automotive dealerships,
automotive repair shops, and car wash facilities;
(b) Any property containing more than four hundred (400)
parking spaces, or one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet of
impervious parking area;
(c) Recycling and/or salvage yard facilities;
(d) Restaurants, grocery stores, and other food service facilities;
19-74
(e) Commercial facilities with outside animal housing areas
including animal shelters, fish hatcheries, kennels, livestock stables,
veterinary clinics, or zoos;
(f) Other producers of pollutants identified by the director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee by information provided
to or collected by him or his representatives, or reasonably deduced or
estimated by him or his representatives from engineering or scientific
study. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-710. General requirements for water quality buffers. (1) All
new developments or redevelopments that are required to submit a WQMP
and/or record a plat shall establish, protect and maintain water quality buffers
along all streams, rivers, lakes, ponds and wetlands located in, the City of
Maryville as set forth in this chapter and in the policy manual. Buffers shall be
established, protected, and maintained for portions of waterbodies that are
located in the City of Maryville. Any property or portion thereof that lies within
the water quality buffer is subject to the requirements for the water quality
buffer stated in this chapter, as well as any and all zoning restrictions that
apply to the parcel as a whole.
(2) The water quality buffer shall be established, managed and
maintained to protect the physical and ecological integrity of the buffered
waterbody, to reduce the potential for flooding, provide tree canopy, stabilize
streambanks and to filter runoff from developed areas. Management of the
water quality buffer includes specific limitations on alteration of the natural
conditions as set forth in this chapter and the policy manual.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the water quality
buffer must be maintained in a use-restricted, undisturbed state in accordance
with this chapter. The water quality buffer must meet, or have the ability to
meet through vegetation improvement and growth, the minimum vegetative
targets defined for the buffer in this chapter.
(4) Public or private property that is being developed or redeveloped
for purposes of the City of Maryville greenway or linear park system is exempt
from all water quality buffer requirements. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb.
2008)
19-711. Minimum width and vegetation standards for buffers on
streams and rivers. (1) A water quality buffer having a minimum width of
sixty (60) feet shall be provided along each side of a stream or river, as
measured perpendicular from the top-of-bank of the active channel. For those
streams that do not have a defined top-of-bank, the buffer shall be measured
perpendicular from the centerline of the stream.
(2) The water quality buffer shall consist two (2) zones, as follows:
(a) Inner zone: The inner zone of the water quality buffer shall
have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet, measured perpendicular from
19-75
the top-of-bank of the active channel and extending landward. Property
owners are permitted and encouraged to establish an inner zone that has
a width greater than thirty (30) feet.
(b) Outer zone: The outer zone of the water quality buffer shall
be measured from the edge of the inner zone and shall extend the
perpendicular distance required to obtain a total minimum buffer width
of sixty (60) feet, when combined with the width in the inner zone.
(3) The minimum vegetative target for the inner zone is mature,
moderately dense forest (i.e., trees) with woody shrubs and understory
vegetation. Where forest vegetation has the potential to impact traffic safety or
limit access, areas immediately surrounding approved stream crossings and
utility access areas may be vegetated with dense grasses.
(4) The minimum vegetative target for the outer zone is mowed, dense
grass that covers the entire zone.
(5) A variance for the width of the water quality buffer may be granted
for water quality buffers located on streams and rivers through allowance of
buffer width averaging, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The average width of the entire buffer within the boundaries
of the property to be developed shall not be less than sixty (60) feet; and
(b) The width of the buffer shall not be less than thirty (30) feet
at any location, except where infrastructure encroachments and/or
stream crossings have been approved by the director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee;
(c) Areas of the water quality buffer having a minimum width
of thirty (30) feet (or less at infrastructure encroachments and stream
crossings) can comprise no more than fifty percent (50%) of the buffer
length;
(d) Buffer width averaging is performed in accordance with
policies stated in this chapter and the policy manual.
(6) Buffer width averaging is required for water quality buffers that
have stream crossings and infrastructure encroachments.
(7) Buffer width averaging is prohibited for any portion of the
development that has or will have after development the land uses described
below:
(a) Areas that have slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%)
that are located within fifty (50) feet of the stream to be buffered;
(b) Developments or facilities that include on-site sewage
disposal and treatment system drainfields (i.e., septic systems), raised
septic systems, subsurface discharges from a wastewater treatment
plant, or land application of biosolids or animal waste;
(c) Landfills (demolition landfills, permitted landfills,
close-in-place landfills);
(d) Junkyards;
19-76
(e) Commercial or industrial facilities that store and/or service
motor vehicles;
(f) Commercial greenhouses or landscape supply facilities;
(g) Developments or facilities that have commercial or public
pools;
(h) Agricultural facilities, farms, feedlots, and confined animal
feed operations;
(i) Animal care facilities, kennels, and commercial/business
developments or facilities that provide short-term or long-term care of
animals;
(j) Other land uses deemed by the director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee to have the potential to generate higher
than normal pollutant loadings. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-712. Minimum width and vegetation standards for buffers on
ponds and lakes. (1) A water quality buffer having a minimum width of thirty
(30) feet shall be provided around the perimeter of ponds and lakes that
discharge water to or receive discharges of water from streams or rivers. The
buffers shall be measured perpendicular from the topographic contour that
defines the normal pool elevation.
(2) Water quality buffers are not required around the perimeter of
ponds that are hydraulically disconnected from a stream or river, or around
ponds that are newly designed and constructed for the purposes of meeting
water quality treatment or channel protection requirements.
(3) The minimum vegetative target for water quality buffers on ponds
and lakes is mowed, dense grass that covers the entire buffer area. (as added
by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-713. Minimum width and vegetation standards for buffers on
wetlands. (1) A water quality buffer having a minimum width of thirty (30)
feet shall be provided around the perimeter of a wetland, as measured from the
outermost edge of the wetland.
(2) Water quality buffers are not required for wetlands designed and
constructed for the purposes of water quality treatment or channel protection.
(3) The minimum vegetative target for water quality buffers on
wetlands is undisturbed, mature, moderately dense forest (i.e., trees) with
woody shrubs and understory vegetation. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb.
2008)
19-714. Additional vegetation requirements for water quality
buffers. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the water quality
buffer must be maintained in a vegetated state in accordance with the minimum
vegetated targets defined for the buffer and the requirements of this section.
19-77
(2) Existing water quality buffer may be restored or improved in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter without prior approval of a
buffer enhancement plan by the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee.
(3) Property owners of existing water quality buffers that have been
disturbed or do not meet, or do not have the potential to meet through natural
vegetative succession, the vegetative targets for buffer areas that are defined in
this chapter shall be required to restore or improve the buffer area in accordance
with this chapter.
(4) Vegetative improvement of water quality buffer areas shall be
required for buffer areas that do not conform to the minimum vegetative target
at the time of development or redevelopment. Inner zone areas that can be
characterized as an early successional forest, consisting of a combination of
grasses, vines, shrubs, tree saplings and possibly even a few mature trees, may
not require vegetative improvement, provided that the vegetation appears
healthy, provides adequate ground coverage, and consists largely of native and
non-invasive species.
(5) Property owners of water quality buffer areas that require
vegetative improvement shall submit a buffer enhancement plan prior to
establishment of the buffer. The buffer enhancement plan shall be submitted
to the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee for approval
prior to establishment of the buffer with the WQMP and may be submitted as
part of a larger landscaping plan.
(6) Buffer enhancement plans shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the policy manual.
(7) Establishment of a water quality buffer must adhere to the
following conditions:
(a) All areas/zones of the buffer being established must be
planted, at a minimum, with vegetation that is appropriate to achieve the
vegetative targets stated in this chapter.
(b) All areas/zones of the buffer being established must be
stabilized against erosion.
(c) If the outer zone of a stream buffer and the buffer around a
pond or a lake will consist largely of grasses after enhancement, seeding
must be performed at a rate/density sufficient to provide healthy, dense,
permanent vegetative cover for one hundred percent (100%) of the buffer
area within one (1) growing season. Mulch, pebbles, wood chips and other
non-vegetative ground cover is not acceptable for buffer enhancement.
(d) No trees shall be planted in a utility easement;
(e) No species may comprise more than one third (1/3) of the
total planted trees or shrubs;
(f) Seedlings/trees must be guaranteed at a seventy-five percent
(75%) survivorship; and
19-78
(g) Non-native species must be removed from the water quality
buffer area. For water quality buffers on streams, where the removal of
such vegetation would cause a reduction in the amount of stream canopy
by fifty percent (50%) or more, revegetation with native plants is required
to provide the cover of the previous canopy at a minimum. For areas
where such vegetation removal would cause a reduction in the amount of
streambank vegetation, revegetation with native plants is required to
return the amount of vegetative cover to its previous state, at a
minimum. To reduce the potential for streambank erosion, revegetation
measures along streambanks must include sufficient erosion control
measures, such as turf reinforcement mats, erosion control blankets, and
straw wattles, etc., to stabilize the area in the short- and long-term.
(h) To increase the chances for the success and health of the
buffer area, the plant species, density, placement, and diversity proposed
in buffer enhancement plans must be appropriate for stream, wetland,
and pond/lake buffers to achieve the vegetative target that is defined for
the buffer through natural succession, given the local site conditions and
use of the upland property. Proposed planting and long-term
maintenance practices must also be appropriate and performed properly.
(i) Vegetation mortality must be accounted for all planting
densities that are proposed in buffer enhancement plans.
(8) One (1) year after completion of the restoration or enhancement
activity, the portion of the performance bond related to the buffer enhancement
plan can be released provided that the buffer area has been restored or
enhanced as required, that soils within the buffer area are stable and not
eroding, and that buffer vegetation is healthy and growing as expected. (as
added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-715. Requirements for steep slopes in water quality buffer
areas. Where steep slopes of fifteen percent (15%) or greater are located within
fifty (50) feet of the water body, one of the following conditions shall apply:
(1) The water quality buffer width in the steep slope area shall be
adjusted to include an additional twenty (20) feet, giving a total buffer width of
eighty (80) feet. At a minimum, the additional twenty (20) feet shall meet the
vegetation target of mowed, dense grass that covers the entire additional area.
(2) The water quality buffer in the steep slope area shall have a
minimum width of sixty (60) feet and follow the inner zone criteria. (as added
by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-716. Activities within the water quality buffer. (1) The following
activities or land uses are prohibited within the water quality buffer:
(a) The storage and use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers,
except as provided in this chapter;
19-79
(b) All types of impervious surfaces, structures, buildings,
storage facilities and other accessories;
(c) Vehicle storage and maintenance;
(d) Waste storage areas, dumpsters, grease bins;
(e) Septic tanks and septic drain fields;
(f) Hazardous sanitary waste landfills;
(g) Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other
containments;
(h) Mining;
(i) Animal lots or kennels; and,
(j) Other activities or uses that are known to contribute
pollutants to waterways.
(2) Facilities used for stormwater quantity or quality management,
and/or for channel erosion protection may be located within the water quality
buffer area provided such facilities are approved by the director of engineering
and public works or his/her designee.
(3) The following activities are allowed within the inner zone of water quality
buffers on streams and within water quality buffers on wetlands:
(a) Maintenance activities to remove trees or other vegetation
if they are in danger of falling, causing damage to dwellings or other
structures, causing blockage of the stream, standing in the path of an
approved water, sanitary sewer, storm main. The roots of a tree that are
penetrating or in danger of penetrating a sewer, water or storm drainage
line at a joint or pipe connection may be removed, however the root wad
or stump should be left in place, where feasible, to maintain soil stability.
(b) Maintenance activities to prune native vegetation provided
that the health and function of the vegetation is not compromised.
(c) Maintenance activities to remove non-native vegetation (i.e.
honeysuckle, kudzu, privet) and re-vegetated with native species,
provided that such activities cause minimal soil disturbance is permitted
and the requirements of § 19-714(7) are met.
(d) Disturbances as required to establish and/or restore buffer
areas in accordance with an approved buffer enhancement plan.
(e) Stormwater management facilities that do not detract from
the buffer meeting the minimum vegetative target for the buffer area and
will allow the buffer area to meet its intended purposes as stated in
§ 19-710.
(f) Infrastructure such as roads, bridges, storm drainage, and
utilities, provided that they adhere to the following standards:
(i) The width shall be kept to the minimum width
needed to allow for maintenance access and installation;
(ii) The crossing shall be at an angle that minimizes
clearing requirements;
19-80
(iii) The minimum number of crossings should be used
within each development, with no more than one (1) crossing every
one-thousand (1,000) linear feet. The director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee may approve additional crossings
if justified by traffic, safety, or access issues.
(iv) Access areas for utilities that are located in the water
quality buffer shall be allowed. Access areas must be minimized
to the extent possible and shall be located no less than
four-hundred (400) feet apart unless warranted by valid safety,
access, or service issues.
(g) Pathways, trails and picnic areas, provided that no
impervious surfaces are used and the design and location of such areas
are approved by the City of Maryville.
(h) Removal of forest vegetation that has the potential to impact
traffic safety or limit access, to areas immediately surrounding the
approved stream or utility crossing. The area shall be vegetated with a
minimum of dense grass.
(i) Bank stabilization, stream restoration or habitat alteration
projects and other activities permitted and approved by TDEC or under
section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. The buffer area must be
re-vegetated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
immediately after the project is complete. Such project must include
sufficient erosion control measures, such as turf reinforcement mats,
erosion control blankets, straw wattles, etc., to stabilize the area in the
short- and long-term.
(j) Education activities and scientific research that do not
require any prohibited activities identified in this section.
(4) The following activities are allowed within the outer zone of the
water quality buffers on streams and rivers, and within water quality buffers
on ponds and lakes.
(a) All activities that are allowed within the inner zone;
(b) Land disturbance and grading, provided that the buffer area
is re-vegetated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
immediately after the project is complete. A buffer enhancement plan
must be submitted and approved for land disturbance and grading
projects that require a grading permit, prior to approval of the grading
permit.
(c) Clearing, grubbing, grading and re-vegetation, performed in
accordance with an approved grading plan;
(d) Disturbances necessary for the construction of utility access
areas and approved stream crossings;
(e) On-going vegetative maintenance activities such as mowing,
bush-hogging, and weed-eating.
19-81
(f) The limited application of herbicides and fertilizers for
purposes of vegetation removal and management is allowed. Herbicides
and fertilizers used must be non-toxic, biodegradable, and safe for
humans, animals and the environment. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb.
2008)
19-717. The protection of water quality buffers during
construction. (1) Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all water quality
buffer areas shall remain protected from land disturbance, vegetation removal,
construction of impervious surfaces, and discharges of sediment and other
construction-related wastes during development activities.
(2) Water quality buffers shall be clearly identified on all construction
drawings, and marked with the statement "water quality buffer. Do not
disturb."
(3) The entire perimeter of water quality buffer areas must be clearly
marked at the site of development or redevelopment prior to the initiation of
land disturbing activities. A combination of stakes, flagging, silt fence and/or
orange construction fence may be used to ensure adequate visibility of the water
quality buffer perimeter. The perimeter markings must be inspected and
approved by the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
prior to approval of a grading permit.
(4) Water quality buffers cannot be encroached upon or disturbed
during project construction, unless they are being established, restored, or
enhanced in accordance with an approved buffer enhancement plan.
(5) All areas of the water quality buffer, including streambanks, shall
be left in a stabilized condition upon completion of construction activities. No
actively eroding, bare or unstable areas shall remain. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-718. The protection and maintenance of water quality buffers
after construction. (1) Once construction has ceased on a project, water
quality buffers must be maintained in accordance with the recorded covenants
for maintenance of water quality best management practices. The covenants
shall require that maintenance of the water quality buffer be the responsibility
of the property owner.
(2) In order to provide for long-term protection and maintenance, the
City of Maryville shall require that the water quality buffer be protected in
perpetuity by placing the buffer in a permanent water quality or other easement
that is recorded with the property's deed.
(3) Permanent boundary markers, in the form of signage approved or
provided by the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee may
be required prior to recording of the final plat, and the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy. The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
19-82
has the authority to require replacement of permanent boundary markers that
have been removed or destroyed. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-719. Plats prepared for recording. Unless otherwise provided
herein, all site development plans and plats prepared for recording shall:
(1) Show the extent of all water quality buffers on the subject property
by metes and bounds and be labeled as "water quality buffer";
(2) Provide a note with reference to the water quality buffer stating
that there shall be no clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of
vegetation except as permitted by the City of Maryville. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-720. Conflicts with state requirements for buffer areas. The
State of Tennessee may require water quality buffers during construction
activities via provisions contained in the Tennessee Construction General
Permit (CGP) or other regulatory permits and processes. The state's
requirements may, or may not, align with the City of Maryville's requirements
and policies for water quality buffers. It is the responsibility of the site developer
to be informed about and follow the requirements of any state-level buffer
requirements. If State of Tennessee and Maryville buffer requirements differ,
the more stringent requirement shall apply. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb.
2008)
19-721. Performance bond. (1) Prior to plat approval, a performance
bond which guarantees satisfactory completion of construction work related to
BMPs and/or the establishment of water quality buffers may be required for a
period of two (2) years.
(2) Performance bonds shall name the City of Maryville as beneficiary
and shall be guaranteed in the form of a surety bond, cashier's check, or letter
of credit from an approved financial institution or insurance carrier. The surety
bond, cashier's check, or letter of credit shall be provided in a form and in an
amount to be determined by the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee. The actual amount shall be based on submission of plans and
estimated construction, installation or potential maintenance and/or
remediation expenses.
(3) The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
may refuse brokers or financial institutions the right to provide a surety bond,
letter of credit, or cashier's check based on past performance, ratings of the
financial institution, or other appropriate sources of reference information. (as
added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-722. NPDES permits. Persons or entities who hold NPDES general,
individual and/or multi-sector permits shall provide either a copy of such permit
or the permit number assigned to them by the Tennessee Department of
19-83
Environment and Conservation to the director of engineering and public works
or his/her designee no later than sixty (60) calendar days after issuance of the
permit. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-723. As-built drawings. (1) Prior to the release of a bond, as-built
drawings shall be provided to the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee, certifying that all BMPs comply with the design shown on the
approved WQMP(s). Features such as the location and elevation of structural
BMPs, boundaries of vegetated buffers and water quality volume reduction
areas shall be provided to verify approved plans. Other contents of the record
drawings must be provided in accordance with guidance provided in the policy
manual.
(2) As-built drawings shall include sufficient design information to
show that the BMPs required by this chapter will operate as approved. This
shall include all necessary computations used to determine percent pollutant
removal and the flow rates and treatment volumes required to size BMPs.
(3) The as-built drawings shall be stamped by the appropriate design
professional required to stamp the WQMP, as stated in § 19-706 of this chapter,
and a registered land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee.
The engineer shall certify that the as-built conditions will meet all water quality
requirements and the surveyor shall certify the accuracy and completeness of
the survey. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-724. Right of entry. (1) The director of engineering and public
works or his/her designee may enter upon any property that discharges or
contributes, or is believed to discharge or contribute, to stormwater runoff or the
stormwater system; stream; natural drainageway; or other stormwater system
during reasonable hours to monitor, remove foreign objects or blockages, and to
inspect for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Failure of a property owner, person(s) working on behalf of the
property owner, or other legal occupant of the property, such as a lessee, to allow
such entry by the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
onto a property for the purposes set forth in § 19-723 shall be cause for the
issuance of a stop work order, withholding of a certificate of occupancy, and/or
civil penalties, fines and/or damage assessments in accordance with § 19-733
through § 19-735 of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-725. Inspection and maintenance. (1) The owner(s) of BMPs,
water quality buffers and/or water quality volume reduction areas or his/her
designee shall at regular and appropriate frequencies inspect and properly
operate and maintain all BMPs, water quality buffers and/or water quality
volume reduction areas in such manner as to maintain their full and intended
function. Inspection and maintenance of privately-owned BMPs, water quality
19-84
buffers and water quality volume reduction areas shall be performed at the sole
cost and expense of the owner(s) of such features.
(2) Inspections and maintenance shall be performed in accordance
with the requirements provided in the policy manual. The director of
engineering and public works or his/her designee has the authority to impose
more stringent inspection and maintenance requirements as necessary for
purposes of water quality protection and public safety.
(3) Inspection and maintenance activities shall be documented by the
property owner or his/her designee. Such documentation shall be maintained
by the property owner for a minimum of three (3) years, and shall be made
available for review by the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee
(4) Prior to release of the performance bond, the property owner shall
provide the City of Maryville with an accurate as-built drawing of the property
and an executed covenant for all BMPs, water quality buffers and water quality
reduction areas. The property owner shall record these items with the Blount
County Register of Deeds. The location of the BMPs, water quality buffers, and
water quality volume reduction areas, and the easements associated with each
of these features shall be shown on a plat that is also recorded with the Blount
County Register of Deeds.
(5) The removal of sediment and other debris from BMPs shall be
performed in accordance with all City of Maryville, state and federal laws.
Guidelines for sediment removal and disposal are referenced in the policy
manual. The director of engineering and public works or his/her designee may
stipulate additional guidelines if deemed necessary for public safety.
(6) This chapter does not authorize access to neighboring private
property by the owner of BMPs, water quality buffers, or water quality volume
reduction areas or his/her designee. Arrangements for access to neighboring
private property by the property owner or his/her designee for purposes of
compliance with this chapter must be handled solely by the owner or his/her
designee, and the owner(s) of the neighboring property. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-726. Corrective actions. The director of engineering and public
works may order the property owner or his/her designee to perform corrective
actions to BMPs, water quality buffer areas or water quality volume reduction
areas as necessary to properly maintain the full and intended function of the
features for the purposes of water quality treatment, channel erosion protection,
or water quality volume reduction, to ensure adherence to local performance
standards, and ensure public safety. If the property owner or his/her designee
fails to perform corrective actions, the city manager or his/her designee shall
have the authority to order the corrective actions to be performed by the city or
others. In such cases where a performance bond exists, the city shall utilize the
bond to perform the corrective actions. In cases where a performance bond does
19-85
not exist, or is not sufficient to perform the corrective actions, the city may
perform such actions and the property owner shall reimburse the city for double
its direct and related expenses. If the property owner fails to reimburse the city
in accordance with this section, the City of Maryville is authorized to file a lien
for said costs against the property and to enforce the lien by judicial foreclosure
proceedings. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-727. Feature integrity. Any alteration, improvement, or
disturbance to BMPs, water quality buffers, or water quality volume reduction
areas that are shown in certified as-built drawings shall be prohibited without
authorization from the director of engineering and public works or his/her
designee. This does not include alterations or repairs that must be made in
order to maintain the full and intended function of the BMPs, water quality
buffer areas, or water quality volume reduction areas. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-728. Conflict and severability. (1) This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions
or existing ordinances and regulations. However, where the provisions of this
chapter and other regulation conflict or overlap, that provision which is more
restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall prevail. It is
required that the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
be advised of any such regulatory conflicts upon submittal of a WQMP.
(2) Each separate provision of this chapter is deemed independent of
all other provisions herein so that if any provision or provisions of this chapter
shall be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain enforceable.
(as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-729. Responsibility. This chapter does not imply a warranty or the
assumption of responsibility on the part of the City of Maryville for the
suitability, fitness or safety of any structure with respect to flooding, water
quality or structural integrity. This chapter is a regulatory instrument only,
and is not to be interpreted as an undertaking by the City of Maryville to design
any structure or facility. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-730. Enforcement during construction. (1) The requirements of
this chapter shall be enforced by the director of engineering and public works
or his/her designee who shall inspect all the work, grading or construction
involved. Failure to properly install or maintain BMPs, water quality buffer
areas, or water quality volume reduction areas as specified on the approved
WQMP will result in the following actions:
(a) First offense. Written requirement for corrective action that
includes a deadline for compliance. If conditions warrant, a stop work
19-86
order will be immediately issued. Corrective actions will be in accordance
with § 19-726.
(b) Second offense. A notice of violation, a stop work order and
suspension of all city inspections until the violation is corrected.
(c) Third offense. A court citation and civil penalty of a
minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day per violation and a maximum
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day per violation and possible
damage assessment.
(d) Any performance bond posted may be forfeited based on the
circumstances if compliance is not achieved after notice of violation
within the time specified in the notice. Any grading or building permit
granted may also be suspended.
(2) All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance
and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has
occurred and the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee
has approved the corrective action. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or an agent of the owner, or the person in
charge of the job site; or conspicuously posted at the project location, and shall
state the necessary corrective actions with a completion date before other
activities can resume. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-731. Enforcement after construction. The requirements of this
chapter shall be enforced by the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee or his/her designee who shall inspect the BMPs, water quality
buffers and water quality volume reduction areas at regular and appropriate
intervals. Failure to properly maintain BMPs, water quality buffer areas, or
water quality volume reduction areas to their full and intended function shall
result in a written requirement for corrective action that includes a deadline for
compliance. Corrective actions will be in accordance with § 19-726. If conditions
warrant, a stop work order will be immediately issued. A court citation and civil
penalty of a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day per violation and a
maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day per violation and possible
damage assessment may also be levied on the property owner by the City of
Maryville. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-732. Variances. The director of engineering and public works o
his/her designee may waive or modify any of the general criteria which are
deemed inappropriate or too restrictive for site conditions, by granting a
variance as set forth herein. Variances may be granted in writing under the
following conditions:
(1) At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request variances
to become part of the approved WQMP. The applicant must explain the reasons
for requesting variances in writing and must submit documentation that the
19-87
issuance of a variance will not result in a reduction in water quality. Specific
variances which are allowed must be documented on the approved WQMP.
(2) During construction, a permit holder may request variances to the
approved WQMP. Until such time as the amended plan is approved by the city,
the land-disturbing activity and associated construction shall not proceed,
except in accordance with the WQMP as originally approved.
Absent universal circumstances, a response to the variance request
should be given by the city within ten (10) working days. Without a written
approval, no variance shall be considered valid. (as added by Ord. #2008-08,
Feb. 2008)
19-733. Unlawful acts. Any Person who: (1) Violates any provision of
this chapter;
(2) Violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter;
(3) Fails or refuses to comply with any lawful notice to abate issued by
the director of engineering and public works or his/her designee, which has not
been timely appealed to the development standards board of appeals, within the
time specified by such notice; or
(4) Violates any lawful order of the city or the development standards
board of appeals within the time allowed by such order;
Shall be guilty of a violation. Each day of such violation or failure or
refusal to comply shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable
accordingly. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-734. Penalties. (1) Any person violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in the
general provisions of the city code. Each day that a continuing violation of this
chapter is maintained or permitted to remain shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be assessed
a civil penalty by the city of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for each day of the violation. Each
violation shall constitute a separate violation. The city may also recover all
damages proximately caused to the city by such violation.
(3) In assessing the civil penalty, the city may consider:
(a) The harm done to the public health or the environment;
(b) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be of substantial
economic detriment to the illegal activity;
(c) The economic benefit gained by the violator;
(d) The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation;
(e) Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by
the municipality;
19-88
(f) The amount of penalty established by ordinance or
resolution for specific categories for violations; and
(g) All equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of
imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
(4) In addition to the civil penalty in sub-section (3) above, the city
may recover all damages proximately caused by the violator to the city which
may include any reasonable expenses and attorneys fees incurred in
investigating, enforcing and/or correcting the violations of this chapter.
(5) The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation
of this chapter and the existence of any other remedy in law or equity shall be
no defense to any such action.
(6) The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not
exclusive, and is not to be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or
more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-735. Notice of violation. Whenever the director of engineering and
public works or his/her designee determines that a violation of any provision of
this chapter has occurred, the director of engineering and public works or
his/her designee may issue a notice of violation to the property owner or
operator, utility, facility operator, lessee, tenant, contractor, permittee, the
equipment operator and/or any other person or entity doing work on the site of
the land-disturbing activity. The notice of violation shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of
where the violation has occurred:
(3) List the violation;
(4) State the action required;
(5) Provide a deadline for compliance or to stop work. (as added by
Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-736. Judicial proceedings and relief. (1) The city attorney may
initiate proceedings seeking legal and/or equitable relief in any court in any
court of competent jurisdiction against any person who has or is making
substantial steps towards:
(a) Violating the provisions of this chapter;
(b) Violating the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter;
(c) Failing or refusing to comply with any lawful order issued
by the engineer, which has not been timely appealed to the development
standards board of appeals within the time allowed by this chapter;
(d) Violating any lawful order of the development standards
board of appeals within the time allowed by such order.
19-89
(2) The city attorney may also initiate civil proceedings in any court
of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages for any damages caused to
publicly-owned stormwater facilities by any person. (as added by Ord. #2008-08,
Feb. 2008)
19-737. Appeals. Appeal or review of a civil penalty or damage
assessment under this section may be made to the City Council of the City of
Maryville by any person incurring a damage assessment or civil penalty. Such
review shall be requested within thirty (30) days after the damage assessment
or civil penalty is served by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
manager's office. If a petition for review of such damage assessment or civil
penalty is not filed within thirty (30) days after the damage assessment or civil
penalty is served in any manner authorized by law, the violator shall be deemed
to have consented to the damage assessment or civil penalty and it shall become
final. The alleged violator may appeal a decision of the city council, pursuant
to the provisions of state law found in title 27, chapter 8. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days or a
later date mutually agreed up on by both parties. Ten (10) days prior, notice of
the time, date and location of said hearing shall be published in the
Maryville-Alcoa Daily Times or its equivalent local paper. Ten (10) days notice
shall be provided to the aggrieved party at the address provide at the time of the
appeal. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
19-738. Special fund created. All damages and civil penalties collected
under this chapter, following adjustment for the expenses incurred in making
such collections, shall be allocated and appropriated for the administration of
the city's stormwater program. (as added by Ord. #2008-08, Feb. 2008)
20-1
TITLE 20
ELECTRICITY1 AND GAS
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES FOR ELECTRIC SERVICE IN THE CITY
OF MARYVILLE.
2. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE GOVERNING OF THE
MARYVILLE ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT.
3. GAS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES FOR ELECTRIC SERVICE
IN THE CITY OF MARYVILLE
SECTION
20-101. Charges levied.
20-102. Fuel Cost Adjustment (FCA).
20-101. Charges levied. All rates and charges for electricity and
electric services provided by the City of Maryville Electric Department shall be
established and maintained in the City of Maryville's Customer Service Policies,
a copy of which shall be available in the city recorder's office. (1985 Code,
§ 13-201, modified, as replaced by Ord. #2009-11, March 2009)
20-102. Fuel Cost Adjustment (FCA). The rate schedules of the
Maryville Electric Department shall be adjusted based on changes in the Fuel
Cost Adjustment (FCA) charged to the city by TVA for wholesale power each
quarter beginning January 1, 2007. Such costs shall be assessed in a uniform
manner to retail power customers based on power usage so that the City of
Maryville Electric Department acts only as a "pass through" organization for
recouping such costs of the FCA. The City of Maryville Electric Department
shall realize no additional revenue itself as a result of the FCA. Such
adjustments to the rate schedule for the FCA may be done as needed by the City
of Maryville Electric Department without return to council for further approval
of the amended rate structure so long as the requirements of this section are
met. (as added by Ord. #2006-45, Dec. 2006)
1Municipal code reference
Electrical code: title 12.
20-2
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE GOVERNING OF THE
MARYVILLE ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT1
SECTION
20-201. Rules and regulations adopted.
20-202. Available in recorder's office.
20-203. Violations.
20-201. Rules and regulations adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for
the purpose of governing the operations of the City of Maryville's Electric
Department within or without the municipality, the "Rules and Regulations for
the Governing of the Electric Department", are hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference as a part of this code, and is hereafter referred to as the "Electric
Rules and Regulations." (1985 Code, § 13-301)
20-202. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the Electric Rules and
Regulations has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept
there for the use and inspection of the public. (1985 Code, § 13-302)
20-203. Violations. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall
violate a provision of the Electric Rules and Regulations, or fail to comply
therewith or with any of the provisions thereof, or violate a detailed statement
or plan submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
these rules and regulations or any revisions thereof is committed or continued,
and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be fined not less
than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. (1985 Code, § 13-303,
modified)
1This chapter renumbered in conjunction with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
20-3
CHAPTER 3
GAS1
SECTION
20-301. To be furnished under franchise.
20-301. To be furnished under franchise. Gas service shall be
furnished for the municipality and its inhabitants under such franchise as the
governing body shall grant. The rights, powers, duties, and obligations of the
municipality, its inhabitants, and the grantee of the franchise shall be clearly
stated in the written franchise agreement which shall be binding on all parties
concerned.2
1This chapter renumbered in conjunction with Change 8, April 1, 2008.
2The agreements are of record in the office of the city recorder.

21-1
TITLE 21
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. ALARMS SYSTEM.
2. PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
3. FOOTHILLS FALL FESTIVAL--RULES AND REGULATIONS.
4. RECREATION AND PARKS SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS.
5. CUSTOMER SERVICE POLICY.
CHAPTER 1
ALARMS SYSTEM
SECTION
21-101. Title.
21-102. Definitions.
21-103. Automatic telephone dialing alarm system.
21-104. Permit issuance and renewal.
21-105. Application requirements for an alarm permit.
21-106. Items required for an alarm system to qualify for an alarm permit.
21-107. False alarms.
21-108. Fee assessment.
21-109. Disconnection.
21-110. Penalty for offenses.
21-101. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "alarm ordinance."
(1985 Code, § 4-801)
21-102. Definitions. Unless it is apparent from the context that
another meaning is intended, the following words when used in this chapter
shall have the meanings indicated herein:
(1) "Alarm system" means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or
electrical, arranged to signal the police and/or fire department that an
emergency exists or that the services of either or both of those departments are
needed. "Alarm system" shall also mean any alarm device which automatically
emits an audible, visual, or other response upon the occurrence of any hazard
or emergency and is intended to alert persons outside the building to the
existence of said hazard or emergency.
(2) "Alarm user" means the person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure, or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained.
(3) "Alarm business" means the business of any individual,
partnership, corporation, or other entity engaged in selling, leasing,
21-2
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any
alarm system or in causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained,
serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed in or on any building,
structure, or facility.
(4) "Automatic telephone dialing alarm system" means any alarm
system which is a device which automatically or electronically transmits by
telephone or telephone line connected to the central dispatch facility a recorded
message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response; or a system
which, upon activation, connects to an answering service whose function it is to
transmit to the police and/or the fire department a need for emergency response.
(5) "False alarm" means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the
police and/or fire department when a situation requiring a response by the police
and/or fire department does not in fact exist; but, this definition does not include
an alarm signal caused by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it
include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by
the alarm user. Also this definition does not include an alarm signal caused by
situation that may have been brought under control prior to the arrival of the
responding police and/or fire department, that otherwise would have required
a response.
(6) "Central dispatch facility" means the central communications
center designated by the city council to receive, route, and otherwise handle all
incoming police, fire, or other emergency service communications traffic.
(7) "Answering service" refers to a telephone answering service
providing among its services the receiving on a continuous basis emergency
signals from alarm systems and thereafter relaying the message to the central
dispatch facility.
(8) "Permit year" means the portion of the calendar year remaining
after the date of issuance of a permit and all subsequent calendar years
thereafter that such permit may remain in effect. (1985 Code, § 4-802)
21-103. Automatic telephone dialing alarm system. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to sell, offer for sale, install,
maintain, lease, operate, or assist in the operation of an automatic telephone
dialing alarm system over any telephone lines exclusively used by the public to
directly request emergency service from the fire and/or police department.
(2) The fire inspector, when he has knowledge of the unlawful
maintenance of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system installed or
operating in violation of this chapter shall, in writing, order the owner, operator,
or lessee to disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours of
receipt of the order.
(3) Any automatic telephone dialing system installed unlawfully, as
set forth in § 20-103(1) hereof, prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
removed within 30 days of the order as contained in § 20-103(2) hereof. (1985
Code, § 4-803, as amended by Ord. #97-25, April 1997)
21-3
21-104. Permit issuance and renewal. (1) The Fire Prevention
Bureau is hereby authorized to grant an alarm permit to any alarm user located
in the city to operate, maintain, install, or modify a police or fire alarm device,
and no such device shall be operated unless such permit shall have first been
issued.
(2) A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any
time by the Fire Prevention Bureau upon the giving of ten (10) days notice to the
permittee, given either verbally in person or written, sent to the address shown
on the permit. Violation of this chapter, following conviction thereof, shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. The failure of the fire inspector
to revoke the permit following the finding of the city court that there has been
a violation of this chapter, shall not be deemed a waiver of the right to revoke
the permit. (1985 Code, § 4-804, as amended by Ord. #97-25, April 1997)
21-105. Application requirements for an alarm permit. Application
for an alarm permit shall be made on forms provided by the Fire Prevention
Bureau. The application form shall request the following information.
(1) The type of alarm system.
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's
property to be serviced by the alarm, and the name, address, and telephone
number of applicant's residence if different. If the applicant's alarm is serviced
by an alarm company, then the applicant shall also include the name, address,
and telephone number of that company.
(3) An emergency telephone number of the user or his representative
to permit prompt notification of alarm calls and to assist police and/or fire
personnel in the inspection of the property.
(4) It is the applicant's responsibility to immediately notify the Fire
Prevention Bureau in writing of any and all changes in the information on file
with the city regarding such permit. (1985 Code, § 4-805, as amended by Ord.
#97-25, April 1997)
21-106. Items required for an alarm system to qualify for an
alarm permit. (1) All alarm systems shall have a backup power supply that
will become effective in the event of power failure or outage in the source of
electricity.
(2) All alarm systems will have an automatic reset which silences the
annunciator within thirty (30) minutes after activation and which will not sound
again as a result of the same event that resulted in the original activation.
(3) Any system installed on or after the effective date of this chapter
must comply with the requirements stipulated in this section. Preexisting
installations must comply with this section within six (6) months of the effective
date of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 4-806)
21-107. False alarms. (1) Whenever an alarm is activated in the city,
thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by police and/or fire
21-4
personnel, a police and/or fire officer on the scene of the activated alarm shall
determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by
the alarm system or whether in some way the alarm system malfunctioned and
thereby activated a false alarm.
(2) If the police or fire officer at the scene of the activated alarm
system determines the alarm to be false and no emergency seems necessary,
then said officer shall submit a report of the false alarm to the respective chief.
A written notification of emergency response and determination of the response
shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user at the address noted on the permit
or location where alarm was activated. The permit holder upon receipt of the
notification shall be entitled to a hearing before the respective chief and permit
holder desiring a hearing shall request said hearing within ten days of date of
notification.
(3) The Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the right to inspect any
alarm system on the premises to which response has been made and he may
cause an inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter
to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this
chapter.
(4) It shall be a violation of this chapter to intentionally cause a false
alarm, and any person who intentionally causes a false alarm shall be subject
to the penalty provisions hereof.
(5) There shall be provided to the alarm user, a ten-day grace period
during the initial installation of the alarm system. Ten days after the permit
has been issued by the Fire Prevention Bureau § 20-108(1) will not apply. Any
emergency response provided by the city thereafter will be under the provisions
of § 20-108, unless otherwise noted herein.
(6) It shall be required and provided that any alarm business testing
or servicing any alarm system notify the police and/or fire departments and
instruct said departments of the location and time of said testing and servicing.
This section shall apply to any testing period after the initial installation period
has ceased. Section 20-108(1) will not apply to the alarm user if prior notice of
said testing has been made to the respective departments as outlined in this
section. Any violation of this section herein will be assessed under the
provisions outlined in § 20-108 of this chapter. (1985 Code, § 4-807, as amended
by Ord. #97-25, April 1997)
21-108. Fee assessment. It is hereby found and determined that more
than three (3) false alarms within a permit year are excessive and constitute a
public nuisance. The activation of four (4) or more false alarms within a permit
year will be handled in the following manner:
A service charge shall be automatically levied against the alarm user of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) upon the occurrence of the fourth (4th) false alarm,
a like amount for the fifth (5th) false alarm, and a service charge of fifty dollars
($50.00) for each false alarm in excess of five (5). All service charges levied shall
21-5
be paid to the city by the alarm user within thirty (30) days of the date of the
written notice of said charges. (1985 Code, § 4-808)
21-109. Disconnection. In the event that an alarm system emitting an
audible, visual, or other similar response shall fail to be deactivated within the
time limitations specified in § 20-106 hereof, the city shall have the right to take
such action as may be necessary in order to disconnect any such alarm. (1985
Code, § 4-809)
21-110. Penalty for offenses. Any person who violates any provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, and upon conviction in city court,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500. Each occurrence constitutes a
separate offense. (1985 Code, § 4-810, modified)
21-6
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC SCHOOLS1
SECTION
21-201. Definitions.
21-202. Admittance of non-resident students.
21-201. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
Resident students shall be classified as those:
(1) With a custodial parent or legal guardian residing inside the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville.
(2) Married to and residing with a resident of the City of Maryville.
(3) Verified homeless within the corporate limits of the City of
Maryville.
(4) In state custody placed by a state agency in a residence within the
corporate limits of the City of Maryville.
All other students shall be classified as non-resident students. (1985
Code, § 1-701)
21-202. Admittance of non-resident students. Non-resident students
may attend as tuition students in Maryville City Schools subject to the following
rules and regulations:
(1) That space is available at the time of attendance and that said
attendance will not cause that class in that grade in that school to exceed the
maximum allowable enrollment set by the school board.
(2) That the custodial parent or legal guardian of said tuition student
agrees to provide transportation to and from said school during the term of
tuition attendance as tuition students are not eligible for public school
transportation provided for and paid by city residents.
(3) That tuition is paid at a rate approved by city council by resolution
and administered under rules set by the school board.
(4) That after meeting the above listed criteria, tuition students will
be allowed to attend City of Maryville schools based on the following priority:
(a) Priority 1: Children of teachers in Maryville City Schools in
accordance with state law.
(b) Priority 2: Children of non-residents who own property in
the City of Maryville.
(c) Priority 3: Children of non-residents employed by the City
of Maryville.
1
Charter references: art. II, § 26 and art. XII.
21-7
(d) Priority 4: Children of non-residents who have siblings
already in Maryville City Schools.
(e) Priority 5: Children of non-residents. (1985 Code, § 1-702)
21-8
CHAPTER 3
FOOTHILLS FALL FESTIVAL--RULES AND REGULATIONS1
SECTION
21-301. Enforcement of reasonable rules and regulations permitted in areas in
the immediate vicinity of Foothills Fall Festival activities.
21-302. Sale, display or storage of food, drink or merchandise on streets,
sidewalks, public rights-of-way, or in any other outdoor space
other than an enclosed patio or deck; prohibited without a
permit.
21-303. Public displays, games, demonstrations or performances not permitted
without permission.
21-301. Enforcement of reasonable rules and regulations
permitted in areas in the immediate vicinity of Foothills Fall Festival
activities. The city manager may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations
related to the public's health, safety and welfare to be enforced where the public
is invited or permitted for Foothills Fall Festival activities and related areas in
the immediate vicinity of such activities. Such rules and regulations may be
enforced by authorized city officials including police officers both in areas where
a ticket is required and where a ticket is not required for admission. If a person
violates a rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this part, he or she may be
required to leave the area of the Foothills Fall Festival activities and areas
immediately adjacent thereto for the remainder of the day or the remainder of
the Foothills Fall Festival, in the discretion of the official or officer requiring
him/her to leave based on the violation. (as added by Ord. #2004-26, June 2004)
21-302. Sale, display or storage of food, drink or merchandise on
streets, sidewalks, public rights-of-way, or in any other outdoor space
other than an enclosed patio or deck; prohibited without a permit.
Sale, display or storage of food, drink, or merchandise on streets, sidewalks,
public rights-of-way, or in any other outdoor space other than an enclosed patio
or deck during the three (3) days of the annual city sponsored Foothills Fall
Festival shall be unlawful within the designated Foothills Fall Festival area
unless a permit for such purpose has been issued by the Foothills Fall Festival
Committee. The designated Fall Festival area shall be defined as follows:
Designated festival area. The boundaries of the designated festival area
are as follows:
1
For detailed provisions regarding permit regulations, see title 9, § 9-212.
21-9
(1) Beginning at a point in the intersection of U.S. Hwy. 321 and Court
Street and continuing along Court Street in a northwesterly direction to the
bridge over Pistol Creek.
(2) Then following the course of Pistol Creek downstream in a
northeasterly, northwesterly and southwesterly direction around the Maryville
central business district to a point below the dam for the Greenbelt Lake where
the creek abuts the right-of-way of McCammon Avenue.
(3) Then following McCammon Avenue in a southeasterly direction to
its intersection with McGhee Street.
(4) Then following McGhee Street in a southwesterly direction to the
southwestern property line of Maryville Towers.
(5) Then in a southeasterly direction along the property line of
Maryville Towers, continuing in a southeasterly direction along Cates Street,
and the extension of the Cates Street right-of-way to U.S. 321.
(6) Then in a northeasterly direction along U.S. Hwy. 321 to Court
Street, being the point of beginning. (as added by Ord. #2010-27, Sept. 2010)
21-303. Public displays, games, demonstrations or performances
not permitted without permission. During the three (3) days of the annual
Foothills Fall Festival, public displays, games, demonstrations or performances
(including, but not limited to musical performances) shall not be permitted in
the designated Foothills Fall Festival area except in a designated location
provided by the Foothills Fall Festival Committee unless such displays, games,
demonstrations, or performances (including, but not limited to musical
performances) are expressly permitted by the Foothills Fall Festival Committee.
Public displays, games, demonstrations or performances (including, but not
limited to musical performances) shall be defined as activities undertaken by a
person or group of persons attending to draw attention of festival attendees to
merchandise or services or any type of activity intended for group amusement
or attention. This restriction shall only be in effect in the area designated as the
Foothills Fall Festival area as defined below:
Designated festival area. The boundaries of the designated festival area
are as follows:
(1) Beginning at a point in the intersection of U.S. Hwy. 321 and Court
Street and continuing along Court Street in a northwesterly direction to the
bridge over Pistol Creek.
(2) Then following the course of Pistol Creek downstream in a
northeasterly, northwesterly and southwesterly direction around the Maryville
central business district to a point below the dam for the Greenbelt Lake where
the creek abuts the right-of-way of McCammon Avenue.
(3) Then following McCammon Avenue in a southeasterly direction to
its intersection with McGhee Street.
(4) Then following McGhee Street in a southwesterly direction to the
southwestern property line of Maryville Towers.
21-10
(5) Then in a southeasterly direction along the property line of
Maryville Towers, continuing in a southeasterly direction along Cates Street,
and the extension of the Cates Street right-of-way to U.S. 321.
(6) Then in a northeasterly direction along U.S. Hwy. 321 to Court
Street, being the point of beginning.
The Foothills Fall Festival Committee will be responsible for scheduling
times and locations for any public displays, games, demonstrations or
performances (including, but not limited to musical performances) desired by the
public during the festival in the Foothills Fall Festival area in a designated
alternate location within the Foothills Fall Festival area. The Foothills Fall
Festival Committee can adopt reasonable rules and regulations regarding use
of such alternate location, including, but not limited to, a deadline in advance
of Foothills Fall Festival by which persons wishing to use the designated
alternate location during the Foothills Fall Festival must apply for such use.
(as added by Ord. #2010-28, Sept. 2010)
21-11
CHAPTER 4
RECREATION AND PARKS SYSTEM
RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION
21-401. Title.
21-402. Sale of food, beverage, etc., in parks.
21-403. Speed limit for motor vehicles in parks.
21-404. Parking in parks.
21-405. Hours of operation for parks.
21-401. Title. This chapter shall be know as "recreation and parks
system rules and regulations." (as added by Ord. #2009-10, March 2009)
21-402. Sale of food, beverage, etc., in parks. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or any agent, representative or
employee thereof, to attempt to sell, offer for sale, or sell any food, beverage or
any other item of personal property within the boundaries of any public park or
upon any of the streets in said parks in the City of Maryville, Tennessee, except
as otherwise herein set forth.
(2) The City of Maryville and the recreation and park commission shall
have the right to make such sale or sales within the boundaries of said parks,
and to authorize or contract for the making of such or sales, this being an
exception to the prohibitions of this section. (as added by Ord. #2009-10, March
2009)
21-403. Speed limit for motor vehicles in parks. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the streets in any public
park in the City of Maryville at a rate of speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per
hours. (as added by Ord. #2009-10, March 2009)
21-404. Parking in parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
any motor vehicle or trailer in any public park in the City of Maryville,
Tennessee, except at those locations where parking is specifically designated by
painted lines upon the pavement or by signs. (as added by Ord. #2009-10,
March 2009)
21-405. Hours of operation for parks. (1) Except as otherwise herein
provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, organization or group to use or
occupy any public park in the City of Maryville, Tennessee, or any vehicular
parking areas in connection therewith for any purpose during the hours between
midnight and 6:00 A.M.
21-12
(2) Permission to use and occupy any of said parks during the hours
prohibited in subsection (1) hereof may be granted on special occasion by
application to the Chief of Police of the City of Maryville and the same may be
issued in writing by the chief of police with the concurrence and approval of the
director of the Maryville-Alcoa-Blount County Recreations and Parks
Commission.
(3) Nothing in this section is to be construed as restricting any official
work or activity in said parks during said hours by any department of the City
of Maryville or of the Maryville-Alcoa-Blount County Recreation and Park
Commission. (as added by Ord. #2009-10, March 2009)
21-13
CHAPTER 5
CUSTOMER SERVICE POLICY1
SECTION
21-501. Introduction.
21-502. Payment hours.
21-503. Information to customers.
21-504. Utility outage.
21-505. Meter tests.
21-506. Limitations of liability.
21-507. Customer charge.
21-508. Manual read policy.
21-509. Security lights.
21-510. Application for service.
21-511. Denial of service.
21-512. Deposit - residential customers.
21-513. Deposit - commercial customers.
21-514. Methods of payment.
21-515. Billing.
21-516. Collection and termination procedures.
21-517. Service underpayments or overpayments.
21-518. Leak adjustment policy.
21-519. Theft of service.
21-520. Rates and charges for services.
21-501. Introduction. The City of Maryville Utilities ("COMU") serves
as provider of water and wastewater utilities within the incorporated city limits
and certain service areas outside of the incorporated area. In addition, COMU
provides electric services as a distributor of power purchased from the
Tennessee Valley Authority ("TVA").
The COMU's goal is to provide excellent service to its customers. This
document describes the customer service policy that is necessary to effectively
manage the utilities and their operations as well as follow regulations
established by governing authorities. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as
replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-502. Payment hours. The COMU accepts payments with the
following times for each method of payment.
1
Appendices A-E (fees, phone numbers, certificate of medical emergency,
annual read policy, manual read agreement) are available in the office of the
recorder.
21-14
(1) In person: Payments may be made during the hours of 8:00 A.M.
and 4:30 P.M. 400 W. Broadway.
(2) Drop box: Payments may be made at any time of day or night.
However, payments must be placed in the drop box, located at City Hall, 400 W.
Broadway prior to 4:00 P.M. to receive current day processing. After 4:00 P.M.
all payments will be processed with the next business day's transactions.
(3) Web payments and IVR (Integrated Voice Response): Payments
(credit card and electronic check) may be made twenty-four (24) hours a day,
seven (7) days a week. Typically, payments are credited to the customer's
account within twenty-four (24) hours, but COMU asks customer(s) to allow
forty-eight (48) hours before due date to ensure payment is posted on time.
Electronic checks may take up to three (3) days to debit customer's bank
account.
In order to restore service due to non-payment after 4:30 P.M., customers
must contact the overtime crews to re-establish service. If an overtime crew is
called out, the customer will be responsible for any associated charges and
additional fees. The electric overtime crew will be dispatched to restore service
for both water and electric service. However, if the electric overtime crew
experiences problems associated with water service, and a water overtime crew
is dispatched, the customer will be charged an additional fee to restore water
service. These charges become due and payable immediately. Failure to pay
these charges may result in the discontinuation of services. Electric service
after-hours can be contacted at (865) 983-8722. Water service after-hour can be
contacted at (865) 982-7990.
In order to avoid penalties or late fees, payments must be received by
COMU prior to, or on, the due dates that are outlined on the associated bill.
Postmarks are not an acceptable measurement of the time payment was
received. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08,
April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-503. Information to customers. Information is available for the
purpose of conservation, fairness, and communication between COMU and its
customers.
(1) The COMU will make available to all customers upon application
for service and anytime upon request, information related to:
(a) Current service practice policy;
(b) Current rates applicable to such customer and a written
and/or oral explanation of the rate schedule.
(2) Upon request a customer will receive a statement of such
customer's monthly kWh and/or gallon consumption for the prior twelve (12)
month period. There is no charge for this service.
(3) Requests for information or questions regarding this policy may be
made in person at any office of COMU, by phone, by mail, or on COMU's website
at www.maryvillegov.com.
21-15
(4) Customers shall be notified of the availability of rate schedules,
governing policy such as those established by TVA, and consumption
information by the most practical combinations of:
(a) A message printed on COMU's bills;
(b) Public displays in the office where bills are paid;
(c) Public service announcements on local radio stations
periodically;
(d) Advertisements in local newspapers periodically;
(e) On COMU's website.
(5) Customers shall be notified of any proposed significant changes in
rates and/or policy at least thirty (30) days prior to implementation of such
change by the most practical combinations of:
(a) Mail;
(b) Newspaper advertisement;
(c) Public service announcements;
(d) Displays in the office where bills are paid;
(e) On COMU's website. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016,
as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-504. Utility outage. To report a utility outage, contact the
Automated Outage Report Line (865) 983-8722. Water service after-hours can
be contacted at (865) 982-7990. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as
replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-505. Meter tests. COMU will, at its own expense, make periodic
tests and inspections of its meters to maintain a high standard of accuracy.
COMU will make additional tests or inspections of its electric and water meters
at the customer's request as described below.
Electric meter tests have a standard testing fee as referenced in
Appendix A and customer must pay this prior to additional meter testing. If test
shows that the meter is accurate within two percent (2%), slow or fast, no
adjustment will be made in the customer's bill. If the test shows the meter to be
in excess of two percent (2%), slow or fast, an adjustment shall be made in
customer's bill over a period of not over thirty (30) days prior and the cost of
conducting the test will be credited by COMU.
Water meter tests have a standard testing fee as referenced in
Appendix A and customer must pay this prior to meter testing. If a meter
registers in excess of any standardized accuracy limits as disclosed in the
adopted water and sewer rules and regulations, an adjustment will be made by
COMU and the cost of conducting the test will be credited by COMU. (as added
by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
21-16
21-506. Limitations of liability. COMU's liability shall not extend
beyond the customer's delivery point. The delivery point for residential electric
shall be defined as the point at which COMU's facility connects with the
customer's facility and further being defined as: at customer owned weatherhead
for overhead service and at source side of terminal of meter pan for underground
service. For other points of delivery, refer to the electric department's rules and
regulations. The delivery point for water and sewer service shall be defined as
the point at which the COMU's facility connects with customer owned service
lines.
In accordance with the TVA operating rules, COMU is not liable for
lightning, power surges, low voltage, high voltage, loss of power or other
temporary abnormal system conditions that are caused by weather, long term
equipment failures or other causes not due to direct negligence by COMU or its
employees. The customer shall be responsible for purchasing and installing any
devices required to protect the customer's equipment from any temporary
abnormal system condition that may occur occasionally. (as added by Ord.
#2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-507. Customer charge. A customer charge, as adopted by the
applicable rate schedule, will be applied to all classes of service for
supplying service. This schedule is available on request and at
www.maryvillegov.com/customer-service. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016,
as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-508. Manual read policy. A customer may not want an Advanced
Metering Infrastructure (AMI) meter installed at their residence. COMU has
provided a manual read policy, Appendix D, for customers who choose not to
participate in AMI. Customer must complete the agreement, Appendix E, and
pay the appropriate electric and/or water meter change out fee and a monthly
manual read fee as referenced in Appendix A. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct.
2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-509. Security lights. If an existing utility pole is not available, a
customer will be charged a pole rental fee plus the monthly rate for usage. If an
existing utility pole can be utilized, no monthly pole rental charge will be
necessary. In order to recover the initial costs of providing the service, a
customer is required to pay a minimum of twelve (12) months of service
regardless of their continuance as a customer of COMU. Any unutilized portion
of the twelve (12) month period will be collected on the final billing. (as added
by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
21-510. Application for service. Each prospective customer desiring
service is required to sign a standard application form before service is supplied.
21-17
The standard application form requires information pertaining to the receipt of
adequate identification, such as a valid driver's license and social security
number. Also, a copy of a customer's rental agreement or lease must be provided
if the service location is not owner occupied. Service will not be supplied to an
applicant who does not
(1) Sign the required form,
(2) Provide adequate photo identification, and
(3) Provide the required rental documents for properties
that are not owner occupied (if applicable). All applications completed prior to
12:00 noon, will have service connected the same business day. After 12:00 noon,
service will be connected the following business day. A current customer that
has been disconnected for non-payment, account has been finaled and deposit
applied to their delinquent account becomes a new customer requiring
applicable re-connection fees, a new deposit, and any past due balance if
reapplying for service.
For commercial customers located within the Maryville City limits,
requests for name change, ownership change or new service requires contact
with the City of Maryville Electrical Inspector at (865) 273-3517 prior to
processing application. The inspector must authorize any release for service.
Commercial customers with a demand in excess of one thousand (1,000) kW will
be required to sign an additional Power Contract. (as added by Ord. #2016-25,
Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-511. Denial of service. Upon application for new service, COMU
may deny service due to previously unpaid utility bills under an applicant's
current or past utility contracts with the city as long as the bill or bills at issue
were not timely disputed by the customer. Such denial of service on this basis
will not occur for an existing customer.
COMU shall deny service if it is determined that service would be a
potential hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of our customers.
When service is being furnished to an occupant of premises under contract
and such contract is not in the occupant's name, COMU reserves the right to
impose the following conditions on the right of the customer to discontinue
service under such a contract:
(1) Written notice of the Customer's desire for such service to be
discontinued may be required.
(2) COMU may require that the service continue for a period not to
exceed three (3) days landlord/tenant account during which time the customer
would be responsible to COMU for all charges for such service. During such
three (3) day period or thereafter, the occupant of the premises to which service
has been ordered disconnected by the customer, other than the occupant, may
be allowed by COMU to enter into a contract for service in the occupant's own
name if the occupant is deemed to comply with COMU's rules and regulations
21-18
with respect to his or her own application for service. (as added by Ord.
#2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-512. Deposit - residential customers. (1) Deposit policies are to be
applied without regard to race, color, creed, gender, age, national origin, or
marital status.
(2) Customers who receive a "green check" designation from ONLINE
Utility Exchange will not be required to provide a deposit. Customers who
receive a "red x" will be required to provide a deposit. The deposit amount
required is listed in Appendix A and should not exceed the class average of no
more than twice the highest monthly bill. COM reserves the right to adjust
deposits as needed.
(3) An existing customer, who wants to transfer service to another
location and does not have an excellent payment history with COMU will be
required to pay a deposit. An excellent payment history is defined as having no
more than one (1) late penalty in the past twelve (12) months.
(4) If account is terminated before one (1) year of service, deposit held
will be applied to any outstanding balance due COMU and any remaining
balance refunded to customer.
(5) All residential deposits will be accounted for and credited to the
account after twelve (12) months of continuous service. The deposit balance is
subject to review by COMU and the customer. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct.
2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-513. Deposit - commercial customers. (1) Deposit policies are to
be applied without regard to race, color, creed, gender, age, national origin, or
marital status.
(2) A deposit is required of any commercial customer before service will
be supplied. The amount required should not exceed twice the highest monthly
bill for billing location where billing history exists. For new customers at
locations where no billing history exists, the monthly bill will be estimated
based on anticipated energy demand and load for customer.
(3) Upon termination of service, any outstanding balance due COMU
will be paid in full from the deposit funds and then the balance, if any, shall be
paid to the customer.
(4) All commercial deposits will be accounted for and credited to the
account after twelve (12) months of continuous service. The deposit balance is
subject to review by COMU and the customer.
(5) COMU does not accept surety bonds. An irrevocable letter of credit
from a financial institution may be acceptable; however, this should be
discussed in advance with the collection technician at (865) 273-3462. (as added
by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
21-19
21-514. Methods of payment. Acceptable methods of payment during
normal business hours are cash, check, money order or cashier's check. Credit
cards are also acceptable methods of payment. VISA, MasterCard, Discover and
American Express are accepted. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as
replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-515. Billing. (1) Bills will be rendered monthly and shall be paid at
the office of COMU or through the various other methods listed under "payment
hours."
(2) Failure to receive a bill will not release customer from payment
obligation.
(3) The due date for payment of the bill will be at least fifteen (15)
days for all cycles from the day the bill is mailed to the customer.
(4) Payments made after the due date will be subject to a late payment
charge of five percent (5%).
(5) A one (1) time courtesy adjustment of late fee per account may be
allowed.
(6) If the COM is unable to obtain access during regular business
hours to read meters or if for any other reason correctly registered consumption
cannot be obtained, the COM reserves the right to render an estimated bill to
the customer on the basis of the best available information available. (as added
by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
21-516. Collection and termination procedures. Whenever practical,
the following process will be followed to discontinue service. However, this
process may be modified as long as the intent of notification remains intact and
is deemed to be more efficient in the administration of providing utility services
and receiving utility payments:
(1) A monthly bill will be sent to the address provided by the customer.
A notice that service is subject to termination for non-payment will be printed
on the monthly bill if there is a balance carried forward from previous month.
(2) A courtesy letter for first time late customers will be mailed twenty
(20) days after due date.
(3) Written notice of termination ("final notice before disconnection of
service") including rights and remedies will be mailed to customer at least five
(5) days prior to the scheduled date of termination and will include all amounts
due. For billing disputes, contact customer service at (865) 273-3456.
(4) If customer does not make payment of all outstanding charges,
notify COMU of a billing dispute, or make other acceptable arrangements by the
last date of termination, COMU will proceed on schedule with termination.
(5) Hearings on disputed bills will be held by appointment between the
office hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. by an appointment with the staff
member designated by the director of financial services.
21-20
(6) A customer requesting a hearing has the right to examine records
pertaining to that customer's service.
(7) The hearing will be conducted by the staff member designated by
the director of financial services. After hearing the evidence, a written decision
will be promptly provided to the customer.
(8) A customer may appeal the decision of the designee of the director
of financial services. In such case the director of financial services will hear the
evidence and render a decision in writing and shall promptly provide the
customer a copy of such final decision.
(9) The customer has the right to a post termination hearing under the
above procedures within two (2) business days following such termination.
(10) Discontinuance of service shall not release the customer from
liability for service already received or from liability for payment that thereafter
becomes due under the minimum bill provisions or other provisions of the
customer's contract.
(11) A standard reconnection fee will be required for reconnection after
termination for nonpayment during normal business hours. After-hours a
service fee will apply and payments will be accepted only in the form of cash or
check.
(12) A cut-off fee will be added to all accounts that have made the cut-off
list, regardless of whether they are disconnected.
(13) If COMU terminates the customer's service for non-payment due
to a returned check, a re-connection fee will apply plus any and all check fees.
Full payment of all past due amounts and applicable fees owed to COMU must
be received in order to restore service. After the third returned check, COMU
will not accept a check from the customer for the next twelve (12) month period.
(14) A returned check/draft fee will be assessed to a customer's account
for each returned bank draft. After the third returned draft, the customer will
no longer be eligible to participate in the bank draft program.
(15) For a customer with hardship or other extenuating circumstances,
special counseling is available. When requested by the customer, COMU may
arrange to extend payment a week from last day to pay before disconnection of
service. The customer is allowed to have three (3) extensions within a twelve
(12) month period as long as the customer pays by the date stated on agreement
and past due balance and all applicable fees are paid in full. If any agreement
is paid with a returned check, no future agreements are allowed for the
following twelve (12) month period.
(16) COMU evaluates weather conditions daily at www.weather.com
for Maryville, TN 37801, and in the event that the forecasted temperature is not
forecasted to exceed twenty degrees Fahrenheit (20° F) or is forecasted to exceed
one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100° F) for heat, on that day, COMU will not
disconnect service for non-payment. During such events where service is
extended due to weather conditions, the service extension shall not extend past
21-21
the extreme weather condition or past the customer's next due date, whichever
date comes first.
(17) For nonpayment of a bill in cases of documented medical hardship,
such as oxygen, life support systems or dialysis machines, with a written order,
Appendix C, from a Tennessee medically licensed physician, COMU will
postpone disconnection procedures and install a delimiter device on customer's
meter for no longer than seven (7) days. COMU limits the number of times this
provision may be invoked to three times per year per location/customer. This
provision does not apply to CPAP machines. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct.
2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-517. Service underpayments or overpayments. If the COMU
determines a customer has been incorrectly billed for utility services, then such
incorrect billing shall be adjusted for either overbilling or under billing. After
a determination of overbilling or underbilling for services has been made by
COMU, an adjustment for overbilling or underbilling shall be for any known or
unknown causes which result in incorrect bills for utility services including but
not limited to incorrect constants, failure of current and potential transformer
or meter equipment, failure of any other related equipment, improper billing
procedures, and any other causes which result in incorrect billing for services to
the customer. The period of adjustment for any overbilling or underbilling shall
be based upon the period of time during which said overbilling or underbilling
occurred subject only to the applicable period of limitations under state law
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 28-3-301. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016,
as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-518. Leak adjustment policy. In order to qualify for a leak
adjustment, a customer with permanent service must apply for the leak
adjustment by certifying that they have experienced a leak and have had it fixed
within their internal water distribution system. Only (1) one adjustment will be
allowed every twelve (12) months and any adjustment will only affect a
maximum of three (3) separate billings. A leak adjustment may be made for
temporary service at the discretion of the utility director.
(1) Water bill. If a customer experiences a leak in their internal water
distribution system, the water portion of the bill will be adjusted to a level that
is equal to the annual average monthly bill, plus fifty percent (50%) of the
difference between the actual bill and the average bill. If data is unavailable for
previous twelve (12) month period, the system-wide average residential water
bill will be used.
(2) Sewer bill. If a customer experiences a leak in their internal water
distribution system, the sewer portion of the bill will be adjusted to the annual
average only when the leakage does not enter the sewer collection system.
For commercial or new customer, adjustments must be based on actual
usage. If no history is available, six (6) months of usage must be established
21-22
before an adjustment can be calculated. (as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016,
as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018 Ch17_2-5-19)
21-519. Theft of service. When theft of service is suspected, COMU
personnel will visit the premises and evaluate the situation. If it appears a
meter has been tampered with, Maryville Police Department will be notified. If
the customer's meter has been tampered with the service will be disconnected
and the account immediately closed. All past due, current due, applicable fees,
additional deposits and tampering related costs must be paid or acceptable
arrangements made before service will be reconnected. COMU reserves the right
to refer all meter tampering and theft of service cases to the attorney general's
office for possible prosecution under Tennessee Law. Any theft of service fees
adopted by COMU rate schedule will be applied to all accounts, as appropriate.
(as added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)
21-520. Rates and charges for services. Rates and charges
for electric, water and sewer services are located in the applicable rate schedule.
A copy of the current rate schedule is available upon request during
the business hours of 8:00 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. They are also available at
www.maryyillegov.com/customer-service. Such requests may be given in person
or by calling (865) 273-3456.
Rates and charges for electric, water and sewer services are established
upon adoption by the Maryville City Council. One (1) exception to this policy is
the adoption of a monthly fuel rate charge as adjusted by the Tennessee Valley
Authority (TVA). Such charges shall be automatically adopted and included in
the electric rate schedule as no additional proceeds are received by COMU. (as
added by Ord. #2016-25, Oct. 2016, as replaced by Ord. #2018-08, April 2018
Ch17_2-5-19)

