CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MILLERSVILLE, TENNESSEE 
____________ 
Published in 2003 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Tim Lassiter 
Mayor 
____________ 
Keith Bell 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Bonnie Coleman 
Milton Dorris 
David Gregory 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Vacant 
City Manager 
____________ 
Robert G. Wheeler, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Holly L. Murphy 
City Recorder 
OFFICIALS AT CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Dan Toole 
Mayor 
____________ 
Phillip Uldrich 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Sheila Jones 
Geary Falk 
Jeff Hooper 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Robert E. Mobley 
City Manager 
____________ 
Robert G. Wheeler, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Holly L. Murphy 
City Recorder 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances of the city through Ordinance No. 01-392. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Senior Code Attorney, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Robert E. Mobley, City Manager, and Mr. Robert G. Wheeler, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee. 2003. 
ORDINANCE 03-429 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MILLERSVILLE, TENNESSEE PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee, as follows: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances, City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee", published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 19, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a civil penalty of not more than $50.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The civil penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 19, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. ;eop; 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon the date of its final passage, the public welfare requiring it. 
Passed First Reading: June 17, 2003 
Public Hearing: July 15, 2003 
Passed Second Reading: July 15, 2003 
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS By: /s/       
   Dan Toole, Mayor Attest: By: /s/       
   Holly L. Murphy, City Recorder Approved as to Form and Legality: By: /s/       
   Robert G. Wheeler, Jr., City Attorney  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 08-541  9-16-2008 Included 4 08-542 10-21-2008 Included 4 09-550  4-21-2009 Included 4 09-553  7-21-2009 Included 4 09-555 10-20-2009 Included 4 09-557 11-17-2009 Included 4 10-560  4-20-2010 Included 4 10-561  4-20-2010 Included 4 10-567  7-20-2010 Omitted 4 10-568  7-20-2010 Included 4 10-569  7-20-2010 Included 4 10-570  7-20-2010 Omitted 4 10-572 10-19-2010 Included 4 10-574 10-19-2010 Included 4 10-575  2-15-2011 Included 4 10-577 12-21-2010 Omitted 4 11-579  3-15-2011 Included 4 11-581  4- 4-2011 Included 4 11-588  6-27-2011 Included 5 11-592  9-20-2011 Included 5 11-593  9-20-2011 Included 5 11-597  2-21-2012 Included 5 12-598  2-21-2012 Included 5 12-599  3-20-2012 Included 5 12-600  3-20-2012 Included 5 12-601  3-20-2012 Included 5 12-602  4-17-2012 Included 5 12-609  1-15-2013 Included 6 13-610  3-19-2013 Included 6 13-613  3-19-2013 Included 6 13-618  9-17-2013 Included 6 13-620 12-17-2013 Included 6 13-622 12-17-2013 Included 6 13-623  1-21-2014 Included 6 14-624  3-18-2014 Included 6 14-625  6-17-2014 Included 6 14-626  6-17-2014 Included 6 14-630 10-21-2014 Included 7 14-631 11- 5-2014 Included 7 14-633 11-24-2015 Included 7 15-635  2-17-2015 Included 7 15-636  2-17-2015 Included 7 10-562  4-20-2010 Included 8 15-642  9-15-2015 Included 8 15-644 11-17-2015 Included 8 15-649  1-19-2016 Included 8 16-650  2-16-2016 Included 8 16-655  4- 4-2016 Included 8 10-573  4-17-2012 Included 9 15-641  8-25-2015 Included 9 16-663  1-17-2017 Included 9 16-664  1-17-2017 Included 9 16-665  1-17-2017 Included 9 17-670  4-18-2017 Included 9 17-672  6-20-2017 Included 9 17-675  8-15-2017 Included 9 17-678  8-15-2017 Included 9 17-681  9-19-2017 Included 9 17-687 11-21-2017 Included 9  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as "Millersville Municipal Code." 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt code of ordinances, T.C.A. § 6-54-502; procedure, notice requirements, T.C.A. §§ 6-54-508, 6-54-509. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Board of commissioners, board. The terms "board of commissioners" and "board" mean the Board of Commissioners of the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    City. The term "the city" means the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee, in the Counties of Sumner and Robertson, except as otherwise provided. 
    Code. The terms "Code" and "this Code" mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee, as amended from time to time. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-102. 
    County. The term "county" means Sumner County and Robertson County, Tennessee. 
    Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-104. 
    Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-106. 
    May, shall. The term "may" is permissive; the term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(12). 
    Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-104(c). 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(16). 
    Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions, committees and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions, committees and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and," and the term "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, company or association. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(15). 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(17). 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(21). 
    Real estate, real property. The terms "real estate" and "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all rights thereto and interests therein, equitable as well as legal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(22). 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, signed. The terms "signature" and "signed" include a mark, the name being written near the mark and witnessed, or any other symbol or methodology executed or adopted by a party with intention to authenticate a writing or record, regardless of being witnessed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(27). 
    State. The terms "the state" and "this state" mean the State of Tennessee. 
    Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
    Subscription. The term "subscription" includes a mark, the name being written near the mark and witnessed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-105(29). 
    T.C.A. The abbreviation "T.C.A." means Tennessee Code Annotated, as amended. 
    Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future and the future tense includes the present. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 1-3-104(a). 
    Written, Writing. The terms "written" and "writing" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several subsections and sections, and the headings of chapters, articles and divisions of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the subsection, section, chapter, article or division, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such subsections, sections, chapters, articles or divisions, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such subsections, sections, chapters, articles or divisions, including the catchlines or other headings, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since such phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections would have been enacted by the board without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate segments, such as, but not limited to, chapters, articles, divisions and subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(d)  The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; amendatory language. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section, division, article or chapter not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows: ...." The new section, division, article or chapter may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Conflicts. 
    In case of conflict between any provision of this Code and any code adopted by reference in this Code, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specified in this section or in any chapter or section of this Code, including the codes and ordinances adopted by reference, whenever any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be a civil offense, or whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be a civil offense, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by a civil penalty of not more than $50.00 and costs for each separate violation; provided, however, that the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of this Code or other applicable law. 
(b)  In any place in this Code where the terms, "It shall be a misdemeanor" or "It shall be an offense" or "It shall be unlawful" or similar terms appear in the context of a penalty provision, such terms shall mean "It shall be a civil offense." Any time the word "fine" or similar term appears in the context of a penalty provision of this Code, it shall mean "civil penalty." 
(c)  Moving traffic violations punishable as a violation of any provision of the traffic chapter of this Code shall be punished by a civil penalty of not more than $50.00 and costs for each separate violation, unless otherwise specified in such chapter. 
(d)  When a civil penalty is imposed on any person for violating any provision of this Code and such person defaults on payment of such penalty, he may be required to perform hard labor, within or without the workhouse, to the extent that his physical condition shall permit, until such civil penalty is discharged by payment, or until such person, being credited with such sum as may be prescribed for each day's hard labor, has fully discharged such penalty. 
(e)  Each day any violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate civil offense. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to enforce ordinances, rules and regulations, T.C.A. § 6-19-101(29); powers of home rule municipalities, T.C.A. § 6-54-306. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code as evidence. 
    Any printed copy of this Code containing a printed certificate of the recorder of the correctness thereof shall be held to be a true and correct copy and may be read in evidence in all courts of the state without further proof of the laws contained therein. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances and other matters not affected by adoption of Code. 
    The repeal provided for in section 2 of the ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the board of commissioners to any person, firm or corporation; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing regulations for the operation or parking of vehicles on specific streets or portions thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes for such improvements; 
(8)  Any ordinance prescribing or extending the boundaries of the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance of the city rezoning property or amendments thereto; 
(10)  Any ordinance levying taxes; 
nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - References and notes. 
    Cross references, state law reference notes, editor's notes and history notes are by way of explanation only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Beer board, § 6-31 et seq.; courts, ch. 26; human relations, ch. 42; administration of fair housing, § 42-37; law enforcement, ch. 46; libraries, ch. 50; library board, § 50-31 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 58-31 et seq.; planning commission, § 62-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of traffic and vehicles regulations, § 78-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 90-51 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 90-56; administration of floodplain district regulations, § 90-261 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Political signs, parking on city owned property. 
(a)  No political signs may be placed on city owned property, or the right-of-ways adjacent to city owned property, except as follows: Political signs meeting the size regulations set forth in Millersville Zoning Ordinance 98-322 [chapter 90 of this Code], as amended, may be displayed in front of city hall from one hour before voting polls are open until one hour after the voting polls close on election day or on days of early voting at city hall. Any structures supporting a sign will be included in calculating the square footage of the sign. No political signs or other objects may be placed on city hall property within ten feet of Highway 31W or within ten feet from the edge of the city hall driveways or in such a way that they create a visibility hazard for traffic entering or exiting city hall property. The placement of signs will also be subject to the limitations set forth by the Sumner County Election Commission. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, there shall be no parking of vehicles or trailers on the grass on city hall property. All parked vehicles must be in designated parking areas. Vehicles violating this provision may be issued a citation for improper parking and/or towed at the owner's expense. When traffic congestion requires it, the city manager or chief of police may designate additional parking areas. 
(c)  Vehicles and trailers displaying political signs shall not be parked on city property for longer than is necessary for the operator or occupant to conduct normal city business. On days when city hall is used as a vote polling location, vehicles and trailers displaying political signs must comply with the regulations set forth by the Sumner County Election Commission and may be prohibited from operating or parking on city hall property. 
(d)  On Election Day and on days of early voting at city hall, pedestrians may hold signs and otherwise gather on city hall property, within the areas designated by the Sumner County Election Commission, provided that they remain at least ten feet away from Highway 31W and at least ten feet away from the edge of the city hall driveways. Pedestrians shall not interfere with the normal flow of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 03-423, §§ 1-4, 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 2-2. - Procedures regarding access to an inspection of public records. 
(a)  Consistent with the Public Records Act of the State of Tennessee, personnel of the City of Millersville shall provide full access and assistance in a timely and efficient manner to Tennessee residents who request access to public documents. 
(b)  Employees of the City of Millersville shall protect the integrity and organization of public records with respect to the manner in which the records are inspected and copied. All inspections of records must be performed under the supervision of the records custodian or designee. All copying of public records must be performed by employees of the city, or, in the event that city personnel are unable to copy the records, by an entity or person designated by the records custodian. 
(c)  To prevent excessive disruptions of the work, essential functions, and duties of employees of the City of Millersville, persons requesting inspection and/or copying of public records are requested to complete a records request form to be furnished by the city. If the requesting party refuses to complete a request form, a city employee shall complete the form with the information provided by the requesting party. Persons requesting access to open public records shall describe the records with specificity so that the records may be located and made available for public inspection or duplication, as provided in subsection (b) above. All requests for public records shall be directed to the records custodian. 
(d)  When records are requested for inspection or copying, the records custodian has up to seven business days to determine whether the city can retrieve the records requested and whether the requested records contain any confidential information, and the estimated charge for copying based upon the number of copies and amount of time required. Within seven business days of a request for records the records custodian shall: 
(1)  Produce the records requested; 
(2)  Deny the records in writing, giving explanation for denial; or, 
(3)  In the case of voluminous requests, provide, in writing, the requestor with an estimated time frame for production and an estimation of duplication costs. 
(e)  There is no charge assessed to a requester for inspecting a public record. Charges for physical copies of records, in accordance with the Office of Open Records Counsel (OORC) schedule of reasonable charges, are as follows: 
(1)  Standard 81/2 × 11 or 81/2 × 14 black and white copy-$0.15 per page for each produced. 
(2)  Standard 81/2 × 11 or 81/2 × 14 color copy-$0.50 per page for each produced. 
(3)  Accident reports-$0.15 per page for each standard 81/2 × 11 or 81/2 × 14 black and white copy produced. 
(4)  Maps, plats, electronic data, audio discs, video discs, and all other materials shall be duplicated at actual costs to the city. 
(f)  Requests requiring less than one hour of municipal employee labor for research, retrieval, redaction and duplication will not result in an assessment of labor charges to the requester. Employee labor in excess of one hour may be charged to the requestor, in addition to the cost per copy, as provided in subsection (e). The city may require payment in advance of producing any request. Requests for copies of records may not be broken down to multiple requests for the same information in order to qualify for the first free hour. 
(1)  For a request requiring more than one employee to complete, labor charges will be assessed based on the following formula: In calculating the charge for labor, a department head shall determine the number of hours each employee spent producing a request. The department head shall then subtract the one-hour threshold from the number of hours the highest paid employee(s) spent producing the request. The department head will then multiply total number of hours to be charged for the labor of each employee by that employee's hourly wage. Finally, the department head will add together the totals for all the employees involved in the request and that will be the total amount of labor that can be charged. 
(2)  When the total number of requests made by a requestor within a calendar month exceeds four, the requests will be aggregated, and the requestor shall charge a fee for any and all labor that is reasonably necessary to produce the copies of the requested records after informing the requestor that the aggregation limit has been met. Request for items that are routinely released and readily accessible, such as agendas for current calendar month meetings and approved minutes from meetings held in the previous calendar month, shall not be counted in the aggregated requests. 
(g)  If the city is assessed a charge to retrieve the requested records from archives or any other entity having possession of requested records, the records custodian may assess the requestor the cost assessed to the city. 
(h)  Upon completion of a records request the requestor may pick up the copies of records at the office of the records custodian. Alternatively, the requestor may choose to have the copies of records delivered via United States Postal Service; provided that the requestor pays all related expenses in advance. 
(i)  The police chief shall maintain in his office records of undercover investigators containing personally identifying information. All other personnel records of the police department shall be maintained in the office of the records custodian. Requests for personnel records, other than for undercover investigators, shall be made to the records custodian, who shall promptly notify the police chief of such request. The police chief shall make the final determination as to the release [of[ the information requested. In the event that the police chief refuses to release the information, he shall provide a written explanation of his reasons for not releasing the information. 
(j)  If the public records requested are frail due to age or other conditions, and copying of the records will cause damage to the original records, the requesting party may be required to make an appointment for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 13-623, § 1, 1-21-2014) 
State Law reference- Procedures for public inspection of, access to, and duplication of public records pursuant to the Tennessee Public Records Act (T.C.A. § 10-7-504, et seq.). 
Secs. 2-3-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Meeting dates and times. 
    Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month in the City Hall. The time of regular meetings shall be at 5:30 p.m. central time without regard to standard time or daylight saving time. 
(Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 8-4-1981; Ord. No. 82-33, § 1, 8-31-1982; Ord. No. 85-69, § 1, 10-22-1985; Ord. No. 94-213, § 1, 2-15-1994; Ord. No. 16-665, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to set meeting dates and times, T.C.A. § 6-20-207. 
Secs. 2-32-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 2-51. - Readings. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of T.C.A. § 6-20-215(a), the board of commissioners may pass any ordinance by reading only the caption of such ordinance on two readings of the ordinance. Copies of such ordinances shall be available during regular business hours at the office of the city recorder and during sessions in which the ordinance has its second and third readings. 
(b)  All ordinances will be read by caption only unless the board of commissioners by majority vote elects to read the ordinance in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 82-17, 2-2-1982; Ord. No. 90-138, §§ 1, 2, 1-29-1990; Ord. No. 95-274, § 1, 11-2-1995) 
Secs. 2-52-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- City judge; pro tempore appointment, § 26-47; clerk of city court, § 26-71 et seq.; zoning enforcement officer, § 90-52; designation of building inspector, § 90-261. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-81. - Occupational safety and health program. 
(a)  Created. There is hereby created an occupational safety and health program for the employees of the city. 
(b)  Title. This section shall provide authority for establishing and administering the occupational safety and health program for the employees of the city. 
(c)  Purpose. The city, in electing to update their established program plan will maintain an effective occupational safety and health program for its employees and shall: 
(1)  Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment that includes: 
a.  Top management commitment and employee involvement; 
b.  Continually analyze the worksite to identify all hazards and potential hazards; 
c.  Develop and maintain methods for preventing or controlling existing or potential hazards; and 
d.  Train managers, supervisors, and employees to understand and deal with worksite hazards. 
(2)  Acquire, maintain and require the use of safety equipment, personal protective equipment and devices reasonably necessary to protect employees. 
(3)  Make, keep, preserve, and make available to the Commissioner of Labor and Workforce Development of the State of Tennessee, his designated representatives, or persons within the Tennessee Department of Labor and Workforce Development to whom such responsibilities have been delegated, adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as required. 
(4)  Consult with the state commissioner of labor and workforce development with regard to the adequacy of the form and content of records. 
(5)  Consult with the state commissioner of labor and workforce development, as appropriate, regarding safety and health problems which are considered to be unusual or peculiar and are such that they cannot be achieved under a standard promulgated by the state. 
(6)  Provide reasonable opportunity for the participation of employees in the effectuation of the objectives of this program, including the opportunity to make anonymous complaints concerning conditions or practices injurious to employee safety and health. 
(7)  Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards, and provide for education and notification of all employees of the existence of this program. 
(d)  Coverage. The provisions of the occupational safety and health program for the employees of the city shall apply to all employees of each administrative department, commission, board, division, or other agency of the city whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or permanent. 
(e)  Standards authorized. The occupational safety and health standards adopted by the city are the same as, but not limited to, the state occupational safety and health standards promulgated, or which may be promulgated, in accordance with section 6 of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972, T.C.A. §§ 50-3-101-50-3-2019. 
(f)  Variance from standards authorized. The city manager may, upon written application to the state commissioner of labor, request an order granting a temporary variance from any approved standards. Application for variances shall be in accordance with Rules of Tennessee Department of Labor, Occupational Safety, chapter 0800-1-2, as authorized by T.C.A. §§ 50-1-102-50-9-113. Prior to requesting such temporary variance, the city manager shall notify or serve notice to employees, their designated representatives, or interested parties and present them with an opportunity for a hearing. The posting of notice on the main bulletin board as designated by the city manager shall be deemed sufficient notice to employees. 
(g)  Administration. For the purposes of this section, the chief of the fire department is designated as the director of occupational safety and health to perform duties and to exercise powers assigned so as to plan, develop, and administer the city program. The director shall develop a plan of operation for the program, and such plan shall become a part of this section when it satisfies all applicable sections of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972, T.C.A. §§ 50-3-101-50-3-2019, and Part IV of the Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Plan. 
(h)  Funding the program. Sufficient funds for administering and staffing the program pursuant to this section shall be made available as authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 01-378, § 1, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 13-610, § 1, 3-19-2013) 
Secs. 2-82-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-101. - Assistant city manager. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of assistant city manager. The assistant city manager shall assist the city manager in the performance of his duties. The assistant city manager shall perform all duties delegated to that position by the city manager with the full authority of the city manager. In the absence of the city manager, the assistant city manager shall perform the functions and duties of the city manager with the full authority of the city manager. 
(b)  The assistant city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 90-163, §§ 1-3, 2-19-1991) 
Secs. 2-102-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 2-121. - Personnel manual. 
    That certain personnel manual referenced in section 1 of Ordinance No. 98-325, as amended by Ordinance No. 01-384, is hereby adopted by reference as the personnel manual for the city. 
Secs. 2-122-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT 

Sec. 2-141. - Purpose of division. 
(a)  The purpose of this division and referenced regulations is to bring the city into compliance with Public Acts 1993, chapter 433. This act requires state municipalities to adopt travel and expense regulations covering expenses incurred by any mayor and any member of the local governing body and any board or committee member elected or appointed by the mayor or local governing body, and any official or employee of the municipality whose salary is set by charter or general law. 
(b)  To provide consistent travel regulations and reimbursement, this division is expanded to cover regular city employees. It's the intent of this policy to ensure fair and equitable treatment to all individuals traveling on city business at city expense. 
(Ord. No. 96-298, § 1, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 2-142. - Enforcement of division provisions. 
    The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of the travel regulations of this division. 
(Ord. No. 96-298, § 2, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 2-143. - Travel policy. 
(a)  In the interpretation and application of this division, the term "traveler" or "authorized traveler" means any elected or appointed municipal officer or employee, including members of municipal boards and committees appointed by the mayor or the board of commissioners, and the employees of such boards and committees who are traveling on official municipal business and whose travel was authorized in accordance with this division. The term "authorized traveler" shall not include the spouse, children, other relatives, friends, or companions accompanying the authorized traveler on city business, unless the person otherwise qualifies as an authorized traveler under this division. 
(b)  Authorized travelers are entitled to reimbursement of certain expenditures incurred while traveling on official business for the city. Reimbursable expenses shall include expenses for transportation; lodging; meals; registration fees for conferences, conventions, and seminars; and other actual and necessary expenses related to official business as determined by the city manager. Under certain conditions, entertainment expenses may be eligible for reimbursement. 
(c)  Authorized travelers can request either a travel advance for the projected cost of authorized travel, or advance billing directly to the city for registration fees, air fares, meals, lodging, conferences, and similar expenses. Travel advance requests aren't considered documentation of travel expenses. If travel advances exceed documented expenses, the traveler must immediately reimburse the city. It will be the responsibility of the city manager to initiate action to recover any undocumented travel advances. 
(d)  Travel advances are available only for special travel and only after completion and approval of the travel authorization form. 
(e)  The travel expense reimbursement form will be used to document all expense claims. 
(f)  To qualify for reimbursement, travel expenses must be: 
(1)  Directly related to the conduct of the city business for which travel was authorized; and 
(2)  Actual, reasonable, and necessary under the circumstances. The city manager may make exceptions for unusual circumstances. 
Expenses considered excessive won't be allowed. 
(g)  Claims of $5.00 or more for travel expense reimbursement must be supported by the original paid receipt for lodging, vehicle rental, phone call, public carrier travel, conference fee, and other reimbursable costs. 
(h)  Any person attempting to defraud the city or misuse city travel funds is subject to legal action for recovery of fraudulent travel claims and/or advances. 
(i)  Mileage and motel expenses incurred within the city aren't ordinarily considered eligible expenses for reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 96-298, § 3, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 2-144. - Reimbursement rate schedules. 
    Authorized travelers shall be reimbursed according to the state travel regulation rates. The city's travel reimbursement rates will automatically change when the state rates are adjusted. The city may pay directly to the provider for expenses such as meals, lodging, and registration fees for conferences, conventions, seminars, and other education programs. 
(Ord. No. 96-298, § 4, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 2-145. - Administrative procedures. 
    The city adopts and incorporates by reference, as if fully set out in this section, the administrative procedures submitted by MTAS to, and approved by, the state comptroller of the treasury, in June 1993. A copy of the administrative procedures is on file in the office of the city recorder. 
(Ord. No. 96-298, § 5, 1-21-1997) 
Secs. 2-146-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SOCIAL SECURITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An amendment to the agreement provided for in this division was authorized by Ordinance No. 95-270. Such amendment provides for exclusion from coverage of certain election officials and election workers. 

Sec. 2-171. - Purpose; policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law, or this division, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the System of Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance, as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and Amendments thereto, including Public Law 734-81st Congress. In pursuance of such policy and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable federal or state laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-86, § 1, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 2-172. - Mayor to execute necessary agreements and amendments with state. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state director of Old Age and Survivors Insurance Agency, as the agent or agency to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in section 2-171. 
(Ord. No. 87-86, § 2, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 2-173. - Withholdings. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-171 is hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable federal or state laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by such laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-86, § 3, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 2-174. - Employer's contributions. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, which shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by such laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-86, § 4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 2-175. - Records and reports. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-86, § 5, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 2-176. - Scope of division's authority. 
    There is hereby excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city or any employee, official, or position not authorized to be covered under applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 87-86, § 6, 2-17-1987) 
Secs. 2-177-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-186. - Applicability. 
    This division is the code of ethics for personnel of the city. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other instrumentality appointed or created by the municipality. The words "municipal" and "municipality" include these separate entities. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 1, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-187. - Definition of personal interest. 
(a)  For purposes of sections 2-188 and 2-189, personal interest means: 
(1)  Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the subject of a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state statutes on conflicts of interests; or 
(2)  Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a matter to be regulated or supervised; or 
(3)  Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the official's or employees' family, which includes spouse, parent, stepparent, grandparent, sibling, children, stepchildren, or grandchildren; 
(b)  The words employment interest include a situation in which an official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that is to be regulated or supervised. 
(c)  In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 2, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-189. - Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. 
    An official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official's vote on the measure. In addition, the official may recuse himself from voting on the measure. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 3, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-190. - Disclosure of personal interest in nonvoting matters. 
    An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with the recorder. In addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 4, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-191. - Acceptance of gratuities, etc. 
    An official or employee may not accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, or other consideration or favor of any kind from anyone other than the city: 
(1)  For the performance of an act, or promise to refrain from performance of an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the regular course of his duties; or 
(2)  That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence his action, or reward him for past action, in executing municipal business. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 5, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-192. - Use of information. 
(a)  An official or employee may not disclose any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or disclose information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to result in financial gain for himself or any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 6, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-193. - Use of municipal time, facilities, etc. 
(a)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to himself or herself, or to the advantage to any private person or entity, except under the circumstances stated herein, or as provided for in a contract or lease that is approved by the city commission as being in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  This provision shall not apply to a police officer utilizing the city-provided uniform and other equipment normally worn on his/her person while such police officer is engaged in secondary employment as a security officer, provided the secondary employment is approved in accordance with department and city policy. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 7, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 13-622, § 1, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 2-194. - Use of position or authority. 
(a)  An official or employee may not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name of the municipality. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his position to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized by the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 8, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-195. - Outside employment. 
    An official or employee may not accept or continue any outside employment if the work unreasonably inhibits the performance of any affirmative duty of the municipal position or conflicts with any provision of the municipality's charter or any ordinance or policy. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 9, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-196. - Ethics complaints. 
(a)  The city attorney is designated as the ethics officer of the municipality. Upon the written request of an official or employee potentially affected by a provision of this chapter, the city attorney may render an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this chapter and other applicable law. 
(b)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the city attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed official or employee charging any violation of this chapter, or may undertake an investigation on his own initiative when he acquires information indicating a possible violation and make recommendations for action to end or seek retribution for any activity that, in the attorney's judgment, constitutes a violation of this code of ethics. 
(2)  The city attorney may request that the governing body hire another attorney, individual, or entity to act as ethics officer when he has or will have a conflict of interests in a particular matter. 
(3)  When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this division is lodged against a member of the municipality's governing body the governing body shall either determine that the complaint has merit, determine that the complaint does not have merit, or determine that the complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the governing body determines that a complaint warrants further investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the city attorney or another individual or entity chosen by the governing body. 
(c)  The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics. 
(d)  When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation of a personnel policy, rule, or regulation or a civil service policy, rule, or regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a violation of the personnel or civil service provisions rather than as a violation of this code of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 10, 3-20-2007) 
Sec. 2-197. - Violations. 
    An elected official or appointed member of a separate municipal board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other instrumentality who violates any provision of this division is subject to punishment as provided by the municipality's charter or other applicable law and in addition is subject to censure by the governing body. An appointed official or an employee who violates any provision of this division is subject to disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 07-507, § 11, 3-20-2007) 
Secs. 2-198-2-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(2). 

Sec. 2-211. - Fiscal year. 
    As provided in T.C.A. § 6-22-121, the fiscal year of the city is hereby fixed and determined to commence on July 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 81-2, § 1, 8-4-1981) 
Sec. 2-212. - Depositories. 
(a)  The city recorder and/or the city manager shall designate the appropriate depositories for the city. The city recorder and/or the city manager shall deposit with such depositories all street funds, as well as all other funds of the city. 
(b)  Any financial institution that becomes a depository of municipal funds shall secure such funds by collateral in the same manner and under the same conditions as state deposits under title 9, chapter 4, parts 1 (T.C.A. §§ 9-4-101-9-4-111) and 4 (T.C.A. §§ 9-4-401-9-4-409), or as provided in a collateral pool created under title 9, chapter 4, part 5 (T.C.A. §§ 9-4-501-9-4-523). 
(Ord. No. 81-3, § 1, 7-29-1981) 
Sec. 2-213. - Purchasing limits and policy. 
    In accordance with T.C.A. § 6-19-104, the purchase of all material, supplies, equipment and services purchased under the authority of this section shall, unless otherwise provided by law, be purchased in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Purchases not exceeding $10,000.00. The city manager is authorized to make the following purchases whose estimated costs do not exceed $10,000.00 without formal sealed bids and written specifications: commonly used items of material, supplies, equipment, and services used in the ordinary course of maintaining and repairing the city's real or personal property; building or maintaining stocks of city material, supplies and equipment used in the ordinary course of city operations; and minor construction, repair or maintenance services. However a record of all such purchases shall be maintained describing the material, supplies, equipment or service purchased, the person or business from whom it was purchased, the date it was purchased, cost, and any other information from which the general public can easily determine the full details of the purchase. Each purchase shall be supported by invoices and/or receipts and any other appropriate documentation signed by the person receiving payment. 
(2)  Purchases by employees other than the city manager. All department heads are authorized to make purchases or delegate the purchase of supplies and materials without a purchase order for $300.00 or less. A requisition request must accompany the receipt after said purchase is made. Any purchase over that amount requires approval of the city manager and a purchase order number to be assigned by the city recorder. 
(3)  Expenditures of more than $2,500.00 but less than of $10,000.00. All purchases, leases, or lease-purchase arrangements with expenditures of less than $10,000.00, but more than $2,500.00 in any fiscal year may be made in the open market without public advertisement, but shall, whenever possible, be based upon at least three competitive bids. 
(4)  Expenditures in excess of $10,000.00. The city manager is required to make purchases in excess of $10,000.00 based on written specifications, awarded by written contract let to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder following advertisement for, and submission of, sealed bids; provided that the city may reject any and all bids. 
(5)  Exceptions to advertising and bidding. Except as hereinafter provided, all purchases and leases or lease-purchase agreements shall be made or entered into only after public advertisement and competitive bid, except as follows: 
a.  Purchases costing less than $10,000.00; provided, that this exemption shall not apply to purchases of like items which individually cost less than $2,500.00, but which are customarily purchased in lots of two or more, if the total purchase price of such items would exceed $10,000.00, during any fiscal year. 
b.  Any goods or services which may not be procured by competitive means because of the existence of a single source of supply or because of proprietary products. A record of all such sole source or proprietary purchases shall be made by the person or body authorizing such purchases and shall specify the amount paid, the items purchased, and from whom the purchase was made. A report of such sole source or proprietary purchases shall be made as soon as possible to the board of commissioners and the chief executive officer of the city and shall include all items of information as required for the record. 
c.  Purchases or leases of any supplies, materials or equipment for immediate delivery in actual emergencies arising from unforeseen causes, including delays by contractors, delays in transportation, and unanticipated volume of work. A record of any such emergency purchase shall be made by the person or body authorizing such emergency purchases, and shall specify the amount paid, the items purchased, from whom the purchase was made and the nature of the emergency. A report of any emergency purchase shall be made as soon as possible to the board of commissioners and the chief executive officer of the city, and shall include all items of information as required in the record. 
d.  Leases or lease-purchase agreements requiring total payments of less than $10,00.00 in each fiscal year the agreement is in effect; provided, that this exemption shall not apply to leases of like or related items which individually may be leased or lease-purchased with total payments of less than $10,00.00 in any fiscal year, but which are customarily leased or lease-purchased in numbers of two or more, if the total lease or lease-purchase payments for such items under a single agreement would be $10,00.00 or more in any fiscal year. 
e.  Purchases, leases, or lease-purchases of real property. 
f.  Purchases, leases, or lease-purchases from any federal, state, or local governmental unit or agency of secondhand articles or equipment or other materials, supplies, commodities, and equipment. 
g.  Purchases of perishable commodities from the requirements of public advertisement and competitive bidding, when such items are purchased in the open market. A record of all such purchases shall be made by the person or body authorizing such purchases and shall specify the amount paid, the items purchased, and from whom the purchase was made. A report of such purchases shall be made, at least monthly, to the chief executive officer and the board of commissioners, and shall include all items of information as required in the record. Fuel and fuel products may be purchased in the open market without public advertisement, but shall whenever possible be based on at least three competitive bids. Fuel and fuel products may be purchased from the department of general services' contract where available. 
h.  Purchases, for resale, of natural gas and propane gas. 
(6)  Competitive sealed proposals. 
a.  The city may use competitive sealed proposals to purchase goods and services rather than competitive sealed bids when the board of commissioners (the "board"), acting under the restrictions and requirements of T.C.A. Title 12, Chapter 3, Part 10, as same may hereinafter be amended, and the procurement code adopted by this division, determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city. The board must make the aforesaid determination with regard to each use of competitive sealed proposals rather than competitive sealed bids, except that in actual emergencies caused by unforeseen circumstances such as natural or human-made disasters, delays by contractors, delays in transportation, or unanticipated volume of work, purchases through competitive sealed proposals may be made without specific authorizing action of the board. A record of any emergency purchase shall be made by the person authorizing the emergency purchase, specifying the amount paid, the items and services purchased, from whom the purchase was made, and the nature of the emergency. A report of the emergency purchase purchased through competitive sealed proposals containing all relevant information shall be made as soon as possible by the person authorizing the purchase to the board. 
b.  Procurement code. The following shall constitute the procurement code of the city: 
1.  Conditions for use. 
a)  Competitive sealed proposals may be used only when qualifications, experience, or competence are more important than price in making the purchase; and 
b)  When there is more than one solution to a purchasing issue and the competitive sealed proposals will assist in choosing the best solution; or 
c)  When there is no readily identifiable solution to a purchasing issue and the competitive sealed proposals will assist in identifying one or more solutions. 
2.  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for competitive sealed proposals shall be given in the same manner provided by applicable law for competitive sealed bids. 
3.  Request/evaluation factors. The request for competitive sealed proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. Among other things, the request shall include the desired specifications (which may be expressed in the context of the result sought to be obtained); the qualifications of each proposer; warranties, time frame for performance, the contract; and, if applicable, the bond or other security that the successful proposer will be required to furnish. 
4.  Opening of proposals. Competitive sealed proposals shall be opened in a manner that avoids disclosure of contents to competing proposers during the negotiation. The proposals shall be open for public inspection after, but not before, the intent to award the contract to a particular proposer is announced. 
5.  Discussions with responsive proposers and revisions to proposals. The request for competitive sealed proposals shall provide that after receipt by the city of a proposal discussions may be conducted for clarification to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements with responsible proposers who submit proposals determined by the purchasing agent to be reasonably susceptible of being selected. These proposers shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and for revision of proposals, both as to the particular goods or services to be furnished and the price thereof. In order to permit the city to obtain the best offers of proposers, revisions may be permitted after submission and before the intent to award to a particular proposer is announced. In conducting discussions, the purchasing agent and other municipal personnel may make no disclosure to any proposer of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing proposers. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the city from conducting conferences or otherwise communicating with all parties who may be interested in responding to a proposal prior to the time that proposals are to be received. 
6.  Best and final offers. If discussions are conducted, the purchasing agent shall issue a written request for best and final offers. The request shall set forth the date, time, and place for submission of best and final offers. Best and final offers shall be requested only once, unless the purchasing agent makes a written determination that it is advantageous to the city to conduct further discussion or change the city's requirements. The request for best and final offers shall inform proposers that, if they do not submit a notice of withdrawal or a best and final offer, their immediate previous offer will be construed as their best and final offer. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the board from rejecting all proposals and thereafter requesting new proposals. 
7.  Award. The award shall be made to the responsible proposer whose proposal the board determines is the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set out in the request for competitive sealed proposals. No other factor may be used in the evaluation. The purchasing agent shall place in the contract file a statement containing the basis on which the award was made. 
8.  Protest. In the event that any proposer to a request for competitive sealed proposers is aggrieved by the decision of the city, such aggrieved proposer may protest the intended award to another proposer if the protest is filed within seven days after the intended award is announced. The protest must be filed with the board in care of the city manager of the city and shall be promptly decided by the board. 
9.  No conflict with other laws. Nothing contained herein is intended to change the authority of the city with respect to contracting for professional services in accordance with applicable laws of the State of Tennessee. 
10.  Advertising required for sealed bids and/or proposals. All requests for bids/proposals above $10,000.00 shall require publishing in the local newspaper of circulation for the City of Millersville for a minimum of one time per week. 
(Ord. No. 98-321, § 1, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 01-398, § 1, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 04-446, §§ 1-3, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 13-613, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 15-636, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 6-56-304. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Possession and consumption in parking lots open to the public. 
    No person shall consume or possess in a parking lot open to the public any open container containing any alcoholic beverage, including beer and mixed drinks. 
(Ord. No. 81-15, § 4, 12-15-1981) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 6-2. - Definition of alcoholic beverages. 
    As used in this chapter unless the context indicates otherwise, alcoholic beverages means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, wine and capable of being consumed by a human being, other than patented medicine or beer, where the latter contains an alcoholic content of five percent by weight, or less. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-3. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises. 
    T.C.A., tit. 57, ch. 4, is hereby adopted so as to be applicable to all sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, which are regulated by the said code when such sales are conducted within the corporate limits of the city. It is the intent of the city commission that T.C.A., tit. 57 ch. 4, shall be effective in the city, the same as if said code sections were copies herein verbatim. In conjunction with and in addition to T.C.A., tit. 57, ch. 4, the city shall further restrict and regulate the permitted sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-4. - Permits authorized for certain businesses. 
    In order to protect the general welfare and morals of the citizens of the city and to avoid the congestion of traffic or interfere with the public health, safety and morals of the citizens, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, association, or any other legal entity to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption within the corporate limits of the city, except a restaurant which qualifies under the rules and regulations herein prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-5. - Permits issued to restaurants. 
    A permit may be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption to any restaurant that has been licensed by the State of Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission, provided such restaurant has the year-round seating capacity for no less than 200 patrons dining simultaneously at tables, operates within a building with a minimum building footprint of 2,500 square feet, and maintains a food-to-alcohol sales ratio where food sales equal not less than 60 percent of the combined sales. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-6. - Concurrent licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and beer for on-premises consumption permit requirement. 
    Any establishment holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall hold concurrently a city permit to sell beer for on-premises consumption, issued by the Millersville Beer Board. The Millersville Beer Board shall have the authority prescribed by T.C.A. § 57-4-202 to suspend an establishment's authority to sell alcoholic beverages as set forth by said code. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-7. - Application requirements for an establishment requesting the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
    An application requesting approval of an establishment offering the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall include: 
(1)  A letter, signed by the applicant, describing the proposed business and specifically requesting approval for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(2)  A professionally prepared site plan indicating the building size and customer seating configuration, floor plan and capacity. The site plan shall also indicate parking, landscaping, signage and other requirements commonly required by the planning commission. 
(3)  A completed application for a city on-premises consumption beer permit. 
(4)  All appropriate beer permit application fees. 
(5)  A copy of a valid state liquor license, issued by the State of Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission, or a copy of an application for a state liquor license that has been submitted to the State of Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission for approval. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-8. - Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premise. 
    Pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-4-301, there is hereby levied a privilege tax (in the same amounts levied by T.C.A. § 57-4-301, for the city general fund to be paid annually as provided herein this chapter) upon any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, association, or any other legal entity engaging in the business of selling at retail in the city alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-9. - Annual privilege tax to be paid to the city. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, association, or any other legal entity exercising the privilege of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the city shall remit annually to the city recorder the appropriate tax described in section 6-8. Payment of the tax shall be made on the first business day of January of each year. At the time a new permit is issued to any business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next payment date. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-10. - Advertisements. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate, association, or any other legal entity holding a lawful and valid permit as authorized in this chapter, or who holds a valid beer permit from the city and a valid liquor license from the state for retail sale of beer or alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall only have on the premises one sign advertising beer or other alcoholic beverages as being sold on the premises, and the size of the sign at the place of business so advertising shall not exceed 24 sq. ft. in size. Any other advertising shall be confined to the interior of the premises for which the permit applies and signs shall not be placed in the window, which are visible to any persons outside of the premises. Signs advertising alcoholic beverages must also comply with the provisions of set forth in chapter 90, article III, division 11, subdivision III, Signs, Billboards and Other Advertising Structures. 
(Ord. No. 07-527, § 2, 1-15-2008) 
Secs. 6-11-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 6-31. - Created; powers. 
(a)  A beer board is hereby created for the city and named the Millersville Beer Board. 
(b)  The board shall have such power and authority as set forth in T.C.A. § 57-5-108, and shall have the absolute authority to issue permits for the sale of beer and to revoke the permits duly issued for violation of any ordinance of the city or any governmental agency within Sumner County, Tennessee, or for such cause as the board may consider necessary to promote the health, welfare, and well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-7, § 1, 11-3-1981) 
Sec. 6-32. - Membership, appointment and compensation; removal of members and filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The city beer board shall consist of five members who are residents of the city to be appointed by the mayor, one member being a city commissioner. The members of the beer board shall be bona fide residents of the city at the time of the appointment and shall have been residents of the area comprising the city for a period of one year prior to such appointment. Board members shall serve without compensation. The members of the first board appointed shall take office as of the date of their appointment and qualification. After the initial members, they shall serve for terms of three years. Any vacancy on the board for any reason shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, and the individual so appointed will serve out the unexpired term. 
(b)  The appointment of members to the beer board shall be subject to a vote of approval of at least three members of the board of commissioners. If a proposed appointee does not receive three votes, the mayor shall withdraw the proposed appointee's nomination and submit a new nominee as soon as practicable. 
(c)  Members of the beer board may be removed from the board by the mayor or by a vote for removal by at least three members of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 81-7, § 2, 11-3-1981; Ord. No. 94-215, § 1, 2-15-1994; Ord. No. 15-635, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-33. - Organization. 
    The board shall organize by selecting among its membership a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and a secretary. Each shall serve in such capacity for a term of one year or until their successors have been chosen for like terms. 
(Ord. No. 81-7, § 3, 11-3-1981) 
Sec. 6-34. - Meetings; quorum; minutes; vote required for permit. 
    The beer board shall hold regular sessions on such dates and at such times and place as it shall establish in its rules. Special sessions may be called by the chairperson or at the request of any member thereof, provided that notice of such a special session has been mailed to each member at least 24 hours before the time set; provided further that the announcement of special sessions may be made at any meeting at which a lawful quorum is present, which announcement shall constitute sufficient notice. All hearings of the board shall be open to the public. The presence of two members shall constitute a quorum and a concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to the granting, revoking, or any other function by the board concerning permits. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings in permanent form and a record shall be kept of the actions of the board with respect to any application for a permit. No transcript of the proceedings before the beer board shall be in any form other than narrative unless the board shall have been requested to provide an exact copy of the testimony, cost of the exact copy to be borne by the person requesting the copy. 
(Ord. No. 81-7, § 4, 11-3-1981) 
Secs. 6-35-6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BEER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beer means all beers, ales, and other malt liquors having an alcoholic content of not more than five percent by weight. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 1, 4-16-1982) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-72. - Privilege tax. 
    There is hereby imposed on the business of selling, distributing, storing or manufacturing beer an annual privilege tax of $100.00. Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or manufacture of beer shall remit the tax on January 1, 1994, and each successive January 1 to the city. At the time a new permit is issued to any business subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next tax payment date. 
(Ord. No. 93-202, § 1(2(A)), 11-16-1993) 
Sec. 6-73. - Civil penalty in lieu of suspension. 
    The beer board may, at the time it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer a permit holder the alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed $1,500.00 for each offense of making or permitting to be made any sales to minors or, a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for any other offense. If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or suspension, the holder shall have seven days within which to pay the civil penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the civil penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed withdrawn. The holder's payment of a civil penalty shall not affect the holder's ability to seek review of the civil penalty pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-108(d). 
(Ord. No. 93-202, § 1(2(B)), 11-16-1993) 
Sec. 6-74. - Interference with public health, safety, and morals. 
    No permit authorizing the sale of beer will be issued when such business would cause congestion of traffic or would interfere with schools, churches, or other places of public gathering, or would otherwise interfere with the public health, safety, and morals. In no event will a permit be issued authorizing the storage, sale, or manufacture of beer at places within 300 feet of any school, church, or other such place of public gathering, measured in accordance with state law and court decisions construing the same. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 5, 4-16-1982; Ord. No. 99-335, § 1, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 6-75. - Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders. 
    It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to: 
(1)  Employ any person convicted for the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating liquor, or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 57-5-301. 
(2)  Employ any person under 18 years of age in the sale, storage, distribution, or manufacture of beer. This subsection shall not apply to grocery stores selling beer for off-premises consumption only. 
(3)  Make or allow any sale of beer during any period of time that the permit holder's place of business is not open for business to the general public. 
(4)  Make or allow any sale of beer to a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  Allow any person under 21 years of age to loiter in or about his place of business. 
(6)  Sell or furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who is known to be insane or mentally defective, or to any person who is visibly intoxicated, or to any person who is known to habitually drink alcoholic beverages to excess, or to any person who is known to be an habitual user of narcotics or other habit-forming drugs. 
(7)  Allow drunk or disreputable persons to loiter about his premises. 
(8)  Serve, sell, or allow the consumption on his premises of any alcoholic beverage with an alcoholic content of more than five percent by weight. 
(9)  Allow gambling on the premises if alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises or to allow any form of gambling that is not permitted by the laws of the State of Tennessee. 
(10)  Allow dancing on his premises. 
(11)  Allow pool or billiard playing in the same room where beer is sold and/or consumed. 
(12)  Fail to provide and maintain separate sanitary toilet facilities for men and women. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 7, 4-16-1982; Ord. No. 85-73, § 1, 1-21-1986; Ord. No. 89-130, § 1, 10-17-1989; Ord. No. 03-441, 2-17-2004) 
Secs. 6-76-6-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 6-101. - Required for engaging in beer business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture beer without first making application to and obtaining a permit from the beer board. The application shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe and/or furnish, and pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-5-101(b), and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $250.00. Such fee shall be in the form of a cashier's check payable to the city. Each applicant must be a person of good moral character and certify that he has read and is familiar with the provisions of this article, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 2, 4-16-1982; Ord. No. 93-202, § 2, 11-16-1993) 
Sec. 6-102. - Restrictive nature. 
    All beer permits shall be restrictive as to the type of beer business authorized under them. Separate permits shall be required for selling at retail, storing, distributing, and manufacturing. Beer permits for the retail sale of beer may be further restricted by the beer board so as to authorize sales only for off-premises consumption. It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage in any type or phase of the beer business not expressly authorized by his permit. It shall likewise be unlawful for him not to comply with any and all express restrictions or conditions which may be written into his permit by the beer board. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 3, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 6-103. - Restrictions on issuance for on-premises consumption. 
    No permit for the retail sale of beer for on-premises consumption shall be issued by the beer board, unless the applicant can satisfy the beer board that 60 percent of its retail sales shall be comprised of food sales. At any time during the effective period of any such permit, the beer board may require the holder of an on-premises consumption permit to appear before it and prove to its satisfaction that 60 percent of its retail sales to that date was comprised of food sales. If the permit holder fails to prove compliance with this section, the beer board may suspend or revoke its permit for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 4, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 6-104. - Issuance to persons convicted of certain crimes. 
    No beer permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted for the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating liquor, or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 6, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 6-105. - Revocation. 
    The beer board shall have the power to revoke any beer permit issued under the provisions of this article when the holder thereof is guilty of making a false statement or misrepresentation in his application or of violating any of the provisions of this chapter. However, no beer permit shall be revoked until a public hearing is held by the board after reasonable notice to all the known parties in interest. Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the police chief or by any member of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 82-24, § 8, 4-16-1982) 
Secs. 6-106-6-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF RETAIL SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-201. - Alcoholic beverages subject to regulation. 
    It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of selling, storing, transporting, distributing, or to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of this municipality except as provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, by rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-202. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used herein unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Alcoholic beverage or beverage means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, wine and capable of being consumed by a human being, other than patented medicine, beer, or wine, where the latter two contain an alcoholic content of five percent by weight, or less. 
    License means the license issued herein and "licensee" means any person to whom such license has been issued. 
    Manufacturer means and includes distiller, vintner and rectifier. "Manufacture" means and includes distilling, rectifying and operating a winery. 
    Retail sale or sale at retail means a sale to a consumer or to any person for any purpose other than for resale. 
    Retailer means any person who sells at retail any beverage for the sale of which a license is required under the provisions herein. 
    Wholesale sale or sale at wholesale means a sale to any person for purposes of resale. 
    Wholesaler means any person who sells at wholesale beverage for the sale of which a license is required under the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 57-3-101-57-3-110. 
    Wine means the product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of fresh, sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and necessary additions to correct defects due to climate, saccharine and seasonal conditions, including champagne, sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic content not to exceed 21 percent by appropriate prefixes descriptive of the fruit or other product from which the same was predominantly the word "gallon" or "gallons" wherever used herein, shall be construed to mean a wine gallon or wine gallons, of 128 ounces. The word "quart" whenever used herein will be construed to mean one-fourth of a wine gallon. The word "pint" wherever used shall be construed to mean one-eighth of a wine gallon. 
    Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter, and singular shall include the plural. 
    The term "federal license" as used herein shall not mean tax receipt or permit. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-203. - Manufacturing prohibited within corporate limits. 
    The manufacture of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-204. - Selling prohibited within corporate limits. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages at wholesale within the corporate limits except to a duly licensed local city retailer, as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-205. - Retail liquor license required. 
(1)  Before any person or other legal entity (the "applicant") shall receive a license for the establishment of a retail liquor store, the applicant shall make application for a license for a specific location and be granted such certificate for such specific location by the city commission as required by Tennessee Code Annotated §57-3-208. When the applicant which intends to obtain a liquor license is a legal entity owned, directly or indirectly, by a combination of persons and/or entities, the group of persons owning an interest, directly or indirectly, the applicant is referred to herein as the "applicant group". The application for the license shall be filed with the city recorder giving the following information: 
(a)  The name, date of birth, and street address of each person to have an interest, direct or indirect, in the retail liquor store as an owner, partner, stockholder or otherwise. In the event that a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other legally recognized entity is an applicant or member of an applicant group, each person with an interest therein must be disclosed and must provide the information herein required by the city; 
(b)  The name of the retail liquor store proposed; 
(c)  The address of the retail liquor store proposed and its zoning designation; 
(d)  The name of the licensee and the address of other retail liquor stores in which an ownership interest is held by the applicant or any member of the applicant group, identifying the applicant or group member holding each interest; 
(e)  Occupation or business and name and location of such business, of applicant and persons in applicant group and length of time engaged in such occupation or business; 
(f)  Whether or not the applicant or any persons in the applicant group has been convicted within the ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application of any violation of any state or federal law or of any violation of any municipal ordinance (with the exception of minor traffic violations such as speeding or traffic signal violations, but not excepting alcohol related violations), and, if so, provide the details of such violation (i.e., charging entity, citation to and copy of law convicted of violating, copy of charge, etc.); 
(g)  If employed, the name and address of the employer; 
(h)  The name and address of the owner of the real property of the proposed location and the amount to be paid for rent or purchase, together with a letter from such owner affirming either: 
(i)  that the parties have reached a written agreement on the terms of a lease and setting forth the amount of the rent provided for in the agreement, or 
(ii)  that the parties have reached a written agreement on the terms of a sale of the premises to the applicant; 
(i)  The amount of money invested or to be invested, and the source of funds to be used, and, if borrowed, the name of the person from whom borrowed, the name of the bank with which the applicant does business, and the name of any person who is aiding the venture financially, either by a loan or guaranty; 
(j)  The name of any person who will have any interest, direct or indirect, in the business of the applicant or in the profits thereof, and the nature and character thereof, and whether the person holds a wholesale or retail liquor license; 
(k)  The identity of the applicant(s) who will be in actual charge of the day-to-day operation of the business, and a certification that that individual has not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, and if the applicant is a corporation, the identity of the officer or employee who will be in actual charge of the day-to-day operations of the business and that such officer or employee has not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(l)  Proof of citizenship of owner(s) and any person(s) employed by business. 
(m)  A statement that the persons receiving the requested license to the best of their knowledge if awarded the license could comply with all the requirements for obtaining the required licenses under state law and the provisions of this chapter for the operation of a retail liquor store in the city; 
(n)  The agreement of each applicant or each member of an applicant group, as appropriate, to comply with all applicable laws and ordinances and with the rules and regulations of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission and the City of Millersville with reference to the sale of alcoholic beverages, and the further agreement of each applicant or each member of an applicant group as to the validity and the reasonableness of these regulations, inspection fees, and taxes provided in this title with reference to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable investigation fee of $300.00 and an additional $100.00 for each additional background check and credit check. In addition, pursuant to Rule 0100-03-.09 of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission, each applicant shall place a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area proposed, in this instance the Nashville Tennessean, containing all the information required in Section 6-205 of this article. Said notice shall run for three consecutive issues immediately preceding the date that the applicant applies to the city for a certificate of compliance. 
(3)  Further documentation: 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by six copies of a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet giving the following information: 
(i)  The shape, size and location of the lot which the retail liquor store is to be operated under the license; 
(ii)  The shape, size, height and location of all building(s) whether they are to be erected, altered, moved or existing upon the lot; and 
(iii)  The off-street parking space and off-street loading and unloading space to be provided including the vehicular access to be provided from these areas to a public street. 
(b)  A written certification by the applicant that the premises of the proposed retail liquor store are in full and complete compliance with the distance requirements of this chapter; and, that the applicant has taken steps to verify compliance with the distance requirements. To the extent that the applicant has documentation of such verification, or the process of verification, then applicant shall submit such documentation with the application. 
(c)  In the case where the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the partnership agreement and an indication of who are general partners and who are limited partners, if any, and for each partner the profit sharing percentage in the partnership; 
(d)  In the case where the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the corporate charter or the operating agreement and a list of shareholders/members with their ownership percentage, a list of officers/managers and a list of names and addresses of directors. 
(e)  Applicant must be open for business no later than one year after application is approved by the city if it is a new construction. The application may be renewed only for unforeseen causes. 
(4)  Signature. The application shall be signed and verified by each person to have any interest in the retail liquor store either as an owner, partner, stockholder or otherwise. 
(5)  Misrepresentation; concealment of fact; duty to amend. If any applicant, member of an applicant group, or licensee either intentionally or innocently misrepresents or conceals any material fact in any application form or as to any other information required to be disclosed by this chapter, such applicant, member of an applicant group or licensee shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter and his or her application may be disregarded or his or her license restricted or revoked as deemed appropriate by the city commission. 
    In addition, if an application submitted does not contain the information required by this chapter, it will not be deemed filed until all information has been submitted in writing. It shall be the duty of the applicant to determine and submit the information required. 
(6)  In issuing the required certificate for the licensing of liquor stores in the city permitted by this chapter, the city commission will consider all applications filed before a closing date to be fixed by it and select from such applications the persons deemed by it in its sole discretion to have the qualifications required by law and the most suitable circumstances and location in consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city for the lawful operation of liquor stores. Such persons and only such persons so selected shall receive a certificate issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014; Ord. No. 15-642, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 6-206. - Limitations on issuance of license. 
(1)  No license shall be granted for the operation of a retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages when, in the opinion of the city commission, expressed by a majority thereof, the carrying on of such business at the premises covered by the application for a license would be closer than 500 feet as measured from the closest point on the retail store's property line to the closest point on the property line of any church, park, school, licensed day care or childcare facilities, or library; a retailer's license issued under this chapter shall not be valid except at the premises recited in the application, and any change of location of said business shall be cause for immediate revocation of said license by the city, unless the location is approved in writing by the city commission. Said approval by the city commission must be authorized by approval of majority of the city commission. 
(2)  No license shall be granted for the operation of a retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages in a building structure that provides less than 1,250 square feet of floor space. 
(3)  No license shall be granted for the operation of a retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages on property not properly zoned for such use according to the Millersville Zoning Ordinance. 
(4)  No more than one license will be issued in each sector of the city limits. The sectors are defined as follows: 
North sector -Areas north of 1441 Louisville Highway 
South sector -Areas south of 1441 Louisville Highway 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-207. - Limitations on number of licenses. 
(1)  No more than one license for each 3,000 population for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued under this chapter. Further, that the population limitations and restrictions as provided for above shall not be decreased unless, first, a public notice of such proposed change is published at least one time 15 days before the first reading on such proposed amendment. 
(2)  No license shall be issued to any person or persons unless such person or persons are legal United States of America Citizens for at least two years prior to submittal of an application for retail license. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014; Ord. No. 15-642, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 6-208. - Bonds of licensees. 
    Bonds required herein shall be executed by a surety company, duly authorized and qualified to do business in Tennessee; bonds of retailers shall be $500.00. Said bond shall be conditioned that the principal thereof shall pay any fine which may be assessed against such principal. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-209. - Retailer's license. 
(1)  No retailer's license shall be issued to a person who is a holder of a public office, either appointive or elective, or who is a public employee, either national, state, city or county. It shall be unlawful for any such person to have any interest in such retail business, directly or indirectly, either proprietary or by means of any loan, mortgage, or lien, or to participate in the profits of any such business. The foregoing shall not apply to uncompensated appointees to municipal boards and commissioners where the boards or commissions on which such appointees serve have no duty to vote for, overlook, or in any manner superintend the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  No retailer shall be a person who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude, within ten years prior to the time he or the concern with which he is connected shall receive a license; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who has been so convicted, but whose rights of citizenship have been restored or judgment of infamy has been removed by a court of competent jurisdiction; and in the case of any such conviction occurring after a license has been issued and received, the said license shall immediately be revoked, if such convicted felon be an individual licensee, and if not, the partnership, corporation or association with which he is connected shall immediately discharge him. 
(3)  No license shall under any condition be issued to any person who, within ten years preceding application for such license or permit shall have been convicted of any offense under the laws of the State of Tennessee or of any other state or of the United States prohibiting or regulating the sale, possession, transportation, storing, manufacturing, or otherwise handling intoxicating liquors or who has, during said period, been engaged in business alone or with others, in violation of any of said laws or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or as they existed or may exist thereafter. 
(4)  No manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler shall have any interest in the business or building containing licensed premises of any other person having a license hereunder, or in the fixtures of any such person. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have ownership in, or participate, either directly or indirectly, in the profits of any retail business licensed, unless his interest in said business and the nature, extent and character thereof shall appear on the application; or if the interest is acquired after the issuance of a license, unless it shall be fully disclosed to the city commission and approved by them. Where such interest is owned by such person on or before the application for any license, the burden shall be upon such person to see that this section is fully complied with, whether he, himself, signs or prepares the application, or whether the same is prepared by another; or if said interest is acquired after the issuance of the license, the burden of said disclosure of the acquisition of such interest shall be upon the seller and the purchaser. 
(6)  No person shall be employed in the sale of alcoholic beverages except a citizen of the United States. 
(7)  No retailer, or any employee thereof, engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be a person under the age of 18 years, and it shall be unlawful for any retailer to employ any person under 18 years of age for the physical storage, sale, or distribution of alcoholic beverages, or to permit any such person under said age on its place of business to engage in the storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  No retailer shall employ in the storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, any person who, within ten years prior to the date of his employment, shall have been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude, and in case an employee should be so convicted, he shall immediately be discharged; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who has been so convicted but whose rights of citizenship have been restored, or judgment of infamy has been removed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(9)  The issuance of a license does not vest a property right in the licensee, but is a privilege subject to revocation or suspension according to this chapter. 
(10)  Misrepresentation of a material fact, or concealment of a material fact required to be shown in application for license shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-210. - Display of license. 
    Persons granted a license to carry on the business or undertaking contemplated therein shall, before being qualified to do business, display and post, and keep displayed and posted, in the most conspicuous place in their premises, such license. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-211. - Transfer of permits restricted. 
    The holder of a license may not sell, assign or transfer such license to any other person unless same is approved by a majority of the city commission and the state commissioner and said license shall be good and valid only for the calendar year in which the same was issued. Provided, however, that licensees who are serving in the military force of the United States in the time of war may appoint an agent to operate under the license of the licensee during the absence of the licensee. In such instances, the license shall continue to be carried and renewed in the name of the owner. The agent of the licensee shall conform to all the requirements of a licensee. No person who is ineligible to obtain a license shall be eligible to serve as the agent of a licensee under this section. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-212. - Expiration date of license. 
    Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of each calendar year and, subject to the provisions of this chapter, may be renewed each calendar year. Renewal fees consist of a non-refundable investigation fee of $300.00 and an additional $100.00 for each additional background check and credit check. In addition, pursuant to Rule 0100-03-.09 of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission, each applicant shall place a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area proposed, in this instance the Nashville Tennessean, containing all the information related to the application for renewal said notice shall run for three consecutive issues immediately preceding the date that the applicant applies to the city for a certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014; Ord. No. 15-642, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 6-213. - New license after revocation. 
    Where a license is revoked, no new license shall be issued to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on the same premises until after the expiration of one year from the date said revocation becomes final and effective. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-214. - Federal license, effect of. 
    The possession of any federal license to sell alcoholic beverages without the corresponding requisite state license shall in all cases be prima facie evidence that the holder of such federal license is selling alcoholic beverages in violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-215. - Inspection fee. 
    The following shall apply regarding inspection fees: 
(1)  There is hereby imposed an inspection fee on all gross purchases of alcohol beverages made by licensees under this chapter. Said fee to be at the maximum amount as provided for in TCA §57-3-501. 
(2)  The inspection fee shall be collected by the wholesaler from the retailer at the time of the sale or at the time the retailer makes payment for the delivery of the alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Every such wholesaler shall hold the fees imposed under the authority of this section until paid to the City of Millersville as hereinafter provided. 
(4)  Each wholesaler making sales to retailers located within the corporate limits of the City of Millersville shall furnish the City of Millersville a report monthly, which report shall contain the following: 
(a)  The name and address of the retailer; 
(b)  The wholesaler's price of the alcoholic beverages sold to such retailer; 
(c)  The amount of tax due under this section; and 
(d)  Such other information as may be required by the city commission and the City of Millersville. The monthly report shall be furnished to the city recorder of Millersville not later than the 20th of the month following which the sales were made; and the inspection fees collected by the wholesaler from the retailers located within the City of Millersville shall be paid to the City of Millersville at the time the monthly report is made. Wholesalers collecting and remitting the inspecting fee to the City of Millersville shall be entitled to reimbursement for this collection service a sum equal to five percent of the total amount of inspection fees collected and remitted, such reimbursement to be deducted and shown on the monthly report to the City of Millersville. 
(5)  Each wholesaler who fails to collect and/or remit in a timely matter the inspection fee imposed hereunder shall be liable in addition to the tax for a penalty of ten percent of the fee due the City of Millersville which shall be payable to the City of Millersville. 
(6)  The City of Millersville shall have the authority to audit the records of all wholesalers subject to the provisions of this section in order to determine the accuracy of said monthly report. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-216. - Failure to pay fees. 
    Whenever any of the persons licensed hereunder fails to account for or pay over to the city recorder any license fee or inspection fee, or defaults in any of the conditions of his bond, the city recorder shall report the same to the city attorney who shall immediately institute the necessary action for the recovery of any such license or inspection fee. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-217. - Regulations for purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to buy any alcoholic beverages herein defined from any person who does not hold the appropriate license under this chapter authorizing the sale of said beverages to him. 
(2)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverages from anyone other than a licensed wholesaler, nor shall any wholesaler sell any alcoholic beverages to anyone other than a licensed retailer. 
(3)  No licensee shall sell intoxicating liquors at retail in connection with any other business or in the same store where any other business is carried on. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-218. - Solicitation. 
    No holder of a license issued shall employ any canvasser or solicitor for the purpose of receiving an order from a consumer for any alcoholic beverages at the residence or places of business of such consumer, nor shall any such license receive or accept any such order which shall have been solicited or received at the residence or place of business of such consumer. This paragraph shall not be construed so as to prohibit the solicitation by a state licensed wholesaler of an order from any licensed retailer at the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-219. - Regulation of retail sales. 
(1)  No retailer shall directly or indirectly, operate more than one place of business in this municipality for the sale of alcoholic beverages, and the word "indirectly" shall include and mean any kind of interest in another place of business, by way of stock ownership, loan, partner's interest, or otherwise. 
(2)  No retailer shall sell, lend or give away any alcoholic beverages to any person who is drunk nor shall any retailer selling alcoholic beverages sell, lend or give away to any person accompanied by a person who is drunk. 
(3)  No retailer shall sell, lend or give away any alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age. 
(4)  No retailer shall sell, lend or give away any alcoholic beverages between 11 o'clock p.m. on Saturday and 8 o'clock a.m. on Monday of each week, and between 11 o'clock p.m. and 8 o'clock a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(5)  No retailer shall sell, lend or give away any alcoholic beverages upon Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, Labor Day, New Year's Day, or the Fourth of July. 
(6)  No retailer of alcoholic beverages shall keep or permit to be kept upon the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages in any unsealed bottles or other unsealed containers. 
(7)  No retailer as herein defined shall own, store or possess upon the licensed premises any unstamped merchandise required by the laws of Tennessee to have affixed thereto revenue stamps of said state, hereunder fails to account for or pay over to the city recorder any inspection fee, or defaults in any of the conditions of his bond, the city recorder shall report the same to the city attorney who shall immediately institute the necessary action for the recovery of any such inspection fee. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-220. - City manager and/or designated agent to determine if provisions are being complied with. 
    The city manager and/or designated agent thereof is authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any dealer for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. The refusal to permit the examination of any such books, papers, and records, or the investigation and examination of such premises, shall constitute sufficient reason for the revocation of a license or the refusal to issue a license. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-221. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any violation of the terms of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00; in such cases, suspension of said license by the city commission for 30 days shall be mandatory, and at the discretion of the city commission may be cause for revocation of said license. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Sec. 6-222. - Visible possession prohibited. 
    Visible possession of alcoholic beverages in unsealed containers upon any public street or within any governmental building shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-631, 11-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-633, 11-24-2014) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT DEVICE CODE 

Sec. 10-31. - Standard Amusement Device Code adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The Standard Amusement Device Code, 1997 edition, is hereby adopted by reference as if copied fully in this section. 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on August 15, 2000, shall prevail and to that extent any provision of such existing ordinances in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000) 
Secs. 10-32-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CARNIVALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Carnival means an aggregation of attractions, whether shows, acts, games, vending devices or amusement devices, whether conducted under one or more managements or independently, which are temporarily set up or conducted in a public place or in any private premises accessible to the public, with or without admission fee, and which, from the nature of the aggregation, attracts attendance and causes promiscuous intermingling of persons in the spirit of merrymaking and revelry. 
(Ord. No. 99-341, § 1, 10-19-1999) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-62. - Inspection of rides. 
    No ride shall be placed in operation for public use until the ride has been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical and other hazards by the building inspector or other person designated by the city manager. Adequate safeguards shall be placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving pans, belts, motor gears, electrical switches and other possible or potential hazards. This inspection will not release the owner and/or manager from any liability and will assume no liability on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-341, § 4, 10-19-1999) 
Sec. 10-63. - Games of chance; indecency. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any gambling device, lottery, number or paddle wheel, number board, punchboard or other game of chance, or conduct or make any show or attraction that contains an act of public indecency, as delineated in T.C.A. § 39-13-511, or any act that is obscene, as defined under T.C.A. § 39-17-901(10). 
(Ord. No. 99-341, § 7, 10-19-1999) 
Secs. 10-64-10-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-81. - Required. 
    No person shall conduct or carry on any carnival in the city without being licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-341, § 2, 10-19-1999) 
Sec. 10-82. - Application; issuance. 
    Any person desiring to carry on any carnival in the city may file with the building inspector an application in writing. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city and shall include the name, permanent address and date of birth of the owner and of the manager; and the proposed location of the carnival and the date and the hours during which the carnival will be operated. The completed application shall be accompanied by the fee according to the schedule in section 10-83 and by proof of insurance required by section 10-84. 
(Ord. No. 99-341, § 3, 10-19-1999) 
Sec. 10-83. - Expiration; fee. 
(a)  Every such license shall specify the period of time for which the license is issued, and the license shall expire at the end of the period stated therein. No license shall be issued for a period to exceed eight days. 
(b)  The license fee shall be: 
(1)  For not more than nine attractions, $55.00 for the first day and $35.00 for each additional day. 
(2)  For ten up to and including 19 attractions, $105.00 for the first day and $30.00 for each additional day. 
(3)  For more than 20 attractions, $200.00 for the first day and $30.00 for each additional day. 
(c)  The license fee shall be waived for nonprofit organizations located inside the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-341, § 5, 10-19-1999) 
Sec. 10-84. - Insurance required. 
    Each applicant for a license to operate a carnival in the city shall keep at all times in full force and effect a public liability insurance policy written by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, in the following amounts: not less than $25,000.00 property damage; $1,000,000.00 for injury or death of one person; and/or for any one occurrence. A copy of the policy or certificate shall be filed with the application for a license. The policy or certificate shall contain an endorsement with the following words: "The City of Millersville, its officers, employees and elected officials are held harmless in any property damage, injury or death resulting from the approval of the operation of this carnival, and shall be named insureds under the policy. No cancellation of any insurance policy shall be valid except upon 30 days' prior written notice to the city." 
(Ord. No. 99-341, § 6, 10-19-1999) 
Secs. 10-85-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR VEHICLE RACEWAYS AND RACETRACKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- For purposes of clarity, and with the city's consent, Ord. No. 11-581, §§ 2-5, adopted April 4, 2011, have been included as Art. IV, §§ 10-101-10-104. 
Cross reference- Noise, ch. 32, article III. 

Sec. 10-101. - Time restrictions for operation of motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity to operate, or to permit or allow any other person to operate, any motor vehicle, whether or not said vehicle be engaged in speed competition with any other vehicle(s), or testing, practicing or otherwise running the motor to prepare any vehicle to engage in racing or speed competition, on the premises of any raceway or racetrack, within the city limits of Millersville, Tennessee, except during the following times: 
(1)  Only on the days and times as follows: 
a.  Mondays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
b.  Tuesdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
c.  Wednesdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
d.  Thursdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. 
e.  Fridays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. 
f.  Saturdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. 
g.  In the event that racing must be canceled or postponed due to rain out on a Saturday, racing may take place on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 11-581, § 2, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 10-102. - Special permits. 
    The owner or management of a licensed racetrack desiring relief from the provisions of the ordinance from which this section was derived may apply for a special permit to cause or create noise which would otherwise be in violation of the ordinance from which this section was derived at least 21 days prior to the date for which the relief is requested. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the codes administrator, or the designee of such administrator, on forms provided for that purpose. Payment of a fee of $100.00 shall accompany the application. The application shall include: 
(1)  A complete description of the event for which relief is requested, including date, time, and duration; 
(2)  An explanation as to the need for a racing or race related event that does not comply with the provisions of the ordinance from which this section was derived; and 
(3)  Evidence that no reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
    The administrator may grant a special permit if he/she determines that the request involves unique circumstances that warrant relief and do not simply constitute an expansion of the provisions of section 10-101. The administrator shall approve or deny an application within ten days of receipt. 
    Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon any conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including but not limited to the effective date, time of day, location, equipment limitation and public notice requirements. No more than four special permits shall be issued within a 12-month period. Appeal of the administrator's denial of a special permit may be made to the chancery court of the county of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 11-581, § 3, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 10-103. - Unlawful operation without muffler system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity to operate, or to permit or allow any other person to operate, any motor vehicle at any time, whether or not said vehicle be engaged in speed competition with any other vehicle or vehicles, including testing, practicing or otherwise running the motor of any vehicle designed to engage in racing or speed competition, on the premises of any raceway or racetrack within the city limits of Millersville, Tennessee, without the use of a muffler system. Said muffler system shall, at all times, limit the sound emitted from the vehicle to less than 100 decibels, as measured by a sound level meter located 100 feet in any direction from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11-581, § 4, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 10-104. - Penalties. 
(a)  Penalty for violation of the provisions of the ordinance from which this section was derived shall be in accordance with chapter 1, section 1-9 of the Millersville Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  It shall be considered a separate offence against any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity for each vehicle that is operated or permitted or allowed to operate in violation of the above section 10-101. 
(c)  It shall be considered a separate offence against any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity for each vehicle that is operated or permitted or allowed to operate in violation of the above section 10-103. 
(Ord. No. 11-581, § 5, 4-4-2011) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 38; dead animals, § 38-4. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    At large means a pet off of the premises of the owner and not on a leash. 
    License means a pet or its owner possessing the tag and a valid certificate of vaccination. 
    Officer means employees of any animal control agency, of any governmental entity, such as Sumner County Animal Control Department, any employee of the city, and/or any person employed by any governmental entity for the purpose of enforcing laws. 
    Owner means any person, firm, association or corporation having a right of property in any pet, or who keeps or harbors a pet, or who has a pet in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who permits a pet to remain on or about any premises. 
    Pets means animals and caged animals. Animals shall include dogs, cats, horses, pigs, cows, goats, sheep, chickens, turkeys, guinea fowl, peafowl. Caged animals shall include birds, snakes, guinea pigs, rats, lizards, hermit crabs, hamsters, ferrets, rabbits, squirrels and spiders. 
    Vaccination means the process whereby an animal is immunized against rabies using a vaccine and a technique approved by the state board of veterinary medical examiners. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 1, 6-10-1997; Ord. No. 00-357, 8-15-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies; certificate. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to keep, harbor, or permit to remain in the city, any cat over six months of age or any dog over three months of age, which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as required by T.C.A. §§ 68-8-101-68-8-114. The certificate evidencing vaccination shall be issued by a licensed veterinarian, and the certificate shall be kept by the person who owns, keeps, or harbors the pet. The certificate shall be subject to inspection by any officer authorized to administer or enforce this chapter. Dogs and cats shall wear proof of vaccination at all times. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 2, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-3. - Pets running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person harboring a pet to allow the animal to run at large. 
(b)  Any pet found running at large may be seized and impounded by any person or officer. A pet is considered to be running at large when the pet is off of the premises of the owner and not on a leash. 
(c)  Any police officer or rabies control officer may go upon the owner's property to impound an animal which has been off the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 3, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-4. - Impoundment. 
    If the owner of an impounded animal can be ascertained from tags or identification carried by the animal the owner shall be notified by a telephone call to the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 4, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-5. - Redemption of pets by owner. 
    Any impounded vaccinated pet not suspected of carrying rabies or not so vicious as to be a danger to the community shall be released to the owner upon payment of an impoundment fee and a boarding fee established by the governmental entity operating the pound, but the impoundment fee shall not be less than $50.00 and the boarding fee shall not be less than $10.00 per day. Unvaccinated pets may be vaccinated in the pound at the expense of the owner. Impoundment fees and boarding fees shall be considered service fees and not fines and do not relieve the owner from the penalties provided in this chapter. Impoundment and boarding fees shall be utilized for animal control. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 5, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-6. - Disposition of unclaimed pets. 
    It shall be the duty of the impounding officer and the operator of the pound to keep all unclaimed animals for three days following the telephone notification to the owner or if notice is mailed. At the expiration of the holding period animals shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  As the city judge may direct. 
(2)  Individuals may purchase unclaimed pets at a price to be set by the rabies control office. Prior to the release of any purchased pet the pet must be vaccinated at the expense of the purchaser by a licensed veterinarian. 
(3)  Unclaimed and unpurchased animals shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 6, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-7. - Animals suspected of having rabies; confined or isolated. 
    If any animal has bitten any person, or is suspected of having bitten any person, or is for any reason suspected of being infected with rabies, any officer may cause the animal to be confined or isolated for such time as it is deemed necessary by a licensed veterinarian, to protect the safety of the people and of property. Confinement or isolation shall be at a place designated by the rabies control office or the Sumner County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 7, 6-10-1997) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 68-8-111. 
Sec. 14-8. - Confinement of female pets in season. 
    Every owner of a female pet shall confine his pet in a weathertight structure during the time the pet is in season or "heat." 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 8, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-9. - Authority to enforce chapter provisions. 
(a)  All officers shall have the right to impound any animal found in violation of this chapter and to issue complaints requiring the owner to appear in court. An officer may go upon the owner's property to impound an animal which has been off the owner's premises. 
(b)  Only police officers or rabies control officers shall issue citations for violations committed in their presence or upon a complaint made by a private citizen. 
(c)  Any individual may impound any animal found in his property in violation of this chapter. Such animals shall be turned over to an officer as soon as practical. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 9, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-10. - Interfering with police officers or public works department officials. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere for any reason with any police officer or public works department officials enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 10, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-11. - Vicious pets to be securely restrained. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any pet known to be vicious or dangerous unless such pet is so restrained as to protect other animals and persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 12, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-12. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any officer may issue a complaint to any person believed to have violated this chapter requiring the person to appear in city court and show cause why a citation should not be issued and a fine imposed for violation of this chapter. 
(b)  A complaint may be issued regardless of whether an animal has been impounded. 
(c)  A person receiving a complaint to appear may admit guilt in writing and pay a fine of $25.00 on the first offense or $50.00 for a second offense without appearing in court. 
(d)  After the owner of an animal has been cited to court and been heard from regarding repeated violations of this chapter, the city judge may order the owner's animal to be impounded permanently and disposed of in the same manner the Sumner County Animal Control Department disposes of unclaimed animals. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 13, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-13. - Noisy pets. 
    No person shall own, keep or harbor any pet which, by loud and frequent barking, whining or howling, annoys, or disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 14, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-14. - Humane care. 
    All owners of animals shall provide a clean and sanitary place for animals to live and shall provide adequate shelter and food to maintain the health and comfort of the animal. Animals shall not be crowded together so as to create an odor or endanger their health. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 15, 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-15. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
    All persons found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 96-299, § 11, 6-10-1997) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; fire prevention codes, § 34-71 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90; floodplain district, § 90-231 et seq.; subdivision regulations, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Building permit fees. 
    With the exception of single-family residence, there are hereby adopted the building permit fees set forth in SBCCII and ICC Codes under the building valuation data and to use those values listed as "good" building valuation data under each category and not to use the recommended modifiers. All building permit fees and any changes to them will be set by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 01-392, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 02-412, §§ 1, 2, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-440, 1-20-2003; 14-630, §§ 1, 2, 10-21-2014; Ord. No. 17-670, 4-18-2017) 
Sec. 18-2. - Exterior walls of new commercial, industrial, multifamily construction. 
    All newly constructed commercial, industrial, multifamily, non-profit, philanthropic, and religious use buildings shall have all exterior walls veneered with architectural masonry, cement fiber, brick, glass, or other materials approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 03-437, 12-16-2003; Ord. No. 06-482, 5-16-2006) 
Secs. 18-3-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-31. - International Building Code, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Building Code, 2006 edition, together with appendices B, Board of Appeals; G, Flood-Resistant Construction; I, Patio Covers and J, Grading, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revisions as if copied fully in this section: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
Section 1612.3 Insert: City of Millersville 
Section 1612.3 Insert: January 15, 2008 
Section 1612.3 Insert: (January 5, 1982) 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 1, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 18-32-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 82. 

Sec. 18-61. - The International Code Council Electrical Code-Administrative Provisions, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Code Council Electrical Code-Administrative Provisions, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revision as if copied fully in this section: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-366, §§ 1-3, 11-21-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 2, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 18-62-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-468, § 3, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, repealed Art. IV, which consisted of § 18-91, and which pertained to the adoption of the Standard Excavation and Grading Code and was derived from Ord. No. 94-214, §§ 1-3, adopted Feb. 15, 1994. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74. 

Secs. 18-91-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE 

Sec. 18-121. - The International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revisions as if copied fully in this section: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
Section 1301.2 Insert: (January 5, 1982) 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 4, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 18-122-18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 18-151. - The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revisions as if copied fully in this section: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
Section 108.4 Insert: (Civil Penalties) ($50.00 per day) (the authority of the court of the City of Millersville) 
Section 108.5 Insert: (less than $50.00 or more than $50.00 per day) 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 5, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 4, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 18-152-18-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 18-181. - The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2006 edition, together with appendices A, Sizing and Capacity of Gas Piping; E, Manufactured Housing used as Dwellings; G, Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs; H, Patio Covers; J, Existing Buildings and Structures; L, Permit Fees; and M, Home Daycare/R-3 Occupancy; is hereby adopted by reference with the following revisions as if copied fully in this section. 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
Section P2603.61 Insert: (18 inches; a minimum of 18 inches below grade with all state rules and regulation requirements met.) 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, §6 , 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 5, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 18-182-18-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-211. - The International Mechanical, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revision as if copied fully in this section. 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 7, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 6, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 18-212-18-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-468, § 8, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, repealed Art. IX, which consisted of § 18-241, and which pertained to the adoption of the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code and was derived from Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, adopted Aug. 15, 2000. 

Secs. 18-241-18-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 18-271. - The International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revision as if copied fully in this section: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 9, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 7, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 18-272-18-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-560, § 8, adopted Apr. 20, 2010, repealed Article XI, which consisted of § 18-301, and which pertained to the adoption of the Standard Swimming Pool Code and derived from Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 10, 8-16-2005. For current provisions, see Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2006 edition. 

Secs. 18-301-18-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 18-331. - The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference as if copied fully in this section with the following revisions: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville. 
Section 103.5 Insert: The following Fee Schedule: 
Initial Maintenance Inspections are free to owners and occupants. 
Where building permits are required for the repair of a structure, a $50.00 base permit fee will be charged in addition to $50.00 per inspection. The minimum fee for the building permit shall be $100.00. 
Section 302.4 Insert: over eight inches 
Section 304.14 Insert: from the first day of March to the last day of October 
Section 602.3 Insert: from the first day of September to the last day of the following May 
Section 602.4 Insert: from the first day of September to the last day of the following May 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 05-468, § 11, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 10-560, § 9, 4-20-2010) 
ARTICLE XIII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 18-351. - The International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revisions as if copied fully in this section: 
Section: 101.1 Insert: City of Millersville 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 10-560, § 10, 4-20-2010) 
Chapter 19. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-100. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-101. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to: 
(a)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the City of Millersville and the public health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city. 
(b)  Enable the City of Millersville to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR §122.26 for stormwater discharges. 
(c)  Allow the City of Millersville to exercise the powers granted in T.C.A. §68-221-1105, which provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to stormwater facilities, is the power by ordinance or resolution to: 
(1)  Exercise general regulation over the planning, location, construction, and operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the municipality, whether or not owned and operated by the municipality; 
(2)  Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this statute, including the adoption of a system of fees for services and permits; 
(3)  Establish standards to regulate the quantity of stormwater discharged and to regulate stormwater contaminants as may be necessary to protect water quality; 
(4)  Review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in proposed subdivisions or commercial developments; 
(5)  Issue permits for stormwater discharges, or for the construction, alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater facilities; 
(6)  Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or condition of the permit; 
(7)  Regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater facilities of sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been contaminated; and 
(8)  Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated land or other sources of stormwater contamination, whether public or private. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-102. - Authority. 
(a)  The city manager or his appointed designee shall serve as the stormwater manager. 
(b)  The stormwater manager shall serve as department head of the stormwater management department and administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The stormwater manager shall have the authority to promulgate rules, regulations and guidance consistent with this chapter in order to carry-out the meaning and intent of this chapter. 
(d)  The stormwater manager shall have the authority to prepare, or have prepared, master plans for drainage basins and to establish regulations or direct capital improvements to carry out said master plans. 
(e)  In the event that the stormwater manager determines that a violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred, or that work does not have a required plan or permit, or that work does not comply with an approved plan or permit, the manager may issue a notice of violation to the permittee or property owner and/or any other person or entity having responsibility for construction work performed at a site development, at which time the penalty provisions of this chapter shall be implemented. 
(f)  The stormwater manager shall have the authority to limit non-stormwater discharges by implementing appropriate regulations, policies and procedures. Such regulations, policy and procedures may include, but are not limited to, provisions for: 
(1)  Determination of points of origin of known or suspected non-permitted discharges; 
(2)  Implementation of a mapping program to accurately locate and map stormwater control structures, including all outflows to Millersville waters or waters of the state. 
(3)  Implementation of education programs and discharge reduction programs for City of Millersville employees and departments designated to minimize polluting discharges; 
(4)  Implementation of a community education and outreach program to inform the public of the stormwater regulations, of procedures to report illicit discharges, and to understand their rights and duties under the stormwater regulations; and 
(5)  Implementation of community programs to allow individual and organizations to engage in programs to promote public awareness of illicit discharge, to rehabilitate riparian areas to natural conditions, and to keep riparian areas free of trash and debris. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-103. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
    100-year flood elevation - The elevation of the 100-year flood at any given location. 
    500-year flood elevation - The elevation of the 500-year flood at any given location. 
    1-year frequency storm - Shall mean a storm event defined to be two and one-half inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the stormwater manager shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    2-year frequency storm - Shall mean a storm event with a 50 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. Defined to be 3.3 inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the stormwater manager shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    5-year frequency storm - Shall mean a storm event with a 20 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. Defined to be four and one-tenth inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the stormwater manager shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    10-year frequency storm - Shall mean a storm event with a ten percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. Defined to be four and eight-tenths inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the stormwater manager shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    25-year frequency storm - Shall mean a storm event with a four percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. Defined to be five and one-half inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the stormwater manager shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    100-year frequency storm - Shall mean a storm event with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. Defined to be six and one-half inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the stormwater manager shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    500-year frequency storm - Shall mean a storm event with a one-fifth of one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. Defined to be seven and six-tenths inches in 24 hours or other such magnitude the stormwater manager shall establish based upon scientific and engineering information. 
    Active channel - The area of the stream that is most subject to water flow and that includes the portion of the channel below the top of the bank. 
    Administrator - Shall be synonymous with stormwater manager. 
    Aquatic resource alteration permit (ARAP) - A permit issued by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation for physically altering waters (streams and wetlands) of the state. 
    As-built certification - As-built plans are field-verified plans signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer and/or a registered land surveyor, both licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee, which shows physical information about the development or redevelopment for purposes of verifying adherence to the approved stormwater management plan(s). 
    As built plans - Means drawings depicting conditions as they were actually constructed. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) - The 500-year flood elevation at any given location. 
    Best management practices (BMP or BMPs) - Are physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by the City of Millersville, and that have been incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein or have been adopted by resolution. As well as schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, structural controls and other management practices designed to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. 
    Board of zoning appeals (BZA) - A group of five citizens ratified by the city commission to hear appeals and decide appeals, special exceptions and variances as authorized by the City of Millersville Zoning Ordinance. 
    Borrow pit - A pit created to provide earth that can be used as fill at another site. 
    CFR - Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Channel - Means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically. 
    Clearing - In the definition of discharges associated with construction activity, clearing does not refer to clearing of vegetation along roadways, highways or power lines for sight distances or other maintenance and/or safety concerns, or cold planning, milling, and/or removal of concrete and/or bituminous asphalt roadway pavement surfaces. Clearing typically refers to removal of vegetation and/or disturbance of soil prior to grading or excavation in anticipation of construction activities. Clearing may also refer to wide area land disturbance in anticipation of non-construction activities; for instance, cleared forested land in order to convert forest land to pasture for wildlife management purposes. 
    Commencement of construction or commencement of land disturbing activities - The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading or excavating activities or other construction activities. 
    Community water - Means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the City of Millersville. 
    Construction - Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment (including contractual obligations to purchase such facilities or equipment) at the premises where such equipment will be used, including preparation work at such premises. 
    Construction related waste - Refuse or unused materials that can result from construction activities. Construction related wastes can include, but not limited to, unused building and landscaping materials, chemicals, litter, sanitary waste and concrete truck washout. 
    Contaminant - Means any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
    Covenants for permanent maintenance of stormwater facilities and best management practices - A legal document executed by the property owner or a homeowner's association as owner of record and recorded with the county register of deeds which guarantees perpetual and proper maintenance of stormwater facilities and best management practices. 
    Cross drain or culvert - A pipe used to convey stormwater from one side of a road to another. 
    Design storm event - Means a hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency interval and duration, used in the analysis and design of a stormwater facility. 
    Development - Any land change that alters the hydrologic or hydraulic conditions of any property. It is often referred to as "site development". Development includes, but is not limited to, providing access to a site, clearing of vegetation, grading, earth moving, providing utilities, roads and other services such as parking facilities, Stormwater management and erosion control systems, potable water and wastewater systems, altering land forms, or construction or demolition of a structure on the land. 
    Discharge - Means dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Disturbed area - Portion of any site that has been altered from existing conditions, including but not limited to the following: providing access to a site, clearing of vegetation, grading, earth moving, providing utilities and other services such as parking facilities, stormwater management and erosion control systems, potable water and wastewater systems, altering land forms or construction or demolition of a structure on the land. 
    Drainage basin - The area of land conveying stormwater runoff to a single point. 
    Drainage system - The system of pipes, channels, culverts and ditches that convey stormwater from and through public and private land in Millersville. 
    Easement - Means an acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land of another. 
    Erosion - Means the removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan - Means a written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
    Excavation - A cavity or hole in the land surface that is caused by the cutting, digging or scooping and removal of soil, rock, or other materials. 
    FEMA - The Federal Emergency Management Agency, which administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NIFP) 
    Filling - Any deposit or stockpiling of dirt, rocks, stumps or other natural or man-made solid waste material. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) - The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk of premium zones. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) - The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains elevations of the base flood, floodway widths, flood velocities and flood profiles. 
    Floodplain - Any land area susceptible of being inundated by water from any source. Floodplains that have been studied for purposes of flood insurance documentation are typically assigned a recurrence interval (i.e., the 100-year floodplain) which defines the magnitude of the flood event that causes the inundation in the floodplain to a specified flood elevation. The 100-year floodplain is the area subject to inundation during the 100-year flood. 
    Flood proofing - Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than on foot. 
    Floodway encroachment - Any obstruction, fill, construction, improvement or other alteration that changes the hydraulic characteristics of the regulatory floodway. 
    Grading - Any clearing, excavating, filling or other disturbance of terrain. 
    Grading permit - A permit issued by the City of Millersville authorizing the commencement of land disturbing activities (also called a land disturbance permit). 
    High quality waters - Surface waters of the State of Tennessee that are identified by TDEC as "high quality waters". Characteristics of high quality waters are listed at Rle 1200-4-3-06 of the official compilation-Rules and regulations of the State of Tennessee. Characteristics in clued waters designated by the water quality control board as Outstanding National Resources Waters (ONRW); waters that provide habitat for ecologically significant populations of certain aquatic or semi-aquatic plants or animals; waters that provide specialized recreational opportunities; waters that possess outstanding scenic or geologic values; or waters where existing conditions are better than water quality standards. High quality waters are sometimes referred to as Tier II or Tier III (ONRW) waters. 
    Hotspot (priority area) - Means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. For example gas stations, car washes, some industrial users, and other areas which potentially handle highly contaminating materials. 
    Illicit connections - Means illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the municipal separate stormwater system whether or not such connections result in discharges into that system. 
    Illicit discharge - Means any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically exempted under §19.104(a)(3). 
    Impervious area - Impermeable surfaces which prevent the percolation of water into the soil including, but not limited to, pavement, parking areas and driveways, packed gravel or soil, or rooftops. 
    Land disturbing activity - Means any activity on property that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land-disturbing activities include, but are not limited to, development, re-development, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation. 
    Maintenance - Means any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. Maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility. 
    Maintenance agreement - Means a document recorded in the land records that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Maximum extent practicable - To one's maximum ability. 
    Millersville waters - means any and all streams, creeks, branches, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the City of Millersville, Tennessee except those bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property in single ownership which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) ("Municipal separate stormwater system") - Means the conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, and storm drains. 
    Municipal storm sewer system - Means a conveyance or system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater. Sanitary sewers are not included in the definition. 
    National Pollutant Discharge System (NPDES) - The program administered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to the waters of the United States. Also a permit issued in accordance with 33 U.S.C. 1342. 
    No rise - A floodway encroachment that causes no increase to the base flood elevation and to the 100-year floodway width and water surface elevation. 
    Off-site facility - Means a structural BMP located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    On-site facility - Means a structural BMP located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    Outfall - The terminus of a stormwater system where the contents are released into a larger public or private stormwater management system, or into a stream. 
    Owner or operator - Any party associated with a construction project that meets either of the following two criteria: 
(a)  The party has operational control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to authorize modifications to those plans and specifications (this will typically be the owner or developer); or 
(b)  The party has day-to-day operational control of those activities at a project which are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the site or other permit conditions, e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the SWPPP or comply with other permit conditions. (This will typically include the general contractor and would also include erosion control contractors.) 
    Peak flow (also "peak discharge") - Means the maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular point resulting from a storm event. 
    Person - Means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
    Priority area - Means "hot spot" as defined in § 19.102(11). 
    Priority construction activity - Land disturbing activities that are located in a watershed that discharges to waters recognized by the State of Tennessee as impaired for siltation, or high quality waters. 
    Public water - Stormwater runoff that originates in whole or in part from or is conveyed by publicly owned facilities such as roads. 
    Redevelopment - The improvement of a lot or lots that have been previously developed. 
    Riprap - An erosion-resistant ground cover of large, loose, angular stone, cobbles and boulders used to line channels, stabilize stream banks and reduce runoff velocities. 
    Runoff - The water resulting from precipitation that is not absorbed by the soil. Also can be referred to as stormwater runoff. 
    Sanitary sewer - A system of underground conduits that collects and delivers wastewater for, toilets, sinks and other plumbing fixtures to a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Sediment - Means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice as a product of erosion 
    Sedimentation - Means soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream. 
    Sewage - Human wastes carried by water from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such industrial wastes, stormwater or other water as may be present; or any substance discharged from a sanitary sewer collection system. 
    Sinkhole - A depression characterized by closed contours on a topographic map. A sinkhole throat, or opening to the subsurface, may or may not be visible. 
    Small lot - A parcel of land less than one acre in area. 
    Soils report - Means a study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) - An area having special flood, mudslide (i.e. mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH. 
    Stabilization - Means providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring. 
    Stormwater - Means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration and drainage. 
    Stormwater management - Means the programs to maintain quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
    Stormwater management department - The department of the local government of the City of Millersville, which administers the provisions of [chapter 19]. 
    Stormwater management facilities - Means the drainage structures, conduits, ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of. 
    Stormwater management plan - Means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels. 
    Stormwater manager - Shall implement, under the authority of the city manager, the provisions and policies of the stormwater management department. 
    Stormwater runoff - Means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Stream - For the specific purpose of water quality buffers, a stream is defined as a linear surface water conveyance that can be characterized with either perennial or ephemeral base flow and: 
(a)  Has published floodplain elevations that have been computed as part of an approved flood study; or 
(b)  Is identified as a blue line of a seven-and-one-half-minute USGS quadrangle, unless otherwise designated by TDEC; or 
(c)  Is identified by the property owners as a stream; or 
(d)  Is or has been identified by the City of Millersville, the USACE or TDEC as a stream. 
    Structural BMPs - Means devices that are constructed to provide control of stormwater runoff. 
    Surface water - Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs. 
    TDEC - The Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. 
    Top of bank - The uppermost limit of the active channel of a stream containing normal flows, usually marked by a break in slope. 
    Total maximum daily load (TMDL) - A calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a water body can receive and still meet water quality standards, and an allocation of that amount to the source(s) of the pollutant. 
    USACE - United States Army Corp of Engineers. 
    Utility, public or private - Any agency which under public franchise or ownership, or under certification of convenience and necessity provides the public with electricity, natural gas, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service. 
    Wastes, industrial/commercial - Liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development of any natural resources. 
    Waste, other - Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, fallen bark, fallen leaves, lawn clippings, animal waste, used or previously applied lime, garbage, trash, refuse, loose used paper, paper products, plastic containers, metal containers, ashes, offal, discarded tar, discarded paint, discarded or uncontained solvents, used or discarded or spilled petroleum products, antifreeze, motor vehicle fluids, used or discarded tires, gas tanks, chemicals, or any other uncontained or unpackaged or disposed of materials which may discharge to or otherwise enter the stormwater system. 
    Water conveyance - A channel, natural depression, gully, stream, creek, pond, reservoir, lake or any other man-made or natural feature that allows water to move along or under the ground. 
    Water quality buffer - A use-restricted, vegetated area that is located along the perimeter of community waters, containing natural vegetation and grasses, enhanced or restored vegetation. 
    Watercourse - Means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Watershed - Means all the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point along a waterway. 
    Waters or water of the state - Any and all water, public or private, on or beneath the surface of the ground, which are contained within, flow through or border upon Tennessee or any portion thereof except those bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property in single ownership which do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters. 
    Wetlands - An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetland determination shall be made by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, and/or the Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-104. - Land disturbing permits. 
(a)  When required. Every person will be required to obtain a land disturbance permit from the City of Millersville Stormwater Management Department in the following cases: 
(1)  Land disturbing activity that disturbs one or more acres of land and involves grubbing, clearing, grading or excavation; 
(2)  Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land if such activity is part of a larger common plan of development that affects one or more acre of land and involves grubbing, clearing, grading or excavation; 
(3)  Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land, if in the discretion of the stormwater manager such activity poses a unique threat to water, or public health or safety; 
(4)  The creation and use of borrow pits, fill areas and/or stockpiles. 
(b)  Building permit. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has completed a notice of intent and obtained a land disturbance permit where the same is required by this chapter. 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a building permit for small lots, the owner or operator of the lot disturbing less than one acre shall prepare and adhere to small lot erosion prevention and sediment control plan that identifies the erosion prevention and sediment control measures to be employed on the site, 
a.  The small lot erosion prevention plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of City of Millersville Best Management Practices. 
b.  The stormwater manager has the discretion to require a full stormwater management plan as deemed necessary to protect streams and adjacent properties from erosion and off-site sedimentation. 
c.  Any construction related wastes, such as vehicle wash pads, construction waste materials and concrete truck washout areas, which are located on small lots, shall be handled in a manner to preclude contact with Stormwater and other water resources. 
(2)  Building permit approval may be withdrawn by the code official or a stop work order placed on the site if the builder or developer at anytime is found to be contributing to stormwater pollution, as with nonstormwater discharge or any other means of polluting any water conveyance in or adjacent to the City of Millersville. 
(3)  Building permit approval may be withdrawn by the code official or a stop work order placed on all construction and development if the site is found to be unstable due to stormwater violations, or if any stormwater violation continues after proper notification. 
(c)  Exemptions. It is acknowledged that exemptions are reviewed by the stormwater manager and should not be construed as an opportunity to circumvent the letter and spirit of the City of Millersville Stormwater Ordinance. The following developments and re-developments are exempt from the requirements for a land disturbance permit and for a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Single to two-family residential dwellings in any given area that conform to the following criteria: 
a.  Do not alter a drainage channel; or 
b.  Disturb less than one acre of land; or 
c.  Are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more; or 
d.  Do not alter the natural ground elevation by more than five feet; or 
e.  Are not located in a sinkhole, or are not located on a site where sinkholes are entirely or partially present. 
(2)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
The following activities are exempt from the stormwater permit requirement with proof as outlined below: 
(a)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. Proof of permitted use must be submitted to the code official to receive this exemption. 
(b)  Any logging or agricultural activity that is consistent with an approved farm conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the appropriate federal or state agency. The management plan and approval must be submitted to the code official to receive this exemption. 
(c)  Additions or modifications to existing structures with minimal land disturbance (that which is required to modify the structure only). 
(d)  Simple farming activities such as gardening for a single family. 
(e)  Small projects such as extending a driveway, building a patio, installation of a swimming pool or deck around a pool. 
(d)  Application for a land disturbance permit. Each application shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Business or residence address of applicant; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property of record in the office of the assessor of property; 
(4)  Address and legal description of subject property including the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject property; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan; 
(6)  A detailed statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity. 
(7)  Where the property includes a sinkhole, wetland, and/or other waters of the state, the applicant shall obtain from the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation appropriate permits. 
(8)  The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency any other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the property. However, the inclusion of those permits in the application shall not foreclose the stormwater manager from imposing additional development requirements and conditions, commensurate with this chapter, on the development of property covered by those permits. 
(9)  Where the land disturbance involves crossing or disturbing any water conveyance, applicant must present a copy of the appropriate ARAP permit or proof that it is not a requirement of the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation to the City of Millersville. 
(10)  Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A sediment and erosion control plan as described in §19.106 (5), 
b.  A stormwater management plan as described in §19.106 (4), providing for stormwater management during the land disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed, and 
c.  Payment of land disturbance permit and other stormwater management fees, which are defined in section 19-107 of this chapter and can be changed by resolution or ordinance. 
d.  A written request for a waiver, where applicable. 
e.  Where permanent stormwater structures are to be built, a detailed maintenance plan shall accompany the application and include the individual(s) and/or agency that will be responsible for the maintenance as well as the complete plan outlining the steps to be taken to keep the permanent structure maintained. 
(e)  Review and approval of application. 
(1)  The City of Millersville Stormwater Management Department will review each application for a land disturbance permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The City of Millersville Stormwater Management Department shall provide one of the following responses in writing: 
a.  Approval of the permit application; 
b.  Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
c.  Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the denial. 
d.  If waiver is requested and granted, a land disturbance permit will be issued with written notice of waiver. 
(2)  If the stormwater management department has granted conditional approval of the permit, the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the conditions established by the department. However, the applicant shall be allowed to continue with his/her land disturbing activity so long as it conforms to conditions established by the City of Millersville Stormwater Management Department. 
a.  No development plans may be implemented until the land disturbance permit has been approved. 
(f)  Permit duration. Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within 180 calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within 12 months from the date of the commencement of construction. 
(g)  Notice of intent. The stormwater management department must be notified, in writing, ten working days in advance of the commencement of any land disturbance activity regardless of land area to be disturbed. Such notification shall be on the NOI form created for this purpose by the City of Millersville. 
(1)  Exceptions. The following activities are exempt from the above requirement: 
a.  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
b.  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
c.  Any logging or agricultural activity that is consistent with an approved farm conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the appropriate federal or state agency. 
d.  Additions or modifications to existing single family structures with minimal land disturbance (that which is required to modify the structure only). 
e.  Simple farming activities such as gardening. 
f.  Small projects such as extending a driveway, building a patio, installation of a swimming pool or deck around a pool. 
(h)  Inspections. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system, BMP's and the conditions and requirements of the land disturbance permit shall be conducted by the City of Millersville Stormwater Inspector. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; 
(4)  Any violations that exist. 
(i)  Irrevocable letter of credit. When a letter of credit is required, the following applies: 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit, a letter of credit, which guarantees satisfactory completion of land disturbing activities, shall be provided for construction and/or grading activities related to erosion prevention and sediment control and water quality buffers. 
(2)  Prior to plat approval, a letter of credit which guarantees satisfactory completion of new development or redevelopment projects shall be provided for construction work related to site roadways and the stormwater management system. 
(3)  Letters of credit shall name the City of Millersville as beneficiary and shall be guaranteed from an approved financial institution or insurance carrier. The letter of credit shall be in an amount to be approved by the engineering and stormwater management departments. The amount of the installation performance security or irrevocable letter of credit shall be the total estimated construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable additional related costs, e.g., for damages or enforcement. 
(4)  The administrator may, at his discretion, require the submittal of an irrevocable letter of credit for performance security prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. 
(5)  The irrevocable letter of credit shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
(6)  The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the stormwater management department. Alternatively, the stormwater management department shall have the right to calculate the cost of construction. 
(7)  The irrevocable letter of credit shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification, by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee, that the structural BMP's have been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  The performance security or irrevocable letter of credit shall be released in full only upon a final inspection of the structural BMP's to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this chapter by a City of Millersville Stormwater inspector. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security or irrevocable letter of credit based on the completion of various development stages can be made at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-105. - Waivers. 
(a)  General. Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the administrator for approval. 
(b)  Conditions for waiver. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
(1)  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter. 
(2)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the administrator. 
(3)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and maintenance of the facility. 
(c)  Downstream damage, etc. prohibited. In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the administrator that the waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream: 
(d)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(1)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(2)  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(3)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property. 
(e)  Land disturbance permit not to be issued where waiver requested. No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be resubmitted with a stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-106. - Stormwater system design and management standards. 
    Stormwater design or BMP manual. 
(a)  Adoption. The City of Millersville adopts as its stormwater design and best management practices (BMP) manual the following publications, which are incorporated by reference in this chapter as is fully set out herein: 
(1)  Tennessee Sediment and Erosion Control Hand Book: http://www.mtas.utk.edu/knowledgebase.nsf/2efb230af01fb972852569d1007223c2/db039e1ad7a4293b85256c4d00477e7b/$FILE/sediment%20and%20erosion%20control.pdf 
(2)  Tennessee's Guide to Selection and Design of Best Management Practices. http://eerc.ra.utk.edu/WRRC.html 
(3)  Appendix A water quality buffer zone policy. 
(4)  Appendix B dry detention basin policy. 
(b)  This manual includes a list of acceptable BMPs including the specific design performance criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, by the administrator or a new manual may be adopted by resolution by the city commission. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(c)  General performance criteria for stormwater management. Unless granted a waiver or judged by the administrator to be exempt, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)  All site designs shall control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with design storms specified in this chapter or in the BMP manual and reduce the generation of post construction stormwater runoff to pre-construction levels. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the BMP manual. 
(3)  Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(4)  Stormwater discharges from "hot spots" may require the application of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices such as the installation of multi-stage water filtration units. 
(5)  Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land disturbance permits shall consult with the administrator to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(6)  The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the BMP manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater facilities. 
(d)  Minimum control requirements. 
(1)  Stormwater designs shall meet the multi-stage storm frequency storage requirements as identified in the BMP manual unless the administrator has granted the applicant a full or partial waiver for a particular BMP. 
(2)  If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the administrator may impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(e)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to allow the administrator to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. To accomplish this goal the stormwater management plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Topographic base map: A topographic base map of the site which extends beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates: 
a.  Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, wetlands; and the type, size, elevation, etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures; 
b.  Current land use including all existing structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements; 
c.  All other existing significant natural and artificial features; 
d.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; 
e.  Proposed structural BMPs; 
f.  A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions. 
(2)  Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in the BMP manual. These calculations must show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the guidelines of the BMP manual. Such calculations shall include: 
a.  A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity where applicable; 
b.  Time of concentration; 
c.  Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil moisture conditions; 
d.  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
e.  Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
f.  Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance capacities; 
g.  Flow velocities; 
h.  Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the BMP manual; and 
i.  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(3)  Soils information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(4)  Maintenance and repair plan: The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued performance. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plans to assist in the periodic inspection of the facility. 
(5)  Landscaping plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. Where it is required by the BMP, this plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect licensed in Tennessee. 
(6)  Maintenance easements: The applicant must ensure access to the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the land record. 
(7)  Maintenance agreement: 
a.  The owner of property to be served by an on-site stormwater management facility must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current property owner and all subsequent property owners. 
b.  The maintenance agreement shall: 
1.  Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is located and be recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate notation. 
2.  Provide for a periodic inspection by the property owner for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the purpose and requirements of this chapter. The property owner will arrange for this inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Tennessee who will submit a sealed report of the inspection to the administrator. It shall also grant permission to the city to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained. 
3.  Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are not limited to: the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the cutting of grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that the property owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP manual. 
4.  Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the administrator. 
5.  Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the prescribed schedule, the administrator shall perform the maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the property owner. The maintenance agreement shall also provide that the Cities cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the property. 
c.  The municipality shall have the discretion to accept the dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets the requirements of this chapter, and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the municipality must also meet the municipality's construction standards and any other standards and specifications that apply to the particular stormwater facility in question. 
(8)  Sediment and erosion control plans: The applicant must prepare a sediment and erosion control plan for all construction activities that complies with §19.106(5) below. 
(f)  Sediment and erosion control plan requirements. The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state of Tennessee. The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual, and shall include at least the following: 
(1)  Project description. Briefly describe the intended project and proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed and infrastructure required. 
(2)  A topographic map with contour intervals of five feet or less showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity. 
(3)  All existing drainage ways, including intermittent and wet-weather. Include any designated floodways or flood plains. 
(4)  A general description of existing land covers. Individual trees and shrubs do not need to be identified. 
(5)  Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project completion, specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist. Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the sequence of implementation for tree protection measures. 
(6)  Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling. 
(7)  Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the site. 
(8)  A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing characteristics. 
(9)  Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation control improvements. 
(10)  Proposed drainage network. 
(11)  Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes. 
(12)  Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water run-off mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems. The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water is concentrated, what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off-site; and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and drainage areas off-site, etc. 
(13)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other structural BMP's. 
(14)  Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation run-off. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used; stabilization measures including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan. 
(15)  Specific details for: the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level acceptable to the administrator. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of the work day by machine, broom or shovel to the satisfaction of the administrator. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(16)  Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development on the site. 
(17)  A description of on-site measures to be taken to recharge surface water into the ground water system through infiltration. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-107. - Permit fees. 
    In order to defray costs associated with the processing of permits and for inspections of land disturbing activities, a non refundable base fee of $100.00 for the first acre and $50.00 for each additional acre or portion thereof proposed to be disturbed shall be required with the application for a land disturbance permit. This fee shall be periodically reviewed and revised as necessary by resolution of the Millersville City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-108. - Post construction. 
    Recorded plat. The location of the stormwater facilities and best management practices, the recorded location of the covenants document, and inspection and maintenance guidance that outlines the property owner's responsibility shall be shown on a plat that is recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
    As built plans. All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any structures located on-site after final construction is completed along with any changes to the operations and maintenance plan submitted with the application. Significant changes must be approved by the stormwater manager. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in Tennessee. 
    Release of performance security. A completed and approved final inspection by the City of Millersville Stormwater Inspector is required before any performance security or irrevocable letter of credit will be released. The city manager shall have the discretion to adopt provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security or irrevocable letter of credit on the completion of various stages of development. In addition, occupancy permits shall not be granted until corrections to all BMP's have been made and accepted by the stormwater manager. 
    Prior to release of irrevocable letter of credit. Prior to the release of the irrevocable letter of credit or other security, the property owner shall provide the City of Millersville with an accurate as-built certification in compliance with as-built plans as outlined in section 19-108(2). 
(a)  Landscaping and stabilization requirements. 
(1)  The removal of sediment and/or other debris from Stormwater management facilities and best management practices shall be performed in accordance with all city, state and federal laws. The manager may stipulate additional requirements if deemed necessary. 
(2)  Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared by development, re-development, demolition and/or construction activities shall be re-vegetated according to a schedule approved by the stormwater manager. The following criteria shall apply to re-vegetation efforts: 
a.  Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area. 
b.  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation. 
c.  Must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
d.  Any area of re-vegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of 75 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following re-vegetation. Re-vegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75 percent survival for one year is achieved. 
(3)  In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping operations and maintenance plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(b)  Inspection of stormwater management facilities. Once the site has been stabilized and construction has ceased, routine inspections for permanent Stormwater management facilities and best management practices are required. Routine inspections are the responsibility of the property owner, or the owner/s of the stormwater management facilities. Maintenance of the privately owned stormwater management facilities shall be performed at the sole cost and expense of the owner/s of such facilities. Periodic inspections of facilities shall be performed as provided for in §19.106(4)(g)(2)(b). 
(c)  Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least ten years. These records shall be made available to the stormwater manager during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(d)  Existing stormwater facilities. Existing developments or re-developments whether or not approval of a stormwater management plan was received prior to the effective date of this section shall maintain their stormwater management facilities using the most current designs, maintenance standards and best management practices to the greatest extent practicable or be subject to municipal fines and other penalties. 
(e)  Failure to meet or maintain design or maintenance standards. 
(1)  If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards required to properly maintain the stormwater systems within the City of Millersville for the purpose of flood prevention, channel protection, water quality and/or public safety for stormwater facilities, erosion prevention, sediment control and/or stormwater systems under this chapter, the stormwater manager, after reasonable notice, may choose to begin levying fines of not less than $50.00, or more than $5,000.00, assessed each day the violation continues or may choose to correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by ordering corrective action to be performed by the city or others until all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition is completed. 
(2)  In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the stormwater manager shall notify in writing the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have seven days to begin maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner and shall complete the repair within 30 days. Failure to comply will result in fines of not less than $50.00 and not more than $5000.00 assessed each day the site remains in violation. 
a.  In the event that corrective action is not completed within the 30 days, the stormwater manager may take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the City of Millersville under this section shall be charged to the responsible party. In such cases where a performance bond or other security exists, the city shall utilize the bond for funding of the corrective actions. In such cases where a performance bond or other security does not exist or is not sufficient to cover the cost incurred, the owner shall reimburse the city for all of its direct and related expenses. If all expenses incurred by the city have not been received within ten days from the date the owner receives the invoice, a lien shall be recorded in the county of residence against such property. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-109. - Buffers. 
(a)  New development and significant redevelopment shall include a waterway buffer if the property includes or is adjacent to any "blue line" streams or intermittent "blue line" streams as indicated on USGS map, and for all waterways where a floodway and floodplain have been determined. The buffer shall be an area where the surface is left in its natural state and is not disturbed by construction. 
(b)  If the buffer must extend at least 50 feet perpendicular to the floodway on each side of the waterway. If a floodway has not been determined, the buffer must extend at least 25 feet beyond each side of the top of bank of stream, creek, or unnamed waterway. 
(c)  The administrator may grant exemptions as needed for roads and utilities which cross waterways and pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to waterways. The administrator may also reduce the buffer zone requirements when extreme loss of buildable area, as defined by a 50 percent or greater loss on a lot or parcel occurs. 
(d)  All water quality buffer zones must be protected during development activities. Prior to the initiation of development activities, ensure adequate visibility of the water quality buffer zones by staking and flagging. Permanent boundary markers, in a form approved by the Millersville Public Works Department, shall be installed at the completion of the development activities. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-110. - Existing locations and developments. 
(a)  Requirements for all existing locations and developments. The following requirements shall apply to all locations and development at which land disturbing activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this chapter: 
(1)  Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the administrator. 
(2)  Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or retaining walls constructed. 
(3)  Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with riprap, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion. 
(4)  Trash, junk, rubbish, etc. shall be cleared from drainage ways. 
(5)  Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to prevent pollution of local waters. Such control measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Ponds: 
1.  Detention pond 
2.  Extended detention pond 
3.  Wet pond 
4.  Alternative storage measures 
b.  Constructed wetlands. 
c.  Infiltration systems: 
1.  Infiltration/percolation trench 
2.  Infiltration basin 
3.  Drainage (recharge) well 
4.  Porous pavement 
d.  Filtering systems: 
1.  Catch basin inserts/media filter 
2.  Sand filter 
3.  Filter/absorption bed 
4.  Filter and buffer strips 
e.  Open channel: 
1.  Swale 
(b)  Requirements for existing problem locations. The administrator shall in writing notify the owners of existing locations and developments of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problem affecting such locations and developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems. The notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance. 
(c)  Inspection of existing facilities. The administrator may, to the extent authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well as after the adoption of this chapter, are functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the municipality's NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-111. - Illicit discharges. 
(1)  Scope. This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the municipality's separate storm sewer system. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
1.  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. It shall be illegal for any person, business, or organization to intentionally dump liquids or solids that are considered priority pollutants by the EPA onto the ground, parking lots, vehicle storage and maintenance lots, vehicle wash areas, or any other uncontained area where there is a potential for exposure to rain or stormwater runoff and potential for the pollutant to reach public or private stormwater drainage systems, City of Millersville waters or waters of the State of Tennessee. 
2.  No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge to the stormwater system, or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, sinkholes, creek banks, or other areas draining to the stormwater system. Illicit discharges include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Sewage discharges or overflows, including sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs), 
b.  Discharges of wash water resulting from the hosing or cleaning of gas stations, auto repair garages, or other types of automotive services facility, 
c.  Discharges resulting from the cleaning, repair, or maintenance of any type equipment, machinery, or facility including motor vehicles, cement-related equipment, and portable toilet services, etc., 
d.  Discharges of wash water from mobile operations such as mobile automobile washing, steam cleaning, power washing, and carpet cleaning, etc., 
e.  Discharges of wash water from the cleaning or hosing of impervious surfaces in industrial and commercial areas including parking lots, streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios, plazas, work yards, and outdoor eating or drinking areas, etc., 
f.  Discharges of runoff from material storage areas containing chemicals, fuels, grease, oil, or other hazardous materials, 
g.  Discharges of pool or fountain water containing chlorine, biocides, or other chemicals: discharges of pool or fountain filter backwash water, 
h.  Discharges of sediment and construction-related wastes, and other pollutant sources such as discarded building materials, chemicals, trash, fuel, paint etc., and 
i.  Discharges of food-related wastes (e.g. grease, fish processing, restaurant kitchen mat and trash bin wash water, etc.) 
3.  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is declared to be unlawful and prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources: 
(i)  Water line flushing or other potable water sources, 
(ii)  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water, 
(iii)  Diverted stream flows permitted by the State of Tennessee, 
(iv)  Rising ground water, 
(v)  Groundwater infiltration to storm drains, 
(vi)  Pumped groundwater, 
(vii)  Foundation or footing drains, 
(viii)  Crawl space pumps, 
(ix)  Air conditioning condensation, 
(x)  Springs, 
(xi)  Non-commercial washing of vehicles, 
(xii)  Approved non-profit organization car washing for charitable purposes, 
(xiii)  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, 
(xiv)  Swimming pools (if de-chlorinated-Less than one PPM chlorine), 
(xv)  Discharges pursuant to a valid and effective NPDES permit issued by the State of Tennessee 
(xvi)  Fire fighting activities, and 
(xvii)  Any other uncontaminated water source. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the administrator as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the administrator has so specified in writing. 
4.  Discharge due to water line flushing through a direct connection to the waters of the State of Tennessee is prohibited. Persons responsible for water line flushing activities are required to de-chlorinate discharges before such discharges come in contact with waters of the State of Tennessee. 
5.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, all illicit discharges, regardless of time elapse since initial discharge, whether the discharge was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of initial release. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
1.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited. 
a.  No person shall connect or allowed to be connected, any sanitary sewer to the stormwater system. 
2.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(c)  Reduction of stormwater pollutants. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge shall undertake all practicable measures to implement, at the person's expense, the BMP's necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. 
1.  Every person shall comply with the following minimum requirements 
a.  Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed or left, any refuse, rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or any other drainage structure, business place or upon any public or private plot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any pond, stream, creek, or any water conveyance in the city. 
b.  Owners of abutting property. The occupants, tenants, owners, lessees and/or proprietors of any real property in the City of Millersville in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall be responsible for keeping such sidewalk free of dirt and litter to the maximum extent practicable (MEP). Sweepings from such sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter, water conveyance, storm drain, drainage ditch or roadway. Sweepings that are not composed entirely of dirt or rock shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on such real property as required for the disposal of garbage. 
c.  Owners and operators of parking lots and similar structures. Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station, paved private street or road, or similar structure, shall clean those structures in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to any stormwater conveyance. 
d.  Best management practices for construction sites. All construction sites shall comply with §19-106, Tennessee Sediment and Erosion Control Handbook, and Tennessee's Guide to Selection and Design of Best Management Practices or any other ordinance that revises, supplements or replaces said section. Any construction worker, builder, homeowner or contractor performing work in the City of Millersville shall keep debris and dirt out of any roadway or stormwater conveyance. The authorized enforcement officer may require any construction worker, builder, homeowner or contractor performing work in the City of Millersville to submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan prior to final approval or issuance of a building permit, whichever applies. 
e.  Best management practices for existing conditions and new activity. The stormwater inspector may enforce controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff for any existing condition or new activity such as, land disturbance, construction, new development and redevelopment within the city as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants. Should any activity or existing condition require the review of an engineer, all costs associated with the review shall be the responsibility of the contractor, owner, builder or worker as may be appropriate. 
f.  Compliance with best management practices. Where BMP guidelines or requirements have been defined in the City of Millersville's Code of Ordinances or federal, state or city stormwater programs for any activity, operation or facility, which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, and/or discharges of non-stormwater to any watercourse or stormwater conveyance, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility, shall comply with such guidelines or requirements. Any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm drain system or water conveyance shall implement best management practices to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into stormwater conveyance or any watercourse. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
g.  Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes shall be responsible to keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that which is actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(2)  Any person engaged in activities that may result in pollutants entering the stormwater conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, undertake the measures set forth below to reduce the risk of non-stormwater discharge and/or pollutant discharge. 
(a)  Business related activities. 
1.  Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). The stormwater manager may require any business, not limited to new businesses, in the city engaged in activities that may result in a non-stormwater discharge to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) that must include an employee training program. Business activities that may require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, automotive sales or services, vehicle loading or fueling, and cleanup procedures that are carried out partially or wholly outdoors. A SWPPP shall be required and a copy retained onsite of any business, old or new, situated on any stream bank or considered for any reason a "hot spot". The SWPPP shall be updated at least every five years or at the request of the stormwater manager. 
2.  Any person conducting business or industrial activities in the city shall prevent pollutants from entering the stormwater conveyance system and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances or regulations. 
(b)  Development. 
1.  The stormwater manager may establish and impose such controls as he/she determines to be appropriate to minimize the long-term, post-construction discharge of stormwater pollutants from new development or modifications to existing development. Controls may include source control measures to prevent pollution of stormwater and/or treatment controls designed to remove pollutants from stormwater. 
2.  Any person conducting development in the city shall prevent pollutants from entering the stormwater conveyance system and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances or regulations. Pollutant sources such as construction materials, debris, trash, fuel, paint and stockpiles must be kept out of the rain as practicable. (inside a building, covered with plastic or tarps, or sealed tightly in a leak-proof container) 
3.  Concrete truck and other equipment washouts must be located away from any stream, storm drain inlets, or ditches and must be a clearly identified and protected area. All such washout areas must be periodically cleaned. 
4.  Park, refuel and maintain vehicles and equipment in one area of the site that is well away from streams, storm drains inlets or ditches to minimize the area exposed to possible spills and fuel storage. Spill kits must be kept nearby and used immediately in the event of a spill. 
5.  Construction site must be kept free of litter, construction debris and leaking containers. 
6.  Never hose down paved surfaces to clean dust, debris, or trash. Sweep up materials and dispose of them in the trash. 
7.  Never bury trash or debris. 
8.  Reduce the use of hazardous materials as practicable then, dispose or recycle hazardous materials properly as outlined by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(c)  Compliance with general permits. 
1.  Any person conducting business, industrial, construction or development activities in the city that are subject to a permit issued by the State of Tennessee, City of Millersville or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, including the construction general permit and the industrial general permit, shall comply with all requirements of such permit. 
(d)  Inspections. 
1.  The stormwater manager shall inspect all businesses located on or near a stream and other "hot spots" for illicit discharges and compliance with all stormwater ordinances, permits and SWPPP's at least once each year whether or not a complaint is received. 
2.  An onsite inspection must be completed at all sites suspected of noncompliance with this chapter. 
3.  Inspection forms specifically created for construction should be used during inspections on all new building sites or sites of land disturbance requiring a permit. 
4.  Land disturbance inspections shall be completed, using the inspection form created for this purpose, 1)following the installation of all BMP's' and prior to land disturbance, 2) following rain events, 3) at least once a month and 4) continuing until site is stable. 
5.  The release of the site by the Stormwater Manager shall be in writing and passed on to the contractor, builder, owner as identified by documents presented to the codes department or owner of record according to property tax records, whichever applies. No site shall obtain a certificate of use or occupancy until, where applicable, a release of the site has been obtained by the stormwater manager. 
(e)  Containment and notification of spills. 
1.  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person has any knowledge of any illicit spill, or suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater or the municipal separate storm sewer system, whether or not responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, shall immediately notify the appropriate authority. 
2.  The person/s responsible for such discharge, either directly or indirectly, shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. 
a.  A report shall be filed with the stormwater manager for the City of Millersville following the containment and cleanup of the illicit spill detailing the location of the spill, exact pollutant/s, outlining the discovery, containment method/s and specific cleanup steps used to bring the site into compliance. This report shall be filed at city hall within seven days of the completion of the cleanup. 
b.  When such spill, in the opinion of the stormwater manager is extensive, hazardous, not fully contained, cleanup is not adequate, or site is not compliant within a reasonable time, a report from a licensed professional may be required. The report shall contain the effects of the spill on land, air and/or water as well as all the cleanup requirements. The report shall be filed when the site has been fully cleaned and the licensed professional has approved the outcome. Failure to submit the report as required by the stormwater manager may result in municipal penalties. All costs of such a report will be the responsibility of the individual or agency accountable for cleanup of such spill. Such report shall be filed within seven days of the completion of the cleanup. 
3.  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials the person/s responsible for such discharge, either directly or indirectly shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. 
4.  In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person/s responsible for such discharge, either directly or indirectly shall notify the stormwater manager in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written report addressed and mailed to the stormwater manager within three business days of the verbal notice. The report shall detail the location of the spill, exact pollutant(s), outline the discovery, containment method(s) and specific cleanup steps used to bring the site into compliance. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least ten years. 
(f)  Illegal dumping. It shall be illegal for any person to dump liquids or solids that are considered priority pollutants by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the ground where there is potential exposure to rain or Stormwater and potential for the pollutant to reach the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System of the City of Millersville or any water conveyance. (The EPA Priority Pollutant List can be found at http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/methods/pollutants.htm .) 
(g)  Enforcement. Violations of this section of the stormwater ordinance could result in notices of violation, stop work orders, and/or municipal monetary penalties. 
(h)  Location of portable toilets. Portable toilets must be located no less than 50 feet away from any storm drain inlets, water conveyances or streams and must be located on a flat plane away from any impervious surface. Alternative locations may be approved by the inspector with or without additional safeguards. 
(i)  Location of concrete washouts. Concrete washout areas must be located at least 50 feet from storm drain inlets, water conveyances, open ditches or streams. 
(j)  Cleaning impervious surfaces. 
1.  A vacuum must be used to remove water from any impervious surface during saw cut operations; nearby stormwater inlets and other water conveyances must be protected. 
2.  Before hosing down or pressure washing any impervious surface, the surface must be swept clean and all sweepings, not comprised entirely of rock and soil, disposed of in trash receptacles; rock and soil may be returned to the property as fill. Nearby storm drain outlets and other water conveyances must be protected to keep sediments out of streams and/or the stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-112. - Administrative enforcement. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the administrator finds that any permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this article or a permit or order issued hereunder, the administrator may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the administrator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The administrator is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to paragraphs (4) and (5) below. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The administrator may order any person who violates this article or stormwater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and the place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(d)  Compliance order. When the administrator finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this article or a permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the administrator finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, the administrator may issue an order to cease and desist from all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; or 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-113. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this article, who violates any provision of this article, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article, or who fails or refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action by the City of Millersville, shall be guilty of a civil offense. 
(b)  Penalties. Under the authority provided in Tennessee Code Annotated §68-221-1106, it is declared that any person violating the provisions of this article may be assessed a civil penalty by the City of Millersville of not less than $50.00 per day or more than $5,000.00 per day. Each day of violation may constitute a separate offense subject to the maximum fine under the authority provided in the Tennessee Code §68-221-1106. 
(c)  Measuring civil penalties. In assessing a civil penalty, the Stormwater Manager may consider: 
(1)  The harm done to the public health or the environment; 
(2)  Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity; 
(3)  The economic benefit gained by the violator; 
(4)  The effectiveness of action taken by the violator to cease the violation; 
(5)  Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the City of Millersville; 
(6)  Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment. 
(d)  Recovery of damages and costs. In addition to the civil penalty in subsection (2) above, the City of Millersville may recover: 
(1)  All damages proximately caused by the violator to the municipality, which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing compliance with, this article, or any other actual damages caused by the violation. 
(2)  The cost of the municipality's maintenance of stormwater facilities when the owner of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-114. - Appeals. 
    Pursuant to T.C.A. § 68-221-1106(d), any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment as provided by this article may appeal said penalty or damage assessment. Upon issuance of a citation or notice of violation of this article it shall be conclusive and final unless the accused violator submits a written notice of appeal to the administrator within ten days of the violation notice being served. If the administrator does not issue a decision within ten days of the written notice of appeal then the violation is considered upheld. If the administrator does not reverse the decision, the aggrieved party may appeal to the City of Millersville governing body, by filing a written request for hearing within ten days of the administrator decision on the appeal. The request for public hearing shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the administrator is alleged to be in error. The governing body will then hold a public hearing within 30 days of receiving the request after giving ten days notice of the public hearing in the local newspaper and after informing the aggrieved party ten days prior to public hearing by certified mail sent to address listed upon the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-115. - Appealing decisions of the governing body. 
    Any alleged violator may appeal a decision of the municipal governing body pursuant to the provision of T.C.A., Title 27, Chapter 8. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 19-116. - Amendments to the City of Millersville Municipal Code. 
(a)  This chapter shall not replace any other municipal code, but is intended to meet the requirements of Millersville's NPDES Permit. Should any other code, subdivision regulation, or zoning regulation be found in conflict with this chapter than the stricter of the two shall apply including both existing and future ordinances adopted by the City of Millersville. 
(b)  This chapter shall take effect on the date of its final passage, the public welfare demanding it. 
(c)  If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter which is not itself invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, 4-20-2010) 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 19-117. - Title and purpose. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "stormwater utility ordinance" for the City of Millersville, Tennessee. 
(1)  Introduction. The City of Millersville finds, determines and declares that the stormwater system, which provides for the collection, treatment, storage and disposal of stormwater, provides benefits and services to all property within the incorporated City of Millersville limits. Such benefits include, but are not limited to: the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, retention, treatment and release of stormwater, the reductions of hazards to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff, improvements in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions, and improvements to water quality in the stormwater and surface water system and its receiving waters of the state all of which are managed by the stormwater coordinator as part of the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) program. 
(2)  Purpose. The objective of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the City of Millersville, Tennessee ("city") and its citizens in compliance with the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and T.C.A., § 68-221-1101 et seq. which require municipalities to implement stormwater management programs, within prescribed time frames, to regulate stormwater discharges to protect water quality; establish adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of stormwater; reduce hazards of property and life-resulting from stormwater runoff; and enable municipalities to fix and require payment of fees for the privilege of discharging stormwater. The city finds that a stormwater management system which provides for the treatment of stormwater is of benefit and provides services to all property within the city. 
It is further determined and declared that charges shall be established for each parcel of real property located with the municipal limits of the city as provided hereinafter to provide for dedicated funding sources for the administration of stormwater management programs and/or stormwater system of the city. The proceeds of charges so derived shall be used for the purposes of stormwater management including, but not limited to: planning, operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and debt service of the city's stormwater management programs and system necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
The stormwater utility purpose is to provide stormwater management for the City of Millersville including to: 
a.  Administer and enforce the City of Millersville Stormwater Management Ordinance; 
b.  Administer, plan, and implement stormwater projects to protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the City of Millersville; 
c.  Implement activities necessary to maintain compliance with the city's MS4 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit and applicable regulations, 40 CFR Section 122.26 for stormwater discharges; 
d.  Annually analyze the cost of services provided, and the system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and other revenues of the utility and make recommendations for changes therein as necessary to support the stormwater utility services; and, 
e.  Advise the board of commissioners and other City of Millersville departments on matters relating to the utility. 
(3)  Administering entity. The stormwater utility shall be part of the Millersville Stormwater Department. The stormwater utility, under the direction and supervision of the stormwater coordinator or designee, shall administer the provisions of this stormwater utility ordinance as approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-118. - Jurisdiction. 
    The stormwater utility ordinance shall govern all properties within the corporate limits of the City of Millersville, in Tennessee. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-119. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    City administrator. The city manager for the City of Millersville or his/her designee. 
    Agricultural property. Property which is zoned agricultural and/or property which yields an annual minimum, or in which the annual minimum has been met in two of the last five years, of $1,000.00 of agricultural products produced and/or sold from the operation of the property. Agricultural production shall include agricultural, forest, and/or livestock production as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Environmental Quality Incentive Program. Proof of agricultural producer status may include IRS from 1040 Schedule F or other accounting records certified by a tax preparer. 
    Base rate or unit rate . The stormwater user fee for a detached single family residential property or the rate per ERU for other developed property in the City of Millersville. 
    Best management practices or BMPs . The physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by the City of Millersville, and that have been incorporated by reference into the stormwater management ordinance as if fully set out therein. 
    Construction . The erection, building, acquisition, alteration, reconstruction, improvement or extension of stormwater facilities; preliminary planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of stormwater facilities; the engineering, legal, fiscal and economic investigations and studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures, and other action necessary in the construction of stormwater facilities; and the inspection and supervision of the construction of stormwater facilities. 
    Deficient property . Real property that does not have adequate stormwater facilities as required in the latest edition of the City of Millersville Subdivision Regulations and Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
    Developed property . Real property which has been altered from its natural state by the creation or addition of buildings, structures, pavement or other impervious surfaces, or by the alteration of the property that results in a meaningful change in the hydrology of the property during and following rainfall events. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) . The representative square footage of a detached single family residential property building site as determined pursuant to this chapter. 
    Exempt property . All public rights-of-way, public streets and public roads, public alleys, public sidewalks and public greenways, public drainage facilities, owners and/or operators of agricultural land, in the municipality, upon which the owner and/or operator conducts activities that enable the owner and/or operator to satisfy the requirements of a qualified farmer or nurseryman under Tennessee law, and railroad right-of-way properties within the City of Millersville. For purposes of this definition, "public" shall mean that which is maintained by or is or is to be dedicated to the City of Millersville and/or the State of Tennessee or the government of the United States. 
    Fiscal year . July 1 of a calendar year to June 30 of the next calendar year, both inclusive. 
    Impervious surface . A surface which is compacted or covered with material that is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, and any other oiled, graveled, graded, compacted, or any other surface which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water. 
    Impervious surface area . The number of square feet of horizontal surface covered by buildings, and other impervious surfaces. All building measurements shall be made between exterior limits of the structure, foundations, columns or other means of support or enclosure. 
    Manager means the City of Millersville City Manager or his/her designee who is designated to supervise the operation of the stormwater management programs and system. 
    Multi-family residential property means residential structure/structures located on a parcel that are designed with five or more dwelling units which accommodate five or more families or groups of individuals living separately and not sharing the same living space. 
    Other developed property means all developed property located within the municipal limits of the city with impervious surface area greater than 400 square feet other than (i) residential property; (ii) exempt property; (iii) vacant property and (iv) park lands/cemetery. Other developed property shall include commercial properties, industrial properties, apartments, parking lots, hospitals, schools, recreational and cultural facilities, industrial properties, hotels, offices, churches, federal, state and local government properties and multi-use properties. Such property shall also include single family dwellings which are attached to or otherwise a part of a building housing a commercial enterprise. Any residential structure which contains more than four attached dwelling units is specifically included in this definition. 
    Park land/cemetery means all real property owned by federal, state and/or local governments that has been designated by such governmental entity for use as a public park or cemetery. 
    Person . Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
    Property owner . The property owner of record as listed in the city's and/or county's tax assessment roll. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver, or personal representative. 
    Runoff coefficient is a term used to describe the percentage of precipitation that leaves a particular site as runoff. Runoff is precipitation that does not soak or absorb into the soil surface and is greatly impacted by the amount of impervious surface that exists on a particular site. The runoff coefficient relates the amount of impervious surface to the intensity of development. 
    Single family residential property . A developed property which serves the primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit to a single family. A single family detached dwelling, a townhouse, an accessory apartment or second dwelling unit, a condominium, a duplex, a triplex, a quadruplex, a villa, or a garden home is included in this definition. A single family dwelling which is attached to, or otherwise a part of, a building housing a commercial enterprise is not included in this definition. 
    Stormwater . Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, infiltration, and drainage. 
    Stormwater management means the planning, design, construction, regulation, improvement, repair, maintenance, and operation of facilities and programs relating to water, flood plains, flood control, grading, erosion, tree conservation, and sediment control. 
    Stormwater management fund or fund means the fund created by this chapter to operate, maintain, and improve the city's stormwater management system. 
    Stormwater system or system means all manmade and natural conveyances and structures, stormwater facilities, and flood control facilities within the corporate limits of the City of Millersville City and all improvements thereto for which the partial or full purpose or use is, among other things, to control discharges and flows necessitated by rainfall events; and incorporate methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, prevent or reduce flooding, over drainage, environmental degradation and water pollution or otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system. This includes all natural conveyances (1) for which the City of Millersville has assumed a level of maintenance responsibility; (2) to which the City of Millersville has made improvements; (3) which have or may pose a threat to public property because of flooding; or (4) for which the City of Millersville is accountable under federal or state regulations for protecting the water quality within its jurisdictional boundaries. 
    Stormwater user fee or fee . The utility service fee established under this chapter and levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces of real property to fund the costs of stormwater management and of operating, maintaining, and improving the stormwater system in the City of Millersville. The stormwater user fee is in addition to other fees that the City of Millersville has the right to charge under any other rule or regulation of the City of Millersville. 
    Stormwater utility . A management structure that is responsible solely and specifically for the stormwater management program and system. 
    Surface water . Waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes, ponds, wetlands, marshes and sinkholes. 
    Trailer parks . Trailer parks are considered several single family units on one parcel. Assessment of these shall be by the square footage of impervious surface.. 
    User . The owner or customer of record of property subject to the stormwater user fee imposed by this chapter. 
    Vacant/undeveloped property . Property on which there is no structure for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued and does not have more than 400 square feet of impervious surface area on it. 
    Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-120. - Funding of stormwater utility. 
    Funding for the stormwater utility's activities may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stormwater user fees; 
(2)  Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising from the violation of the City of Millersville Stormwater Management Ordinance and City of Millersville Stormwater Utility Ordinance; 
(3)  Stormwater permit and inspection fees; and 
(4)  Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and private grants, or revolving funds, and from the Local Government Public Obligations Act of 1986 (Tennessee Code Annotated, title 9, chapter 21). 
    To the extent that the stormwater user fees collected are insufficient to construct needed stormwater drainage facilities, the cost of the same may be paid from such City of Millersville funds as may be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-121. - Stormwater utility management fund. 
    All revenues generated by or on behalf of the stormwater utility shall be deposited in a stormwater utility management fund and used to fulfill the purposes of the stormwater utility. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-122. - Operating budget. 
    The board of commissioners shall adopt, based on a recommendation from the city administrator, public services director, finance director, public works superintendent and/or stormwater manager/coordinator, an operating budget for the stormwater utility management fund each fiscal year. The operating budget shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-123. - Stormwater user fee established. 
    There shall be imposed on each and every developed property in the City of Millersville, except exempt property, a stormwater user fee, which will be charged either monthly or as a regular interval charge, which shall be set from time to time by ordinance as adopted by the City of Millersville. Prior to establishing or amending the stormwater user fee, the City of Millersville shall advertise its intent to do so by publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Millersville at least ten days in advance of the meeting of the board meeting which shall consider the adoption of the fee or its amendment. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-124. - Equivalent residential unit (ERU). 
    Establishment. The equivalent residential unit (ERU) as a method of measurement is established for the purpose of calculating the base stormwater user fees. Such ERU shall be set as 2,900 square feet of impervious area. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-125. - Property classification for stormwater user fees. 
(1)  Property classifications. For purposes of determining the stormwater user fee, all properties in the City of Millersville are classified into one of the following categories: 
a.  Single family residential property; 
b.  Other developed property; 
c.  Vacant/undeveloped property; and 
d.  Exempt property; 
    Single family residential fee. The board finds that the intensity of development of most parcels of real property in the City of Millersville classified as single family residential is less than the average intensity of development for other developed property and similar to each other and that it would be excessively and unnecessarily expensive to determine precisely the square footage of the impervious surface on each such parcel. Therefore, all single family residential properties, excluding duplexes and above, in the City of Millersville shall be charged the unit rate for single family residential properties regardless of the size of the parcel or the impervious surface area of the improvements. 
    Other developed property fee. The fee for other developed property (i.e., non-single-family residential property) in the City of Millersville shall be charged the unit rate for other developed property plus the fee associated to the square footage of impervious surface as stated in section 19-126. 
    Vacant/undeveloped property fee. There shall be a base $4.00 stormwater user fee for vacant/undeveloped property or as otherwise provided by state law. 
    Exempt property. There shall be no stormwater user fee for exempt property or as otherwise provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-126. - Unit rate. 
    The board hereby establishes a unit rate for single family residential property of $4.00 per month. The board hereby establishes a base rate for other developed property of $4.00 per month in addition to charges for the impervious portions of the property as prescribed below: 
0-300 sq. ft. $ 0.00 300-3,000 sq. ft. $ 2.00 3,000-6,000 sq. ft. $ 4.00 6,000-9,000 sq. ft. $ 6.00 9,000-15,000 sq. ft. $10.00 15,000-21,000 sq. ft. $14.00 21,000-30,000 sq. ft. $20.00 30,000-42,000 sq. ft. $28.00 42,000-57,000 sq. ft. $38.00 57,000-75,000 sq. ft. $50.00 75,000-99,000 sq. ft. $66.00 99,000-125,000 sq. ft. $70.00 Over 125,000 sq. ft. $80.00  
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-127. - Proper owners to pay charges. 
    The owner of each property/tax lot shall be obligated to pay the stormwater user fee as provided in this chapter, provided however, that if no water or sewer service is being provided by the City of Millersville or local water utility district at the property to the owner as a customer of record and such service is being provided to a customer of record other than the owner, it shall be presumed that the owner and such customer of record have agreed that the customer of record shall be obligated to pay such stormwater user fee. 
    If the customer of record other than the owner refuses to pay the stormwater user fee, the owner of each property shall be obligated to pay the stormwater user fee as defined in this chapter. 
    Single-family residential properties shall be billed a flat single-family residential fee based on the placement of utility meters. Each unit of a multi-tenant single-family residential building (up to four units) shall be the single family residential fee, to the customer of record for the unit. If units are not individually billed for any water or sewer service, i.e. water and sewer utilities are billed to a master meter, then the parcel owner for the master meter shall be billed as other developed property based on the total impervious surface area. In the case where two or more single family homes are located on one property, each single family home shall be assessed the residential fee. 
    Multi-family residential (greater than four units, apartments) and multi-tenant non-residential properties shall be billed an impervious-based fee according to the placement of parcels, i.e. if the property contains individual unit parcels, then the stormwater user fee shall be billed to individual units based on the unit's pro rata percentage of impervious surface. If the multi-tenant property contains only a master parcel, then the stormwater user fee for the entire impervious surface area shall be billed to the owner of record for such master parcel. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-128. - Billing procedures and penalties for late payment. 
(1)  Rate and collection schedule. The stormwater user fee shall be billed and collected monthly with the monthly utility services bill for all properties within the corporate limits. 
    All bills for the stormwater user fee shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules and regulations of the applicable utilities department pertaining to the collection of the stormwater user fees. 
(2)  Delinquent bills. The stormwater user fee shall be considered delinquent if not received by the City of Millersville or applicable billing water utility by the due date stated within the utility statement, and subsequent late fees shall be imposed as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by the board of commissioners as established by an ordinance. 
(3)  Penalties for late payment; failure to pay. Stormwater user fees shall be subject to a late fee established by ordinance as indicated in the stormwater user fee schedule. The City of Millersville shall be entitled to recover attorney's fees incurred in collecting delinquent stormwater user fees. The city or other collecting utility provider may discontinue utility service to any stormwater user who fails or refuses to pay the stormwater user fees and may refuse to accept payment of the utility bill from any user without receiving at the same time, payment of the stormwater user fee charges owned by such user and further may refuse to re-establish service until all such fees have been paid in full. 
(4)  Mandatory statement. Pursuant to T.C.A. § 68-221-1112, each bill that shall contain stormwater user fees shall contain the following statement in bold: "THIS FEE HAS BEEN MANDATED BY CONGRESS". 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-129. - Appeals of fees. 
    Any person who disagrees with the calculation of the stormwater user fee, as provided in this chapter, may appeal such fee determination to the Millersville Board of Commissioners within 60 days after receipt of stormwater bill is due. Any appeal not filed within the time permitted by this section shall be deemed waived. 
    All appeals shall be filed in writing addressed to the stormwater manager/coordinator for the City of Millersville and shall state the grounds for the appeal and the amount of the stormwater user fee the appellant asserts is appropriate. The appeal shall provide such information and documentation supporting the basis of the appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal review fee as set forth by the board of commissioners. 
    The Millersville Board of Commissioners shall review the appeal and determine whether the challenged determination is consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Appeals related to the stormwater user fee shall be decided based on substantiated evidence with a sound engineering and factual basis. All appeal determinations shall be applied utilizing a strict interpretation of the stormwater utility ordinance. At any hearing related to an appeal or credit determination, the city shall be allowed to present evidence, findings, and recommendations; appealing parties and applicants shall be given an opportunity to present evidence, findings, and recommendations. 
    The Millersville Board of Commissioners may request additional information from the appealing party; the committee may defer the determination of an appeal one time to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Millersville Hearing Authority. Each appeal shall be placed on the Millersville Board of Commissioners agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting, within 30 days after the stormwater manager/coordinator receives the written appeal. 
    The stormwater manager/coordinator shall notify the appellant customer of the date of the appeal review hearing in writing; such written notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing by regular mail at the address provided in the written appeal document. The decision of the Millersville Board of Commissioners shall be final and conclusive with no further administrative review. 
    If a refund is due, the stormwater manager/coordinator shall authorize the refund which will be provided as the stormwater manager/coordinator deems as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-130. - Stormwater user fee credit and adjustment policy. 
    A "stormwater user fee credits and adjustments" policy shall be developed by the stormwater manager/coordinator that provides for an appropriate reduction in the stormwater user fee for other developed property for defined actions or activities that reduce the city's cost of service or reduce the property's use of the stormwater system and which are ongoing. Application shall be made in the manner prescribed in the policy document and such user fee credits or adjustments shall be retroactive to the first month in which the unit rates within this chapter take effect for a period of one year. Thereafter such user fee credits and adjustments shall become effective in the next month or billing cycle after final approval. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 19-131. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective as of the date of its passage on second reading by the board of commissioners. Stormwater user fees shall be charged as a utility billing for all customers within the corporate city limits. The effective date of the new unit rates shall be February 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 15-649, 1-19-2016) 
APPENDIX A. - CITY OF MILLERSVILLE WATER QUALITY BUFFER ZONE POLICY 

Sec. 1. - Description. 
    A water quality buffer zone is a strip of undisturbed native vegetation, either original or re-established, that borders streams and rivers, ponds and lakes, wetlands, and seeps. Buffers zones are most effective when stormwater runoff is flowing into and through the buffer zone as shallow sheet flow, rather than in concentrated form such as in channels, gullies, or wet weather conveyances. Therefore, it is critical that the design of any development include management practices, to the maximum extent practical, that will result in stormwater runoff flowing into and through the buffer zone as shallow sheet flow. 
    Buffer zones protect the physical and ecological integrity of water bodies from surrounding upland activities in the following ways: 
  Filtering excess amounts of sediment, organic material, nutrients and other chemicals; 
  Providing flood protection; 
  Reducing storm runoff velocities; 
  Protecting channel bank areas from scour and erosion; 
  Providing shade for cooling adjacent water; which allows waters to hold a greater level of dissolved oxygen; and 
  Providing leaf litter and large woody debris important to aquatic organisms. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. A § I, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 2. - Intent. 
    The intent of this policy is to protect and maintain the native vegetation in riparian areas by implementing specifications for the establishment, protection and long-term maintenance of water quality buffers zones along all intermittent and perennial stream waterways and wetlands, in or adjacent to new development and significant redevelopment within our jurisdictional authority. This policy serves to clarify the requirements for streamside water quality buffers. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. A § II, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 3. - Design standards for water quality buffer zones. 
    A water quality buffer zone is required along all perennial and intermittent stream waterways and wetlands as identified on a seven-and-one-half-minute USGS quadrangle map, or as determined by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation or Millersville's Public Works Department. The buffer width shall be calculated as follows: 
Option #1 
(a)  In areas where a floodway profile has been computed as part of an approved flood study, the buffer zone shall be the width of the floodway plus at least 50 feet perpendicular from the edge of the floodway on each side of the waterway, or 100 feet perpendicular from the top of bank on each side of the waterway, whichever is greater. 
(b)  In areas where a floodway profile has not been computed as part of an approved flood study, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 feet perpendicular from the top of bank on each side of the waterway. 
(c)  When delineated wetland or critical areas extend beyond the edge of the required buffer zone width, the buffer zone shall be adjusted so that the buffer zone consists of the extent of the delineated wetland plus 25 feet extending perpendicular beyond the wetland edge. 
Option #2 
(a)  In areas where there has been an approved flood study, the buffer zone width shall be at least 100 feet perpendicular from the top of bank on each side of the waterway. 
(b)  In areas where there has not been an approved flood study, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 feet perpendicular from the top of bank on each side of the waterway. 
(c)  When delineated wetland or critical areas extend beyond the edge of the required buffer zone width, the buffer zone shall be adjusted so that the buffer zone consists of the extent of the delineated wetland plus 25 feet extending perpendicular beyond the wetland edge. 
Water quality buffer zone width adjustment: 
(a)  If there are 15 percent to 24 percent slopes which are within the required buffer zone width, the buffer width must be adjusted to include an additional 20 feet. 
(b)  If there are 25 percent or greater slopes which are within the required buffer zone width, the buffer width must be adjusted to include an additional 50 feet. 
(c)  If the adjacent land use involves drain-fields from on-site sewage disposal and treatment system (i.e., septic systems), subsurface discharges from a wastewater treatment plant, or land application of bio-solids or animal waste, the buffer zone width must be adjusted to include an additional 50 feet. 
(d)  If the land use or activity involves the storage of hazardous substances or petroleum facilities, the buffer zone width must be adjusted to include an additional 100 feet. 
(e)  If the land use or activity involves raised septic systems or animal feedlot operations, the buffer zone width must be adjusted to include an additional 200 feet. 
(f)  If the land use or activity involves solid waste landfills or junkyards, the buffer zone width must be adjusted to include an additional 250 feet. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. A § III(1), 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 4. - Water quality buffer zone management and maintenance. 
    The function of the water quality buffer zone is to protect the physical and ecological integrity of the waterway, to reduce flooding potential, and to filter runoff from residential and commercial development. The buffer zone vegetative target is undisturbed native vegetation. 
(a)  Management of the water quality buffer zone includes specific limitations on alteration of the natural conditions. The following practices and activities are restricted within the water quality buffer zone, except with prior approval by the Millersville Public Works Department: 
(1)  Clearing or grubbing of existing vegetation; 
(2)  Soil disturbance by grading, stripping, or other practices; 
(3)  Filling or dumping; and 
(4)  Use, storage, or application of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. 
(b)  The following structures, practices, and activities are permitted in the water quality buffer zone, subject to the prior approval of the Millersville Public Works Department and the following specific design or maintenance features: 
(1)  Stream crossings, paths, and utilities 
a.  An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no economically feasible alternative is available; 
b.  The right of way should be the minimum width needed to allow for maintenance access and installation; 
c.  The angle of a crossing shall be perpendicular to the stream or buffer in order to minimize clearing requirements; 
d.  The minimum number of crossings should be used within each development, and no more than one crossing is allowed for every 1,000 linear feet of buffer zone. Where possible, the design of roadways and lots within a development should be aligned such that all streams are either to the rear or the side of individual lots, never along the front. 
(2)  Individual trees within the water quality buffer zone may be removed if in danger of falling, causing damage to dwellings or other structures, or causing blockage of the stream. The root wad or stump should be left in place, where feasible, to maintain soil stability. 
(c)  All site development plans and plats prepared for recording shall: 
(1)  Show the extent of any water quality buffer zone on the subject property by metes and bounds and be labeled as "water quality buffer zone"; 
(2)  Provide a note to reference any water quality buffer zone stating, "There shall be no clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of soil and/or native vegetation except as permitted by the Millersville Public Works Department"; and 
(3)  Provide a note to reference any protective covenants governing all water quality buffer zones stating, "Any water quality buffer zone shown hereon is subject to protective covenants which may be found in the land records and which restrict disturbance and use of these areas." 
(d)  All water quality buffer zones must be protected during development activities. Prior to the initiation of development activities, ensure adequate visibility of the water quality buffer zones by staking and flagging. Permanent boundary markers, in the form of signage approved by the Millersville Public Works Department, shall be installed prior to the completion of the development activities. 
(e)  Stream banks and other areas within the water quality buffer zone must be left in a stabilized condition upon completion of the development activities. The vegetative condition of the entire streamside water quality buffer must be monitored and landscaping or stabilization performed to repair erosion, damaged vegetation, or other problems identified. Only native vegetation may be used in conjunction with stabilization activities. A guide to selecting native vegetation can be found at www.tva.com/river/landandshore/stabilization/plantsearch.htm , or obtained by contacting the Millersville Public Works Department. 
All landscaping or stabilization activities within the water quality buffer zone must have prior approval by the Millersville Public Works Department. In addition, performing work in and around waters of the state may require coverage under a state and possibly a federal permit. Contact the nearest Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, Division of Water Pollution Control environmental assistance center for more information on whether a proposed activity requires a permit. 
(f)  All water quality buffer zones shall be maintained through a declaration of protective covenant, which is required to be submitted for approval by the Millersville Public Works Department. The covenant shall be recorded in the land records and shall run with the land and continue in perpetuity. 
(g)  All lease agreements must contain a notation regarding the presence and location of protective covenants for water quality buffer zones, and which shall contain information on the management and maintenance requirements for the water quality buffer zones for the new resident. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. A § III(2), 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 5. - Waivers/variances. 
(a)  This water quality buffer zone policy shall apply to all proposed development except for a development which prior to the effective date of this ordinance: 
(1)  Is covered by a valid, unexpired plat in accordance with development regulations; 
(2)  Is covered by a current, executed public works agreement; 
(3)  Is covered by a valid, unexpired building permit; or 
(4)  Has been granted a waiver in accordance with current development regulations. 
(b)  The Millersville Public Works Department may grant a variance for the following: 
(1)  Those projects or activities where it can be demonstrated that strict compliance with the ordinance would result in practical difficulty or financial hardship; or 
(2)  Those projects or activities serving a public need where no feasible alternative is available; or 
(3)  The repair and maintenance of public improvements where avoidance and minimization of adverse impacts to wetlands and associated aquatic ecosystems have been addressed. 
(c)  Waivers for development may also be granted in two additional forms, if deemed appropriate by the Millersville Public Works Department: 
(1)  The water quality buffer zone width may be relaxed and permitted to become narrower at some points as long as the width is not reduced to less than 35 feet perpendicular from the top of bank, and the overall average width of the buffer meets the minimum requirement. 
(2)  The Planning Department may offer credit for additional density elsewhere on the site in compensation for the loss of developable land due to the requirements of this ordinance. This compensation may increase the total number of dwelling units on the site up to the amount permitted under the base zoning. 
(d)  The applicant shall submit a written request for a variance to the Millersville Public Works Department. The application shall include specific reasons justifying the variance and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance request. The Millersville Public Works Department may require an alternatives analysis that clearly demonstrates that no other feasible alternatives exist and that minimal impact will occur as a result of the project or development. 
(e)  When considering a request for a variance, the Millersville Public Works Department may require additional information such as, but not limited too, site design, landscape planting, fencing, the placement of signs, and the establishment of water quality best management practices in order to reduce adverse impacts on water quality, streams, and wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. A § IV, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 6. - Conflict with other regulations. 
    Where the standards and management requirements of this buffer ordinance are in conflict with other laws, regulations, and policies regarding streams, steep slopes, erodible soils, wetlands, floodplains, timber harvesting, land disturbance activities or other environmental protective measures, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. A § V, 4-20-2010) 
APPENDIX B. - CITY OF MILLERSVILLE DRY DETENTION BASIN POLICY 

Sec. 1. - Description. 
    A detention basin (also known as a detention pond) is the most common method to satisfy stormwater detention requirements. It is applicable to small and large developments, can be easily designed and constructed, and is long-lasting and durable while reducing peak flows (with adequate inspection and maintenance). This practice can also provide a reduction in sediment, as well as a reduction in nutrients, toxic materials, heavy metals, floatable materials, oxygen demanding substances, and oil and grease. 
    A dry detention basin is intended to drain dry between storm events but sometimes may not have a chance to drain completely between closely occurring storm events. The detention basin begins to fill as stormwater runoff enters the facility. The first flush volume is captured in order to improve water quality. One or more outlet structures then release the stormwater runoff slowly to reduce peak discharge rates and to provide time for sediments to settle. Litter and debris are prevented from leaving the detention basin, and soluble pollutants are captured by a combination of vegetation and soils. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § I, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 2. - Selection criteria. 
(a)  The primary objective is to reduce the incoming peak flow discharge and slow the stormwater runoff response from a particular property or development, thus reducing flooding downstream. 
(b)  The secondary objective is to remove suspended sediments, trash and debris, oil, grease and other pollutants to protect the water quality of Tennessee streams and channels. Although dry detention basins are usually not as effective at removing soluble pollutants as wet detention basins and wetlands, dry detention basins are usually easier and less expensive to construct, inspect and maintain. Dry detention basins can be used wherever a lack of sufficient supply water would prevent the use of wet detention basins or wetlands. 
(c)  Dry detention basins can also supply multiple benefits for passive recreation during dry periods (recreational trails, ball fields, picnicking). Portions of a dry detention basin that are not wetted frequently can be attractively landscaped or used for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § II, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 3. - Design and sizing considerations. 
(a)  A permanent detention basin design must be stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Tennessee. The professional engineer must be qualified by education and experience to perform the necessary hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. 
(b)  As the primary objective, dry detention basins must be designed to have adequate detention storage and outlet structures to limit the peak discharge rate for the post development conditions to be no greater than the peak discharge rate for the predevelopment conditions. Multi-stage detention is required for the one-year, two-year, five-year, ten-year, and 25-year storms (with NRCS Type II 24-hour rainfall distribution). Additional stages (i.e. 50-year and 100-year) may be required for special watersheds. 
(c)  As the secondary objective, water quality improvement is obtained through the use of the first flush treatment volume. The first one-half inches of stormwater runoff, over the entire contributing drainage area of the development, is defined as the first flush volume (with a minimum value of 4,500 cubic feet). The initial wave of stormwater runoff is more likely to contain aerially-deposited sediments, particulates from vehicles (such as incomplete combustion, dust from brake linings, tire particles), leaves, trash, cigarette butts, etc. The first flush volume must be captured and then slowly released over a minimum 24-hour period (and maximum of 72 hours). 
(d)  Additional measures may be required to improve stormwater quality, depending upon the nature of the land use and expected pollutants. Pretreatment of stormwater runoff with a media filtration inlet or oil/water separator may be necessary. A trash rack for capturing floating debris is generally considered to be standard equipment for a stormwater treatment BMP. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § III, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 4. - Location and layout. 
    Basic elements of a dry detention basin are illustrated in Figure 1. The recommended design includes the use of a sediment fore-bay to reduce sediment loading, particularly if the post-construction detention basin is a modification from a temporary sediment basin during the construction phase. The use of an upper stage (for storage of infrequent storms) is optional; there are both benefits and drawbacks. A shallow detention basin with a large surface area will usually perform better than a deeper detention basin with the same volume. However, shallow storage areas increase the overall surface area needed for detention. 
    Design flow paths to minimize potential short-circuiting by locating the drainage inlets to the basin as far away from the outlet structure as possible. The length-to-width ratio of a basin should be at least 3:1. Baffles or back-slope drains may be used to prevent short-circuiting for ratios less than 3:1. Increase pond area and volume to compensate for dead spaces if topography or aesthetics require the pond to have an irregular shape. It is important to reduce the velocity of incoming stormwater using riprap or other energy dissipaters. 
    Although dry detention basins are generally less expensive to construct and maintain than wet detention basins, they provide lower water quality benefits. The primary disadvantage of a dry detention basin is the amount of surface area required, which can be reduced somewhat by using concrete retaining walls on one or more sides. In general, concrete retaining walls should not face southward in order to reduce the potential for heating on hot summer days. 
    Bedrock and topography must be considered during preliminary design. Karst topography may indicate fractured bedrock, dissolved limestone passages, or sinkholes, for which a detention basin would be highly detrimental. The additional water volume that is introduced to the underground limestone passages, or even the additional weight of ponded water, could intensify karst activity and eventually collapse the bed of the detention pond. 
    Interaction with site utilities must be considered during preliminary design. Typical utilities include electrical, telephone, cable TV, water, sewer, natural gas, petroleum, etc. These utilities may or may not be in a dedicated utility easement, so it is always necessary to conduct a careful site survey. Detention basins (including embankments) should not be allowed over utility lines. Conversely, utility trenches should not be constructed on existing detention basin structures. 
    Detention basin easements and access must be considered during preliminary design, in order to allow for the construction easement and maintenance. Detention basins that are not frequently inspected and maintained often become more of a nuisance than a beneficial part of a stormwater management program. In particular, provide access for inspection and maintenance to the sediment fore-bay and to the outlet control structure. It may also be desirable to encourage or discourage public access to the detention basin (by using site grading, signs, fences or gates). Additional safety elements include trash racks, grating over pipes and culverts, gentle side slopes whenever possible, increased visibility and/or lighting in residential areas, etc. 
    Small detention basins serving individual properties do not offer as much recreational benefits as community or regional detention basins would. Regional facilities can often be landscaped to offer recreational and aesthetic benefits. Jogging and walking trails, picnic areas, and ball fields are some of the typical uses. For example, portions of the facility for flood control of major design storms can be used for exercise areas, soccer fields, or football fields. Wildlife benefits can also be provided in the form of islands, buffer areas, or preservation zones. It is important to maintain such areas, however as their primary purpose is for stormwater management. Under no circumstances should debris be allowed to accumulate near the outlet. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § IV, 4-20-2010) 
Editor's note- Figure 1 can be found in city offices on request. 
Sec. 5. - Volume and size. 
    The volume of a dry detention basin consists of two elements: the live pool (the upper portion of the basin representing detention capability) and the first flush volume (the lower portion of the basin representing stormwater quality treatment). Since the post-development peak runoff may not exceed the pre-development peak flow rate, the upper section's volume should be based on a standard storage routing method. 
    Detention basins shall be sized to collect the one-half inches of stormwater runoff from the entire contributing area, or the first 4,500 cubic feet of stormwater runoff, whichever is greater. The first flush volume must be released at a controlled rate over a minimum 24-hour period (and a maximum 72-hours period). 
    As a warning to those who design detention basins, it should be realized that future stormwater regulations are likely to be more stringent than the current regulations. This is mostly driven by national and state laws and regulations, which will require municipalities and county governments to accomplish additional pollution reduction with a proportional effort for water quality monitoring and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § V, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 6. - Grading. 
    Side slopes of detention basins and embankment dams shall be 3:1 (H:V) or flatter, except where approved by the engineering reviewing authority. This encourages a strong growth of vegetation on the side slopes, helps to prevent soil erosion, and allows for safer mowing. Steep slopes, particularly on embankments or other fill soils, will contribute to soil erosion if not properly vegetated or stabilized, and thereby reduce or negate the effectiveness of a dry detention basin with respect to water quality. Vegetate the side slopes and basin bottom to the maximum extent practical. If significant side erosion is expected, consider the use of soil stabilization or armoring techniques. Detention basins should not be located immediately above or below a steep slope or grade, because impounded water may create slope stability problems. 
    Minimum width for top of embankment is six feet. The embankment height should allow for up to ten percent settlement of embankment, unless the embankment is thoroughly compacted with vibratory equipment or sheeps-foot rollers. The top of embankment (after expected settlement) shall generally be at least two feet above the top of outlet structure and at least one foot above the peak 100-year water surface elevation. Compaction in the immediate area of the emergency spillway can be difficult, but is necessary. 
    The use of a back-slope drain can be very beneficial in preventing erosion at detention basins. See Figure 5 for a typical detail. The back-slope drain is also useful for increasing lengths of flow paths to prevent short circuiting of the detention basin. Intercepted stormwater can be routed around the detention basin to enter at the most hydraulically distant point from the outlet structure. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § VI, 4-20-2010) 
Editor's note- Figure 5 can be found in city offices on request. 
Sec. 7. - Outlet structure. 
    Detention basin outlet structures should be constructed of durable materials, such as concrete or masonry block. Corrugated metal pipe (CMP) and plastic (HDPE) risers and drain pipes are popular in engineering design, but are susceptible to crushing, corrosion, and flotation in detention basins. A concrete outlet structure is generally preferable to a masonry block structure because it is sturdier and more durable. Provisions should be made for sufficient reinforcement and anchoring of the riser and drain pipe system. 
    The specific flow-controlling elements of an outlet structure may include one or more of the following: a circular orifice, a noncircular orifice, a rectangular weir, a trapezoidal weir, a triangular weir, a V-notch weir, culvert entrance control or a riser overflow opening. 
    Figures 2 and 3 illustrate possible designs for the outlet structure. These details are only two possible ways to accomplish stormwater detention and stormwater quality control. The first flush volume is typically drained during a minimum time of 24 hours by using an orifice with a designed size. Maximum drain time should be less than 72 hours to allow for sufficient volume recovery prior to the next period of rainfall. The first flush volume can be filtered through sand by using an under-drain system (shown in Figure 2) or by an aboveground filter box with sand or aggregate (shown in Figure 3). Figure 4 shows an alternative outlet structure with a water quality manhole. Provide an emergency spillway in order to route large storms through the facility without overtopping. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § VII, 4-20-2010) 
Editor's note- Figures 2-4 can be found in city offices on request. 
Sec. 8. - Emergency spillway. 
    An emergency spillway should be included in addition to the primary outlet structure on a detention pond. The purpose of this spillway is to pass storm events that exceed the design capacity of the pond, in order to prevent overtopping the embankment. The emergency spillway should be located over an undisturbed abutment area and not over the embankment fill for stability reasons, except where approved by an engineering reviewing authority. The emergency spillway capacity should be designed to prevent overtopping the embankment structure or dam during a storm event commensurate with the impoundment volume, dam size, and downstream flood hazard potential in event of dam failure. The minimum spillway capacity should be capable of handling a 100-year storm event. Where feasible, the emergency spillway should be made independent from the riser control structure to avoid the possibility of overtopping from riser or drain pipe clogging from vandalism or trash. The designer is referred to the requirements set forth in the Tennessee Safe Dams Act and Regulations at: 
www.state.tn.us/environment/permits/safedam.htm . 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § VIII, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 9. - Other design elements. 
(a)  Sediment fore-bay-To facilitate the cleanout of sediment, trash, debris, leaves, etc. The sediment fore-bay typically contains five percent to ten percent of the total volume. It should be located at a point where velocities have dissipated, to allow large sediments and debris to settle out. A fore-bay can be separated from the remainder of a detention basin by several means: a lateral sill with rooted wetland vegetation, rock-filled gabion, rock retaining wall, or rock check dam placed laterally across the basin. The sediment fore-bay should be easily accessible so that it can be inspected and maintained. 
(b)  Public safety should be considered, particularly in residential areas. Operating detention basins often attract neighborhood children. Avoid steep slopes and drop-offs; consider routes for escaping the detention basin if a person accidentally falls in. Avoid depths over four feet when possible; provide fencing and signs in areas where children may potentially play, and where steep slopes are used in the detention area. 
(c)  A low-flow channel (or concrete trickle ditch) can assist in completely draining detention basins with flat slopes. It also assists with the observation and removal of accumulated sediment. A typical design would be a triangular ditch, four feet wide and three inches deep with a slope of one-half to one percent. 
(d)  Anti-seep collars or a cutoff layer of compacted clay are required around the outlet pipe to prevent internal piping and erosion. An anti-seep collar should extend at least one pipe diameter from the culvert in all directions, with compacted clay backfill using small mechanical tampers. The designer is referred to the Tennessee Erosion & Sediment Control Handbook for anti-seep collar considerations. 
(e)  To prevent the outlet riser from clogging, include trash racks or other debris barriers with a maximum opening size of six inches on all outlet structures, except for any emergency spillway structures that are designed for a 25-year storm or greater return period. Trash racks that are placed at an angle to the direction of flow tend to force debris up and away from the outlet opening and are somewhat less vulnerable to clogging. These racks should be regularly cleaned and maintained. 
(f)  Provide a permanent means for vehicle access to the detention basin. Detention basins must be located in a maintenance easement so that authorities have the right to inspect the facility. This easement should be free of large trees and excessive vehicle grades. 
(g)  A skimmer, oil/water separator or other type of stormwater runoff pretreatment is recommended for drainage areas having greater than 50 percent impervious surface or where there may be a potential source of oil and grease contamination. In addition to most large parking lots, oil and grease contamination is also likely for vehicle fueling and maintenance facilities. 
(h)  An anti-vortex device for the outlet structure may be needed for very large detention basins in areas where public access is not controlled. The anti-vortex device may be a combination of vanes above the outlet structure or guide walls around the outlet structure, that increases the inlet flow efficiency and might lessen the chance of humans drowning or reduce the potential for erosion and structural undercutting. The designer is referred to the Tennessee Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for anti-vortex and trash rack considerations. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § IX, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 10. - Construction/inspection considerations. 
    Inadequate storage is the most frequent problem that occurs in the design review before construction, and also for the as-built review after construction. This can occur for several reasons: 
(1)  The design engineer may not allow enough room to construct the detention basin (most often due to insufficient design detail such as slope transitions, setbacks, property lines, drainage easements, parking lot widths, inaccurate contours, or incorrect/omitted utilities locations). 
(2)  The engineer who performs the stormwater computations may not be the same person who does the site layout and grading details. The required detention storage volume and outlet structure details need to be communicated clearly to the design engineer for inclusion on the plans and for construction layout. 
(3)  The construction contractor may not correctly follow the design plans, and consequently, does not excavate deep enough or build berms of sufficient height to hold the required detention volume. This may occur due to rock formations encountered or to groundwater. It is important that the elevation-volume configuration shown on the plans be preserved during construction so that the detention basin functions according to intended design. 
(4)  The construction contractor changes the basin configuration during the construction without being aware of the required volume. Approval from the engineer was not obtained for a design change. 
    It is highly recommended that the design engineer be involved in the construction and inspection phases of the detention basin. Special attention should be given to the requirements for detention basin volume, elevations and sizes of each outlet, embankment crest and emergency spillway crest elevations; embankment compaction, side slopes, size and shape of various weirs or orifices, outlet structure anchoring, trash racks, and installation of anti-seepage collars. 
    Proper hydraulic design of the outlet is critical to achieving good performance for both stormwater detention and stormwater quality of the dry detention basin. The two most common problems for detention basin outlets are: 
(a)  The discharge capacity of the outlet system is too great at the detention design depth. This causes excessive basin outflows and results in fast drawdown times and inadequate filling of the detention basin volume. Both stormwater outflow and stormwater quality will suffer. 
(b)  The outlet structure clogs because it is not adequately protected against trash and debris. The use of innovative trash racks is recommended. Effective trash racks are often created using welded rebar with 6-inch openings. Sloped trash racks are preferable to vertical ones for forcing floating debris upward and away from the opening, rather than being forced against the trash rack, and causing clogging. This is sufficient to stop most beverage cans, fast food containers, tree limbs, etc. Properly designed and installed trash racks also provide a measure of safety to children who may otherwise be pulled toward and held against the opening. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § X, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 11. - Inspection and maintenance. 
    Effective and safe operation of a detention basin depends on continuous maintenance of all system components. Detention basin easements and access must be considered during the planning stage in order to allow for proper inspection and maintenance. 
(1)  Inspect the dry detention basin regularly (e.g. at least monthly) and particularly after heavy rainfall events. Record all observations and problems. Perform any maintenance and repair erosion promptly. Remove debris and trash after storm events. Check all outlet structures regularly for clogging. 
(2)  Detention basins should be surveyed approximately every five years to check for adequate embankment settlement and freeboard and for storage volume as per intended engineering design calculations and plans. 
(3)  Remove sediment when accumulation becomes noticeable (one inch to two inches over a wide area) or if resuspension is observed or probable. Sediment may be permitted to accumulate if the detention basin volume has been over-designed with adequate controls to prevent further sediment movement. If a sand under-drain is used, look for reduced first flush infiltration or ponded water; sand layer replacement or maintenance may be needed. 
(4)  Maintain a thick and healthy stand of vegetation (usually grass). Mow or trim at regular intervals to encourage thick growth. Remove leaves, grass clippings, or sticks from detention basin regularly to prevent stormwater pollution. Remove trees or nuisance vegetation as necessary to ensure structural integrity of embankments. Signs should be posted at detention ponds to discourage local homeowners from depositing yard trimmings, waste, and fill materials inside the basin. Appropriate signs and barriers such as fences should also be considered at detention basins where children have easy access to the site. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § XI, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 12. - Sediment removal. 
    A primary function of stormwater treatment BMPs is to collect and remove sediment, which is a pollutant itself and is associated with several other attached pollutants. The sediment accumulation rate is dependent on a number of factors including watershed size, facility sizing, construction upstream, and nearby industrial or commercial activities, etc. Sediments should be identified before sediment removal and disposal is performed. Special attention or sampling should be given to sediments accumulated from industrial or manufacturing facilities, heavy commercial sites, fueling centers or automotive maintenance areas, parking areas, or other areas where pollutants are suspected. Sediment should be treated as potentially hazardous until proven otherwise. 
    Some sediment may contain contaminants for which TDEC requires special disposal procedures. Consult TDEC-Division of Water Pollution Control if there is any uncertainty about what the sediment contains or if it is known to contain contaminants. Clean sediment may be used as fill material or land spreading. It is important that this material not be placed in a way that will promote or allow re-suspension in stormwater runoff. Some demolition or sanitary landfill operators will allow the sediment to be disposed at their facility for use as cover. This generally requires that the sediment be tested to ensure that it is innocuous. 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § XII, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 13. - Limitations and special requirements. 
(a)  A dry detention basin will require frequent inspection and maintenance. Trash, debris, leaves and other large items should be removed from the detention basin following each rainfall event. If upstream erosion is not properly controlled, dry detention basins can be maintenance-intensive with respect to sediment removal, nuisance odors, insects and mosquitoes, etc. 
(b)  A dry detention basin may not have sufficient vegetation on the slopes and bottom to prevent erosion. Vegetation must be maintained and cut at adequate intervals. Remove grass clippings from detention basin immediately after cutting, using rakes or other hand equipment. 
(c)  A dry detention basin that impounds more than 30 acre-feet of volume (and minimum six feet high) or which is higher than 20 feet (and minimum 15 acre-feet of volume) is subject to the Tennessee Safe Dams Act of 1973 and as amended by law. The Safe Dams Act is administered by the TDEC Division of Water Supply; further information on design standards, regulations and permit applications is available at the TDEC website: 
http://www.state.tn.us/environment/permits/safedam.htm 
(Ord. No. 10-562, App. B § XIII, 4-20-2010) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; emergency services, ch. 30; alarm businesses, § 30-31 et seq.; secondhand goods, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; commercial districts, § 90-181 et seq.; industrial districts, § 90-211 et seq.; adult entertainment and sexually oriented businesses, § 90-331 et seq.; home occupations, § 90-432. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Use of business property; restrictions; violation. 
(a)  Any owner, manager or lessee of business property open to the public during business hours may restrict the use of such property in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Notice of any restriction on the use of such property may be made by actual notice to the users or may be made by placing temporary or permanent signs near all entrances or may be made by placing chains or barriers across entrances. Signs shall be constructed, worded and placed so as to give notice to unauthorized users that use of the property is forbidden. The responsibility and cost for erection of all such signs shall be borne by the property owner or lessee and all signs shall be subject to the approval of the city and shall conform to standard uniform traffic sign regulations customarily used by the city. 
(c)  Any person making unauthorized use of business property shall be in violation of this section, provided that proper notice as required in this section has been given or posted. It shall also be unlawful for any person, without legitimate business or purpose, to loiter, wander, or idle in, upon, or about the premises regulated in this section which are customarily open to the public use. 
(Ord. No. 81-15, §§ 1-3, 12-15-1981) 
Secs. 22-2-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 22-31. - Levied; privilege license required. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations, and businesses declared by the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by municipalities, an annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by such state laws. The taxes provided for in T.C.A. §§ 67-4-501-67-4-507 are hereby expressly enacted, ordained, and levied on the business activities, vocations, and occupations carried on within the municipality at the rates and in the manner prescribed by such act. 
(b)  No person shall exercise any such privilege within the municipality without a currently effective privilege license, which shall be issued by the recorder to each applicant therefor upon such applicant's payment of the appropriate privilege tax. 
(Ord. No. 90-142, §§ 1, 2, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 22-32. - Hotel/motel privilege tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy in a hotel valued in money whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction there from whatsoever. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to imply that consideration is charged when the space provided to the person is complimentary from the operator and no consideration is charged to or received from any person. 
    Hotel means any structure or any portion of any structures which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, tourist court, motel, or any place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are furnished to transients for a consideration. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room, lodging or accommodations in any hotel/motel. 
    Operator means the person operating the hotel whether as owner, lessee, or otherwise. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Tourist related activities means activities including but not limited to the planning and conducting of programs of information and publicity designed to attract to the city tourists, visitors and other interested persons from outside the area and further, the encouragement and coordination of the efforts of other public and private organizations or groups of citizens to publicize the facilities and attractions of the area for the same purposes. It shall also mean the acquisition, construction and remodeling of facilities useful in the attraction and promoting of tourist, conventions and recreational business. 
    Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy for any rooms, lodging or accommodations in a hotel for a period of less than 90 continuous days. 
(b)  Administration. 
(1)  There is hereby levied, assessed and imposed, and shall be paid and collected, a privilege tax upon the privilege of occupancy in any hotel of each transient in an amount equal to three percent of the consideration charged by the operator. Such tax is a privilege tax upon the transient occupying such room and is to be collected as provided herein. 
(2)  Such tax shall be added by each operator to each invoice prepared by the operator for the occupancy in his hotel to be given directly or transmitted to the transient and shall be collected by such operator from the transient and remitted to the city. 
(3)  The tax hereby levied shall be remitted by all operators who lease, rent or charge for occupancy within a hotel in the city to the city recorder, such tax to be remitted to such officer no later than the 20th day of each month for the preceding month. The operator is hereby required to collect the tax from the transient at the time of the presentation of the invoice for such occupancy whether prior to occupancy or after occupancy as may be the custom of the operator and if credit is granted by the operator to the transient then the obligation to the city entitled to such tax shall be that of the operator. 
(4)  The city recorder shall be responsible for the collection of such tax. A monthly tax return under oath shall be filed with the city recorder by the operator with such number of copies thereof as the city recorder may reasonably require for the collection of such tax. The report of the operator shall include such facts and information as may be deemed reasonable for the verification of the tax due. The form of such report shall be developed by the city recorder and approved by the board of commissioners prior to use. The city recorder shall audit each operator in the city at least once per year and shall report on the audits made on a quarterly basis to the board of commissioners. 
(5)  No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded. 
(6)  Taxes collected by the operator which are not remitted to the city recorder on or before the due dates are delinquent. An operator shall be liable for interest on such delinquent taxes from the due date at the rate of 12 percent per annum and in addition, a penalty of one percent for each month or fraction thereof, such taxes are delinquent. Such interest and penalty shall become a part of the tax. Each occurrence of willful refusal of an operator to collect or remit the tax or willful refusal of a transient to pay the tax imposed is declared to be unlawful and shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine not in excess of $50.00 plus court costs. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of the tax imposed by this section to keep and preserve for a period of three years all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he/she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city which records the city recorder shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(8)  The city recorder or other authorized collector of the tax in administering and enforcing the provisions of this act shall have, as additional powers, those powers and duties with respect to collecting taxes as provided by law for the county clerks. Upon any claim of illegal assessment and collection, the tax payer shall have the remedy provided in T.C.A., tit. 67. The recorder shall also have all of those powers and duties as provided in T.C.A., tit. 67 with respect to the adjustment and settlement with tax payers of errors of taxes collected. Any tax paid under protest shall be paid to the city recorder. Any suit filed to recover taxes paid under protest may be brought by filing the same against the city. 
(9)  The city recorder is hereby charged with the duty of collection of the tax herein levied and the proceeds received by the city from the tax shall be used exclusively for tourist related activities within the city as required by T.C.A. § 7-4-503. 
(10)  If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to that end, the provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 17-675, § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COURT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City courts, T.C.A. § 6-21-501 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-31. - Establishment. 
    A city court for the city is hereby established and vested with the authority as provided by the Constitution of the United States of America, the state constitution, and the city Charter and city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 1, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-32. - City judge; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    The person appointed by the board of commissioners to handle judicial matters within the municipality shall preside over the city court, and shall be known as the city judge. The city judge shall be appointed by a resolution adopted by the board of commissioners. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners. The city judge shall receive such compensation for his services as the board of commissioners may prescribe, and such compensation shall not be altered during his term of service. The city judge's term of office shall commence immediately after the oath of office has been duly administered to the individual so appointed and subscribed and filed by such individual with the city recorder. Before performing any duties of the city judge, the person so appointed shall execute a fidelity bond in the amount of $1,000.00. The cost of making the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 2, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-33. - Maintenance of docket. 
    The city judge shall keep a complete docket of all matters coming before him in his judicial capacity. The docket shall include for each defendant such information as his name, warrant and/or summonses numbers, alleged offense, disposition, fines and costs imposed and whether collected, whether committed to workhouse, and all other information that may be relevant. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 3, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-34. - Issuance of summonses. 
    When a complaint of an alleged ordinance violation is made to the city judge, the judge may in his discretion, in lieu of issuing an arrest warrant, issue a summons, ordering the alleged offender to personally appear before the city court at a time specified therein to answer to the charges against him. The summons shall contain a brief description of the offense charged but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the ordinance alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear before the city court as commanded in a summons lawfully served on him, the cause may be proceeded with ex parte, and the judgment of the court shall be valid and binding subject to the defendant's right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 4, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-35. - Issuance of subpoenas. 
    The city judge may subpoena as witnesses all persons whose testimony he believes will be relevant and material to matters coming before his court, and it shall be unlawful for any person lawfully served with such a subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 5, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-36. - Trial and disposition of cases. 
    Every person charged with violating a municipal ordinance shall be entitled to an immediate trial and disposition of his case, provided that the city court is in session or the city judge is reasonably available. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply when the alleged offender, by reason of drunkenness or other incapacity, is not in a proper condition or is not able to appear before the court. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 6, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-37. - Appearance bonds authorized. 
    When the city judge is not available or when an alleged offender requests and has reasonable grounds for a delay in the trial of his case, he may, in lieu of remaining in jail pending disposition of his case, be allowed to post an appearance bond with the city judge or, in the absence of the judge, with the ranking police officer on duty at the time, provided that such alleged offender is not drunk or otherwise in need of protective custody. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 7, 12-15-1981) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 6-21-505. 
Sec. 26-38. - Imposition of fines, penalties, and costs. 
    All fines, penalties, and costs shall be imposed and recorded by the city judge on the city court docket in open court. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 8, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-39. - Standard court cost. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance to the contrary, the city judge in all cases heard or determined by him for offenses against the corporate laws and ordinances shall tax in the bill of costs the sum of $75.00. The city judge may remit, with or without condition, fines and costs imposed for violation of any ordinance or Charter provision. 
(Ord. No. 82-22, § 1, 4-6-1982; Ord. No. 82-31, § 1, 7-16-1982; Ord. No. 02-408, § 1, 5-21-2002; Ord. No. 10-569, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-40. - Installment payment of fines and costs. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of T.C.A. § 6-21-502, the city judge or his designee is hereby authorized to allow defendants convicted of violating city ordinances to pay any fines and costs imposed upon them by installments for a period not to exceed 60 days. The frequency and amount of installments shall be within the discretion of the city judge. 
(b)  Failure of any defendant to make payment in accordance with the installment schedule, as established by the city judge, shall constitute contempt of court and may be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 83-37, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-1983) 
Sec. 26-41. - Judge's authority to assign traffic school in lieu of fine. 
(a)  The city judge is hereby given the discretion to assign traffic school to any such offenders as he thinks will benefit from the experience, regardless of previous attendance at such a school. 
(b)  The city assesses a fee of $135.00 for each person assigned traffic safety school. Persons authorized to substitute attendance in a comparable traffic safety school in another state or location shall not be released from the required payment of the $135.00 fee. 
(Ord. No. 97-311, §§ 1, 2, 7-15-1997; Ord. No. 02-409, § 1, 5-21-2002; Ord. No. 10-572, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 08-542, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 26-42. - Authority to contract with collection agency. 
(a)  In accordance with T.C.A. § 40-24-105(d)(1), the municipal court clerk is hereby authorized to employ the services of a collection agency to collect fines, court costs and litigation taxes assessed by the municipal court where the fines and costs have not been collected within 60 days after they were due. Interest will be collected on each account at a rate of ten percent in accordance with T.C.A. § 47-14-121. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to prepare a written contract between the city and a collection agency capable of serving in this capacity. Such contract shall include a provision authorizing the collection agency to institute an action to collect fines and costs in a judicial proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 99-346, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-43. - Appeals. 
    Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgment of the city court against him may, within ten days thereafter, Sundays exclusive, appeal to the next term of the circuit court upon posting a proper appeal bond. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 9, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-44. - Bond amounts, conditions, and forms. 
    An appearance bond in any case before the city court shall be in such amount as the city judge shall prescribe and shall be conditioned that the defendant shall appear for trial before the city court at the stated time and place. An appeal bond in any case shall be in the sum of $250.00 and shall be conditioned that if the circuit court shall find against the appellant the fine or penalty and all costs of the trial and appeal shall be promptly paid by the defendant and/or his sureties. An appearance or appeal bond in any case may be made in the form of a cash deposit or by any corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state or by two private persons who individually own real property located within the county. No other type of bond shall be acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 10, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-45. - Disposition and report of fines and costs. 
    All funds coming into the hands of the city judge in the form of fines, penalties, costs, and forfeitures shall be recorded by him and paid over daily to the municipality. At the end of each month he shall submit to the board of commissioners a report accounting for the collection or noncollection of all fines, penalties, and costs imposed by his court during the current month and to date for the current fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 11, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-46. - Disturbance of proceedings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance of any trial before the city court by making loud or unusual noises, by using indecorous, profane, or blasphemous language, or by any distracting conduct whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 12, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 26-47. - City judge; pro tempore appointment. 
    In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the city judge, the mayor may appoint a city judge pro tempore. If the mayor is temporarily absent or disabled and/or otherwise unable to appoint a city judge pro tempore, then in such event, in case of the temporary absence, incompetency or inability of the city judge to serve, the vice-mayor may appoint a city judge, pro tempore. 
(Ord. No. 81-11, § 13, 12-15-1981) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 
Secs. 26-48-26-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 

Sec. 26-71. - Establishment of office. 
    There is hereby created for the city the office of clerk of the city court. 
(Ord. No. 82-25, § 1, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 26-72. - Appointment and compensation. 
    The city manager shall appoint the clerk of the city court. Further, compensation for the clerk of the city court shall be a sum designated and authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 82-25, § 2, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 26-73. - Oath of office. 
    The clerk of the city court before entering upon a performance of his duties shall take the same oath as provided for in T.C.A. § 6-21-103, the oath to be administered by either the mayor, city manager or city judge. 
(Ord. No. 82-25, § 3, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 26-74. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  The clerk of the city court shall assist the city judge in all of the duties of his office and shall carry out any orders or instructions of the city judge. 
(b)  The clerk of the city court is hereby empowered to appoint and designate deputies to assist and aid in the performance of the duties of the office of the clerk of the city court and the deputies, after having been appointed and after having taken the oath as prescribed in section 26-73, shall have the same powers and authority as the clerk of the city court. 
(c)  The clerk of the city court or his deputy is hereby empowered to administer oaths and affirmations, to issue process and to approve all appeal bonds. 
(d)  Assigning a process and warrants. On all process issuing from the city court, the clerk of the city court is authorized to issue all process, in addition to the city judge, or a deputy of the clerk of the city court, and the city or deputy clerk of the clerk of the city court shall also have the power to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with violations of the ordinances of the city and subpoenas for the appearance of witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 82-25, § 4, 4-16-1982) 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 30-31. - False alarms. 
(a)  Any individual, business, corporation or other entity which owns or operates any type of alarm or alarm system which causes or requires a response by the city police department or fire department shall be responsible for maintaining and operating the alarm or alarm system in a manner to prevent the alarm or alarm system from activating in the absence of an actual emergency. If either the police or fire department respond to any alarm or alarm system nonemergency at the same address more than one time in any one calendar month, a charge of $25.00 shall be assessed against the individual, business, corporation or other entity responsible for the alarm or alarm system. 
(b)  Any time the police or fire department respond to an alarm subject to the charges set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the chief of the responding department shall notify the city recorder of such charge and shall include in the notice the dates of all responses for that calendar month to the subject address. The city recorder shall then prepare and mail an invoice to the responsible party for all such charges. 
(Ord. No. 90-164, § 2, 2-19-1991) 
Chapter 32 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 58; planning, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 70; excavations and cuts in public rights-of-way, § 74-31 et seq.; sewers, § 82-31 et seq.; zoning, ch. 90; subdivisions, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

Sec. 32-31. - Source and scope of article. 
    All hazardous materials transported or stored within the city limits of Millersville shall be in accordance with the requirements of the State of Tennessee, Department of Transportation's Hazardous Materials Regulations, the State of Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation and the City of Millersville. All required permits must be in place at all times. 
(Ord. No. 02-422, § 1, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 32-32. - Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous materials. 
    The fire chief and the director of public works shall establish routes for vehicles transporting hazardous material within the city. Unless otherwise authorized, hazardous materials shall be transported only on Interstate 65, Highway 31-W (Louisville Highway) and Highway 257 (Bethel Road). The use of other city roadways may be restricted by the fire chief and the director of public works and shall be limited to the delivery of the hazardous material to a designated and approved location. 
(Ord. No. 02-422, § 2, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 32-33. - Transportation of hazardous material. 
    No person shall operate or park any vehicle carrying hazardous material within the corporate limits of Millersville at any time, except while traveling on an established route and for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious delivery of hazardous materials. Businesses located within the City of Millersville may have vehicle parking sites designated, subject to review and approval by the fire chief, and the business must demonstrate that parking and garaging of the vehicles is in compliance with the city's zoning regulations and meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The parking area must be surrounded by a minimum six-foot-high chain link fence, with a barbed wire top that provides for a locked gate when the area or vehicles are unattended. 
(2)  "No Smoking" signs must be posted within the area. 
(3)  The fire chief shall determine that there are adequate portable fire extinguishers, with a minimum 4A40BC rating, within a 50-foot travel distance from the vehicles, exclusive of those extinguishers found in the vehicle. 
(4)  Vehicles shall be prohibited from parking within 100 feet of any building's air intake structures. 
(5)  All vehicles shall be required to be properly placarded at all times. 
(6)  Open flame welding shall be prohibited within the secured area. 
(7)  The parking area shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete. 
(8)  Vehicles shall be prohibited from parking within 50 feet of any property line or any building. 
(9)  Overnight parking may be permitted within a licensed business operating as a designated truck stop, with overnight parking authorized and approved by the city, provided that the business is in compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations governing the parking of vehicles transporting hazardous material. 
(10)  The fire chief may prohibit vehicles transporting hazardous material from stopping or parking anywhere within the city, including truck stops and authorized businesses or locations, if it is determined that substances and/or conditions are present that could potentially interact with or otherwise cause an increased danger from the materials being transported. 
(Ord. No. 02-422, § 3, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 32-34. - Leaking vehicles prohibited. 
    No vehicle transporting hazardous material may be operated anywhere in the city if it is determined that the materials are leaking from the vehicle. If a leak is detected, the Millersville Fire Department must be immediately notified, along with other agencies required by law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 02-422, § 4, 4-20-2004) 
Secs. 32-35-32-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 32-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Alarm means any fire, burglary, motor vehicle or civil defense alarm, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device. 
    Commercial area means an area of land, structures or buildings being used for commercial purposes, provided that such use is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for commercial use in accordance with the terms and maps of the city's zoning ordinance. Commercial activities associated with an approved home occupation within a residentially zoned district shall not be defined as a commercial area. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention. 
    Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or certified private volunteer firefighter or firefighting association, partnership or corporation, an ambulance, a motor vehicle belonging to a private security agency or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, provided such vehicles are in use as emergency vehicles by one authorized to use such vehicles for that purpose. 
    Emergency work means any work for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Industrial area means an area of land, structures or buildings being used for industrial purposes, provided that such use is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for industrial use in accordance with the terms and maps of the city's zoning ordinance. Industrial activities associated with an approved home occupation within a residentially zoned district shall not be defined as an industrial area. 
    Noise-sensitive area means an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court or public library is located. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property or structures thereon owned by a governmental entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other public recreational areas. 
    Real property line means a line along the surfaces, and its vertical place extension, which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intra-building real property division. 
    Residential area means any real property which contains a structure or building in which one or more persons reside, provided that such structure or building is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for residential use in accordance with the terms and maps of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 06-480, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 32-67. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the geographical limits of the city and outside the city limits, within all territory to which the jurisdiction of the city extends. 
(Ord. No. 06-480, § 2, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 32-68. - Excessive noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud or excessive noise, which unreasonably interferes with the comfort, response, health and safety of others within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-480, § 3, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 32-69. - Specific prohibitions. 
    In addition to the general prohibition set out in section 32-68, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this article: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device of a motor vehicle on any street or public place within the jurisdiction of the city continuously or intermittently for a period in excess of 60 seconds, except as a danger or emergency warning. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar devices. 
a.  The operation or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound on the public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device. 
b.  The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 15 meters (50 feet) to any person in a commercial, industrial, residential or noise-sensitive area, multifamily dwelling, motor vehicle or public space. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and sound amplifiers. The use or operation of any loudspeaker system, sound amplifier or other similar device within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas, public rights-of-way or public space such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible across the real property line of the source; provided that this shall not apply to any public performance, gathering or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the city, nor shall it apply to performances at any amphitheater or other structure whenever the same is governed by another ordinance or by contract as to acceptable levels of sound and as to hours. 
(4)  Street sales. The offering for sale by shouting or outcry within any residential, commercial or noise-sensitive area, public rights-of-way or public space except by permit issued by the city. 
(5)  Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently or continuously howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create excessive noise across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise-sensitive area. For the purpose of this article, barking dogs shall include a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously for a period of ten minutes, or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance at any time of day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property. 
(6)  Construction and demolition. The operating of any equipment used in construction work within 1,500 feet of any residential or noise-sensitive area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for emergency work; and to prohibit pile driving, jackhammering, and blasting on weekends and holidays, and for all other days between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. For purposes of this subsection, distances are to be measured from the property line of the nearest residence or noise-sensitive area in any direction to the prohibited construction operation. 
(7)  Powered model vehicles. The operation of, or permitting the operation of, powered model vehicles between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends or holidays within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas, public rights-of-way or public space such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible across the real property line of the source. 
(8)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  Except in case of an emergency, the intentional sounding of any alarm between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  The testing of any alarm for a period in excess of 60 seconds at any time. 
c.  The testing of a complete emergency signaling system, including the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, more than once in each calendar month, and the sounding of the emergency signaling system for a period in excess of 15 minutes. 
(9)  Motor vehicles. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other device in good working order so as to effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(10)  Blowers, engines, machinery, etc. The operation by any person of any noise-creating power blower, power fan, power tool, air compressor, internal-combustion engine (except trains, motor vehicles or motorcycles), or other similar equipment or machinery which causes noise due to its operation, within 1,500 feet of any residential or noise-sensitive area, unless the blower, fan, tool, compressor, engine or other machine is equipped with a functional muffler device or is contained or housed within a structure sufficient to deaden the noise to the point that it is not plainly audible to a person of normal hearing ability in the residential or noise-sensitive area nearest the source of such noise, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays. 
(11)  Commercial garbage collection. The servicing of a private, commercial garbage dumpster by any person using garbage collection vehicles and equipment within 1,500 feet of any multifamily dwelling, residential area or noise-sensitive area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays, or within 500 feet of any multi-family dwelling, residential area or noise-sensitive area, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays; however, this shall not apply to the collection of garbage from any establishment where it has been determined by the director of public works or designee that the collection of garbage from the establishment during permitted hours would be a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 06-480, § 4, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 32-70. - Special permits. 
    Any person desiring relief from the provisions of section 32-69(6) of this article shall apply for a special permit to cause or create noise which would otherwise be in violation of this article at least 21 days prior to the date for which the relief is requested. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the codes administrator, or the designee of such administrator, on forms provided for that purpose. Payment of a fee of $100.00 shall accompany the application. The administrator shall grant a special permit upon a showing by the applicant of the following: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
    Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including but not limited to the effective date, time of day, location and equipment limitation. No special permit shall be issued for a period in excess of 15 consecutive days. Any special permit granted pursuant to this section may be renewed upon application to the codes administrator upon a showing that the reasons for which the permit was granted still exist. Appeal of the administrator's denial of a special permit may be made to the Chancery Court of the county of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 06-480, § 5, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 32-71. - Special exemptions. 
(a)  The use of legal fireworks is exempt from the provisions of this article during the times and dates such fireworks are permitted and regulated by section 34-101. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Businesses licensed for the repair, fabrication or maintenance of motor vehicles may occasionally, if necessary, operate a motor without a muffler. Occasionally, for the purpose of such operation, shall be defined as no more often than two times per calendar week, with a duration of no more than one hour per occasion and the operation must take place between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Businesses having the need to operate or test motors more often shall be required to provide a facility capable of muffling the excessive sound. 
(Ord. No. 06-480, § 6, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 10-575, §§ 1-5, 2-15-2011; Ord. No. 11-579, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 11-581, § 6, 4-4-2011) 
Sec. 32-72. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-9; however, in the case of a violation involving a motor vehicle, the person charged with a violation may be granted a period of 15 days in which to correct the cause of the sound. 
(Ord. No. 06-480, § 7, 4-18-2006) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; emergency services, ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Open burning-Regulation and permitting of open burning. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of any kind except as specifically permitted in this section. 
(b)  Open burning, as described in this section, may be conducted without permits, provided that no public nuisance is or will be created by such burning. Fires used for cooking food, fires for ceremonial or recreational purposes, including barbecues and outdoor fireplaces, and fires set for the training and instruction of firefighters, do not need a permit. This grant of exemptions shall in no way relieve the person from the consequences, damages, or claims resulting from such burning. This exception does not relieve the person of the responsibility of using fire safe practices nor from getting a permit from any other agency that may require such permit. 
(c)  Open burning shall be allowed inside the corporate limits of the city when a valid permit has been obtained from the fire department. Prior to the burning, the person requesting the permit shall be certain that no detriment to the public health or damage to the land, water or air will be caused. The following conditions shall always be met: 
(1)  Open burning shall be allowed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and dusk. 
(2)  Fires that have not been completely extinguished by dusk may be permitted to smolder, provided that the fire remains attended and no additional materials are added. 
(3)  The fires may never be left unattended. 
(4)  Items burned are limited to trees, limbs, and brush grown only on the property. 
(5)  Rubber tires and similar materials are not to be used to start or burn within the fire. 
(6)  Construction debris, roofing materials, metal, painted materials, asbestos, treated wood, pesticides, herbicides, or and other classified hazardous material, including petroleum based products, shall not be burned. 
(7)  Burn piles are limited to a diameter of twelve feet. Larger piles may be authorized by the fire chief or authorized representative based on location, equipment on site, materials, firebreak clearance and purpose for the fire. The larger fires may not be located within 1000 feet of any inhabited residential, retail, or commercial buildings or any parks or other outdoor public or private gathering places. Larger fires are generally limited to the clearing of land parcels and are permitted once per land parcel, development phase, or other land division approved by the fire chief. 
(8)  Burning will not be permitted when the wind velocity is above ten MPH. 
(9)  All controlled fires shall be at least 50 feet from all structures. 
(10)  Before igniting any open burn fire, the permit holder must contact the fire department to determine if a ban or other restriction on open burning is in place. The fire department may be contacted by calling the number printed on the burn permit. (Do not call 911 to inquire about open burn permit information.) 
(d)  To obtain a permit, the applicant shall file an application to the fire department on the form prescribed by the department. No fee shall be required to obtain an open burning permit. All permits issued shall be displayed while the open burning is in progress. The fire department shall have the authority to forbid, restrict, or suspend any and all burning when the fire chief or the officers or senior fire officer in charge has determined that conditions are unfavorable or hazardous for outdoor fires. 
(Ord. No. 00-361, § 1, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 08-540, §§ 1-3, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 34-2. - Same-Number of permits per year; validity; compliance with fire code. 
(a)  Open burning permits shall be valid only during the calendar year in which they were issued. 
(b)  Open burning shall be permitted on no more than 12 days per calendar year on any parcel of land. 
(c)  The content of this section is not intended to regulate open burning associated with outdoor recreational activities, such as campfires or outdoor food preparation. 
(d)  The activity of open burning shall comply with the Millersville Code of Ordinances, the fire prevention codes adopted therein and the requirements and restrictions set forth by the Millersville Fire Department. 
(e)  Provisions set forth in this section shall not allow activities that would permit less restrictive regulations than those set forth within the fire prevention code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-442, §§ 1-5, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 34-3. - Open burning enforcement. 
    Violations of the provisions permitting open burning, as set forth in sections 34-1 and 34-2 and as set forth in the fire code adopted within the Code, may result in revocation of the burn permit, citation, fine, and any other penalties permitted by law. Issuance of an open burn permit may be denied to anyone having violated the provisions regulating open burning within 12 months of the request for a permit. The fire chief shall have the authority to determine if denial of a permit is appropriate, based upon the severity or frequency of the previous offence(s). 
(Ord. No. 08-540, §4, 8-19-2008) 
Secs. 34-4-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 34-31. - Establishment; equipment; membership. 
    There is hereby established a fire department to be supported and equipped from appropriations by the board of commissioners. All apparatus, equipment, and supplies shall be purchased by or through the municipality and shall be and remain the property of the municipality. The fire department shall be composed of a chief appointed by the city manager and such other members of the fire department as the city manager shall appoint. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 1, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-32. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department and the members thereof to take all proper steps for fire prevention and suppression by: 
(1)  Preventing uncontrolled fires from starting. 
(2)  Preventing the loss of life and property because of fires. 
(3)  Confining fires to their place of origin. 
(4)  Extinguishing uncontrolled fires. 
(5)  Preventing loss of life from asphyxiation or drowning. 
(6)  Performing such rescue work as its equipment and/or the training of its personnel makes practicable. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 2, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-33. - Organization; rules and regulations. 
    The chief of the fire department shall set up the organization of the department, make definite assignments of individuals, and shall formulate and enforce such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 3, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-34. - Tenure and compensation of members. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department shall hold office so long as his conduct and efficiency are satisfactory to the city manager. However, so that adequate discipline may be maintained, the chief shall have the authority to suspend or discharge any other member of the department when he deems such action to be necessary for the good of the department. The chief may be suspended up to 30 days or dismissed by the city manager. 
(b)  All personnel of the fire department shall receive such compensation for their services as the board of commissioners may from time to time prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 4, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-35. - Chief responsible for training and maintenance. 
    The chief of the fire department shall be fully responsible for the training of the firefighters and for maintenance of all property and equipment of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 5, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-36. - Records and reports. 
    The chief of the fire department shall keep adequate records of all fires, inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel, and work of the department. He shall submit a written report on such matters to the mayor and city manager once each month, and at the end of the year a detailed annual report shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 6, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-37. - Equipment to be used only within corporate limits generally. 
    No equipment of the fire department shall be used for fighting any fire outside the corporate limits unless such fire is on city-owned property or, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, is in such hazardous proximity to property owned by or located within the city as to endanger such city property or unless expressly authorized in writing by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 7, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 34-38. - Chief to be assistant to state officer. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of T.C.A. § 68-102-108, the chief of the fire department is designated as an assistant to the state commissioner of insurance and is subject to all the duties and obligations imposed by T.C.A. § 68-102-101 et seq., and shall be subject to the directions of the commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 81-8, § 8, 12-1-1981) 
Secs. 34-39-34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 34-71. - The International Fire Code, 2006 edition, adopted; effect of conflict; official. 
(a)  The International Fire Code, 2006 edition, is hereby adopted by reference with the following revisions as if copied fully in this section: 
(1)  "City of Millersville" shall be inserted where the name of jurisdiction is required. 
(2)  Under all penalties sections, the offense shall read "civil penalty," with a dollar amount of "$50.00 per violation" and number of days shall read, "the authority of the court of the City of Millersville." 
(3)  The dollar amount shall be "not less than $50.00 or more than $50.00 per violation per day" and inserted where applicable. 
(b)  Any matter in the code adopted by this section which is contrary to ordinances in existence on April 20, 2010 shall prevail and to that extent, any provision of such existing ordinance in conflict with such code is hereby repealed in that respect only. 
(c)  When reference in the code adopted by this section is made to a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in such code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 00-356, §§ 1-3, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 00-366, §§ 1-3, 11-21-2000; Ord. No. 10-561, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 34-72-34-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 34-101. - Use restricted. 
    It is hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this article for any individual to use within the city any pyrotechnics commonly known as fireworks, other than the permissible items set forth in T.C.A. § 68-22-108 and other than during dates and times provided in this section. The permissible items may be used on the following dates and times: 
(1)  July 3 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  July 4 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight). 
(3)  July 5 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(4)  On the first Saturday following the 4th of July between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight). 
(5)  Beginning at 9:00 a.m. on December 31 and continuing until 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(6)  The Millersville City Commission may, by resolution, temporarily amend the dates and times for permissible use of fireworks for special events or to coincide with local, state or national observances of holidays. 
(Ord. No. 87-87, § 3, 3-17-1987; Ord. No. 05-461, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 13-620, § 1, 12-17-2013) 
ARTICLE V. - INSPECTIONS AND REVIEW 

Sec. 34-102. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to the development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, change of use, and maintenance of all property within present or future incorporated areas of the city or which are subject to the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  No building permit or occupational license shall be issued prior to the approval of the fire safety inspector to ensure compliance with all applicable codes. 
(c)  All commercial and industrial occupancies, as defined in the Standard Building Code, with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings, shall be inspected, yearly, to ensure compliance with all the applicable codes, by the fire safety inspector. High hazard occupancies may require more frequent inspections as determined by the fire safety inspector. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, Exh. A, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 34-103. - Fire safety inspector. 
(a)  The fire chief or designee shall be the fire safety inspector. The fire safety inspector shall be certified by the division of the state fire marshals' office and be in compliance with the provisions and requirements prescribed in the rules and regulations of the division of the state fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire safety inspector shall be made part of the building and zoning department and shall answer to the chief of the city fire department. 
(c)  The city fire safety inspector shall be authorized and empowered to make inspections at reasonable hours of all uses or activities regulated by this article, in order to determine if applicable provisions of codes and ordinances and regulations relating to fire safety are being followed. 
(d)  Inspections may be made without notice, and refusal to allow such an inspection shall be deemed a violation of this article. Such failure to permit an inspection shall be sufficient grounds and probable cause for a court of competent jurisdiction to issue an administrative warrant for the purpose of inspecting, surveying or examining such premises. 
(e)  In the event a building, structure, or land appears to be vacant or abandoned, and the property owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain consent for an inspection, the fire safety inspector may enter into or upon any open or unsecured portion of the premises in order to conduct an inspection thereof. 
(f)  The fire safety inspector shall be provided with official identification and exhibit such identification when making an inspection. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers to assist in making inspections when such assistance is requested by the fire safety inspector. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, Exh. A, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 34-104. - Compliance with other regulations. 
    An inspection or approval under this article does not relieve the owner or operator of the obligation to comply with other applicable state, regional, or local code or regulation. The inspection shall not relieve any owner or operator of any liability for violation of any code, regulation, rule, ordinance or requirement. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, Exh. A, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 34-105. - Notice of violation; compliance. 
    Whenever the fire safety inspector determines that there is a violation of this article, the inspector shall notify the owner or operator in writing of the violation, and shall give reasonable time to comply, and follow up inspections shall be made to ensure compliance. In the event of noncompliance after the third inspection, the fire safety inspector shall use all means available under most current law to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, Exh. A, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 34-106. - Fees. 
    Inspection and plans review fees shall be set by the city board of commissioners by resolution. Fees will be reviewed from time to time and adjusted as needed. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, Exh. A, 1-17-2017) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 32; solid waste, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; floodplain district, § 90-231 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Smoke, soot, cinders, and other fumes, gases, acids or dust. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, dust, or gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the health, comfort, and safety of the public or so as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or business. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 1, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 38-2. - Overgrown lots. 
(a)  Prohibition . Pursuant to the authority granted to municipalities under T.C.A. § 6-54-113, it is unlawful for any owner of record of real property to create, maintain, or permit to be maintained on such property the unrestricted growth of vines, grass, underbrush and other vegetation commonly recognized as weeds. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an order by the city manager or his/her designee to cut such vegetation when it has reached a height of over eight inches. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to property on which active farming operations requiring the growth of grass for agricultural purposes are being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 2, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 08-541, § 1, 9-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-3. - Stagnant water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his property without treating it so as to effectively prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 3, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 38-4. - Dead animals. 
    Any person owning or having possession of any dead animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury the animal or notify the Sumner County Health Department and dispose of such animal in such manner as the Sumner County Health Department shall direct. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 4, 4-17-1990) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 38-5. - Condition of premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him to become or remain in a filthy condition, or permit the use or occupation of the premises in such a manner as to create noxious or offensive smells and odors in connection therewith, or to allow the accumulation or creation of unwholesome and offensive matter or the breeding of flies, rodents or other vermin on the premises to the menace of the public health or the annoyance of people residing within the vicinity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit on their property within the city the accumulation of trash, refuse, rubbish, litter, or any other substance, animal or thing, to such an extent that such growth or accumulation is injurious to the health and welfare of an inhabitant of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 5, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 38-6. - Open storage. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, freezer, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to keep the premises of such property clean and to remove from the premises all such items as listed in this section including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., upon notice from the city manager, building inspector, or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 6, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 38-7. - Vegetation-Reduction in traffic visibility. 
    No weeds, trees, shrubs, or other growth shall be permitted on any lot, which cause a reduction in traffic visibility at intersections or reduce the visibility of traffic control signs. 
(Ord. No. 08-541, § 2, 9-16-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-541, § 2, adopted Sept. 16, 2008, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to violation; notice; abatement; expenses; reimbursement, and derived from Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 7, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 06-496, § 1, 11-21-2006. 
Sec. 38-8. - Enforcement. 
    It is the duty of the codes enforcement officer, city manager, codes administrator or person they may designate to inspect any property within the city suspected of being in violation of sections 38-1-38-7. If such inspection determines that a violation of this code exists, then the codes enforcement officer, city manager, codes administrator or person they may designate will cause a notice to be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (1) to the property owner as shown on the tax record of the city or county. 
(1)  Notice . It is the duty of the codes enforcement officer, city manager, codes administrator or person they may designate to enforce this section and to serve notice upon the owner of record and the occupant to be in violation of sections 38-1-38-7. Notice shall be in writing and in plain language to remedy the condition within seven calendar days from service of notice. Service of notice shall be considered the date of mailing the notice or date notice was hand-delivered. The notice shall be sent registered mail, certified mail or hand delivered to the last known address of the owner of record. Undeliverable mail may be kept in the file to verify due diligence in notification. The notice shall state that the owner of the property is entitled to a hearing, and shall, at the minimum, contain the following additional information: 
a.  A brief statement that the owner of the property is in violation of the City of Millersville Code of Ordinances with chapter and section identified; 
b.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
c.  A statement that the property may be cleaned at the owner's expense and a lien placed against the property to secure the cost of the clean-up; 
d.  A statement of the right to issue a citation into court; 
e.  The person, office, address and telephone number of the department or person issuing the notice; 
f.  Identification of the person, position, or department to whom a hearing may be requested, along with contact information and notice that such hearing must be requested and scheduled prior to the expiration of the remedy timeframe. 
In the interest of public welfare, service of notice shall be considered the date of mailing the notice or the date notice was hand-delivered in all violations of and matters relating to Chapter 38, Health and Sanitation. 
(2)  Clean-up at property owner's expense. If the property owner of record fails or refuses to remedy the condition within seven calendar days from the date of mailing, the codes enforcement officer, city manager, codes administrator or person they may designate is further authorized and directed to cause the removal or remediation of the violation at the expense of the city. The owners of the property shall then be notified of the amount of such expense and that reimbursement of such expense is required within ten calendar days from service of notice. Notice is to be sent registered mail, certified mail or hand delivered to the last known address of the owner of record. Undeliverable mail may be kept in the file to verify due diligence in notification. Service of notice shall be considered the date of mailing the notice or date notice was hand-delivered. 
(3)  Failure to reimburse city. The city, after notification to the property owners as set out in subsection (1) of this section, shall have authority to abate the conditions by removing from the property the condition, substance or thing causing the violation. All owners of property shall be liable jointly and separately for the expense of removal of the condition from their property, and the property itself shall be subject to suit for reimbursement of such expenses. If litigation is necessary to collect any of the amounts provided in this section, there shall be added thereto all costs of such litigation and reasonable attorney fees. If the expense of such removal shall not have been paid within the ten-day period allowed following notice, all expenses, including filing fees, shall be entered upon the tax books of the city as a lien against such parcel of property whereon such expenses were incurred and shall be added to the property tax bills to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. 
(4)  Appeal . The owner of record who is aggrieved by the determination and order of the public officer may appeal the determination and order to the city manager or his/her designee. The appeal shall be filed with the city recorder within the time period established pursuant to subsection (1) above. Failure to appeal within this time shall, without exception, constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. The time period established in subsections (1) and (2) above shall be stayed during the appeal process, provided that the hearing is held not later than seven calendar days from the date for remedy. 
(Ord. No. 08-541, § 3, 9-16-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-541, § 3, adopted Sept. 16, 2008, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to failure to reimburse city; lien; penalties and interest; litigation, and derived from Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 8, 4-17-1990. 
Sec. 38-9. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who shall fail to comply with the notice as prescribed in section 38-8, shall be alleged to be guilty of a strict liability offense, and shall be cited into the Millersville City Court for disposition. The maximum fine per day for violation of this section shall be $50.00 plus the cost of the cause. Each day the violation continues after due notice has been served may be deemed a separate offense. In addition thereto, or in lieu thereof, the codes enforcement officer may commence corrective or clean up actions to abate the unlawful conditions that constitute a violation of this Code. Costs of any corrective or clean up action taken by the city shall be charged against the real estate upon which the violation occurs and continues, and shall be a lien upon such real estate as outlined in section 38-8. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 1, § 9, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 06-496, § 2, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-541, § 3, 9-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-10. - T.C.A. §§ 54-20-101-54-20-205 declared to be municipal ordinances. 
    The state offenses and remedies cited under T.C.A. §§ 54-20-101 through 54-20-205, and which are not specifically made a violation of any other ordinance of the city, are hereby declared to be municipal ordinances of the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee, and civil penalties and noted remedies may ensue from and be ordered by the Millersville City Court, accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 09-557, 11-17-2009) 
Chapter 42 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 42-31. - Policy. 
    It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the community. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 1, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 42-34 and 42-35. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and judiciaries. 
    To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 2, 5-21-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-33. - Unlawful practices. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section and section 42-36, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in section 42-34 shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Exemptions under this article shall be as provided in T.C.A. § 4-21-602. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, persons shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  They are the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 3, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-34. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
(a)  It is a discriminatory practice for any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, real property or a housing accommodation to a person; 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of real property or a housing accommodation, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith; 
(3)  Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent or lease real property or a housing accommodation from a person; 
(4)  Represent to a person that real property or a housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect real property or a housing accommodation; 
(5)  Make, print, publish, circulate, post or mail or cause to be made, printed, published, circulated, posted or mailed a notice, statement, advertisement or sign, or use a form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property or a housing accommodation, or make a record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of real property or a housing accommodation, which indicates, directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin or an intent to make such a limitation, specification or discrimination; 
(6)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property or a housing accommodation for sale, rental or lease with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in the sale, rental or lease of that real property or housing accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or 
(7)  Deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing services, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation. 
(b)  It is a discriminatory practice for any person to: 
(1)  Discriminate in the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
a.  The buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of: 
a.  The person; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the person. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "discrimination" includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, no modification need be permitted unless the renter first agrees to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted, unless previously negotiated with the landlord; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of terrain or unusual site characteristics; or 
b.  With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route: 
1.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
2.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
3.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
i.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
ii.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
iii.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
iv.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms, such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
(d)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people (commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (c)(3)b of this section. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
(f)  Nothing in subsection (b) of this section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(g)  It is a discriminatory practice for a person in the business of insuring against hazards to refuse to enter into, or discriminate in the terms, conditions, or privileges of, a contract of insurance against hazards to a housing accommodation or real property because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex or national origin of the person owning, or residing in or near the housing accommodations or real property. 
(h)  It is a discriminatory practice for a person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such person's having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  This section may also be enforced by appropriate civil action. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 4, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-35. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against them in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicap of such person or of any person associated with them in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. Nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 42-33(b). 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 5, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-36. - Exemption for private clubs. 
    Nothing in this article prohibits a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 7, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-37. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be held by the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor may delegate any of these functions, duties, and powers to employees of the community or to boards of such employees, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this article. The mayor shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers it the community, to boards of officers or to themselves, as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law. 
(c)  All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this article and shall cooperate with the mayor to further such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 8, 5-21-1996) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 42-38. - Education and conciliation. 
    Immediately after the enactment of this article, the mayor shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this article. He shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this article and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor, with their advice, to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 9, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-39. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)  Any persons who claim to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believe that they will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the mayor. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the mayor requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the mayor shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or is about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, or within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection (c) of this section, the mayor shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether they intend to resolve it. If the mayor decides to resolve the complaints, they shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by information methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this article without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee of the city who shall make public any information in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(b)  A complaint under subsection (a) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against them and with the leave of the mayor, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified. 
(c)  If within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the mayor, the mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this article, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The mayor will assist in this filing. 
(d)  If the mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights granted or protected by this article, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate. 
(e)  In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant. 
(f)  Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the mayor shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 10, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-40. - Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence. 
(a)  In conducting an investigation, the mayor shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided, however, that the mayor first complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The mayor may issue subpoenas to compel his access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United States District Court of the district in which the investigation is taking place. The mayor may administer oaths. 
(b)  Upon written application to the mayor, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the mayor to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the mayor himself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request. 
(c)  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the mayor shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in United States District Courts. Fees payable to the witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by them. 
(d)  Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the mayor to revoke or modify the subpoena. The mayor shall grant the petition if they find that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(e)  In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the mayor or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts business. 
(f)  Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the mayor shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the mayor, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other document submitted to the mayor pursuant to his subpoena or other order, or shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(g)  The city attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the mayor participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 11, 5-21-1996) 
Sec. 42-41. - Enforcement of article provisions by private persons. 
    The rights granted by sections 42-33 through 42-35, may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts or general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought to this section or section 42-39(d) from time to time before bringing it to trial or renting dwellings; or any persons because they are or have been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or any class or persons from: 
(1)  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in this article; 
(2)  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
(3)  Any citizens because they are or have been, or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in this article, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate shall be fined not more than $1,000.00, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and, if bodily injury results, shall be fined not more than $10,000.00, or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and, if death results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life. 
(Ord. No. 96-287, § 12, 5-21-1996) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to provide departments, T.C.A. § 6-19-101. 

Sec. 46-31. - Establishment. 
    A police department for the city is hereby authorized and established and vested with the police power as authorized by the city Charter and the laws and Constitution of the United States and of the state. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 1, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-32. - Appointment of chief of police and other members. 
    The city manager, pursuant to T.C.A. § 6-21-102 is hereby authorized and shall appoint a chief of police and such other patrol officers and other members of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 2, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-33. - Duties of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall direct the police work of the city and be responsible for the enforcement and maintenance of law and order. The chief of police shall set up the organization of the department, make definite assignments of individuals, and shall formulate and enforce such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 3, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-34. - Tenure and compensation of members. 
(a)  The chief of the police department shall hold office for so long as his conduct and efficiency are satisfactory to the city manager. However, so that adequate discipline may be maintained, the chief shall have the authority to suspend or discharge any other member of the department when he deems such action to be necessary for the good of the department. The chief may be suspended up to 30 days or dismissed by the city manager. 
(b)  All personnel of the police department shall receive such compensation for their services as the board of commissioners may from time to time prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 4, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-35. - Chief responsible for training and maintenance. 
    The chief of the police department shall be fully responsible for the training of the members of the police department and for the maintenance of all property and equipment of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 5, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-36. - Police officers to preserve law and order. 
    Police officers shall preserve law and order within the city. They shall patrol the city and shall assist the city court during the trial of cases. Police officers shall also promptly serve any legal process issued by the city court. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 6, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-37. - Police officers to wear uniforms and be armed. 
    All police officers shall wear such uniform and badge as the board of commissioners shall authorize and shall carry a service pistol and billy club at all times while on duty unless otherwise expressly directed by the chief for a special assignment. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 7, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-38. - When police officers to make arrests. 
    Unless otherwise authorized or directed in this Code or other applicable law, an arrest of the person shall be made by a police officer in the following cases: 
(1)  Whenever the officer is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the person. 
(2)  Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is threatened in the officer's presence by the person. 
(3)  Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has reasonable cause to believe the person has committed it. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 8, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-39. - Police officers may require assistance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to refuse to aid a police officer in maintaining law and order or in making a lawful arrest when such person's assistance is requested by the police officer and is reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 9, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-40. - Disposition of persons arrested. 
    Unless otherwise authorized by law, when any person is arrested he shall be brought before the city court for immediate trial or allowed to post bond. When the city judge is not immediately available or the alleged offender does not post the required bond, the alleged offender shall be confined. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 10, 12-1-1981) 
Sec. 46-41. - Records. 
    The police department shall keep a comprehensive and detailed daily record, in permanent form, showing: 
(1)  All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within the corporate limits. 
(2)  All arrests made by police officers. 
(3)  All police investigations made, funerals convoyed, fire calls answered, and other miscellaneous activities of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 81-9, § 11, 12-1-1981) 
Chapter 50 - LIBRARIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Creation of public library. 
    Pursuant to T.C.A. § 10-3-101 et seq., there is hereby created an independent public library for the city, which shall be known as Millersville Public Library. Such library shall be free to the residents of the city. The library board, created in article II of this chapter, may extend the privileges and facilities of the library to persons residing outside the city upon such terms as it may deem proper. 
(Ord. No. 83-46, § 1, 11-25-1983) 
Secs. 50-2-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 50-31. - Established; appointment of members; terms; compensation; gender considerations. 
    There is hereby established a library board, which shall be known as Millersville Public Library Board. Such library board shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and shall consist of seven members. Not more than one official of the city shall serve on the library board. The members shall serve without salary and, after the initial terms, for a term of three years. Not more than five of the members shall be of the same sex. 
(Ord. No. 83-46, § 2, 11-25-1983) 
Sec. 50-32. - Officers; appointment of librarian; rules; funds; personnel; donations; property. 
    The members of the library board shall organize by electing officers and adopting bylaws and regulations. The library board shall have the power to direct all the affairs of the library, including appointment of a librarian who shall direct the internal affairs of the library, and such assistants or employees as may be necessary. It may make and enforce rules and regulations and establish branches of travel service at its discretion. It may expend funds for the special training and formal education of library personnel, provided that such personnel shall agree to work in the library for at least two years after completion of such training and education. It may receive donations, devises and bequests to be used by it directly for library purposes. It may hold and convey realty and personal property and negotiate leases for and on behalf of such library. The library board shall furnish to the state library agency such statistics and information as may be required, and shall make annual reports to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 83-46, § 3, 11-25-1983) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - State misdemeanors adopted. 
    All offenses against the state which are committed within the corporate limits and which are defined by the state law or are recognized by the common law to be misdemeanors are hereby designated and declared to be offenses against this city also. Any violation of any such law within the corporate limits is also a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 81-10, § 1, 12-1-1981) 
State Law reference- General police powers, T.C.A. § 6-19-101(22); authority to adopt public records, T.C.A. § 6-54-502(a); "public records" defined, T.C.A. § 6-54-501(3); "public records" includes state statutes, T.C.A. § 6-54-501(3)(A). 
Secs. 54-2-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 54-31. - Discharge restricted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a violation of this section for any one to discharge a firearm or weapon of any type within the corporate limits of the city without the permission of the property owner on whose property the firearm or weapon is discharged. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it is hereby declared unlawful for any one to discharge a firearm or weapon within 1,000 feet of any road, street, or public right-of-way or within 1,000 feet of any dwelling, church, place of business, or public building. 
(Ord. No. 87-87, §§ 1, 2, 3-17-1987) 
Secs. 54-32-54-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAX RELIEF[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-489, § 1, adopted September 19, 2006, enacted provisions intended for use as chapter 5, §§ 5-201-5-205. At the discretion of the editor, said provisionas have been redesignated as chapter 54, article III, §§ 54-51-54-55. 

Sec. 54-51. - Programs established. 
    A property tax relief credit program for elderly low income taxpayers, totally and permanently disabled taxpayers and disabled veteran taxpayers is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 06-489, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 54-52. - Taxpayers receiving these credits. 
    The taxpayers to receive these credits shall be the legal property owner of record. The taxpayer must be determined to comply with the property tax relief as specified by T.C.A. §§ 67-5-701-67-5-705, as amended, issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 06-489, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 54-53. - Amount of credit granted. 
    The amount of property tax credit granted by the city shall be an amount additional to the state relief for city property tax and equal to the state relief, except that the total relief shall not exceed the total tax due. 
(Ord. No. 06-489, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 54-54. - City manager to develop procedures. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to develop the necessary procedures to execute said program. 
(Ord. No. 06-489, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 54-55. - Eligibility for taxpayers. 
    Taxpayers qualifying for this exemption shall have their eligibility determined by the State of Tennessee prior to payment of said tax and assessment in order to qualify for the exemptions granted herein. 
(Ord. No. 06-489, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Chapter 58 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 90; subdivisions, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall respectively mean and include each of the meanings set forth: 
(1)  The board means the Millersville Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
(2)  Park. The term park or parks unless specifically limited, will be deemed to include all parks, parkways, playgrounds, athletic fields, tennis courts, golf courses, swimming pools, and other recreation areas and amenities serving thereto, under the control of the board and/or within the City of Millersville. 
(3)  Permit means any written authorization issued by or under the authority of the board for a specified park privilege permitting the performance of a specified act or acts in the park. 
(4)  Owner means any person owning, operating or having the use or control of a vehicle, animal or other property under a lease or otherwise. 
(5)  Police officer means any member of the Police Department of Millersville, Sumner County and Robertson County, Tennessee, and any other Millersville employee who is designated special police and appointed and sworn by the mayor and any law enforcement officer employed by the United States Government, the State of Tennessee or a subdivision thereof. 
(6)  Bridle path means any path or road maintained for persons riding on horseback. 
(7)  Foot path means any path, road, or trail maintained for pedestrians. 
(8)  Bicycle path means any path, road, or trail maintained for persons riding on bicycles, but not motorized motorcycles. 
(9)  Bathing areas means any area maintained for the use of bathers including the water area and lands under water adjacent thereto under the jurisdiction board. 
(10)  Playground area means any area maintained or designated as a playground, and including all territory under the supervision and control of the board adjacent to and within 12 feet thereof. 
(11)  Safety zone means any space within any park so designated by appropriate signs. 
(12)  Omnibus shall include any vehicle held and used for transportation of passengers for hire. 
(13)  Unnecessary stopping means bringing a vehicle to a complete stop on a parkway, or a road in a park other than a parking space, or other than in conformity with traffic regulations or other than because of any emergency. 
(Ord. No. 09-555, § 1, 10-20-2009; Ord. No. 12-609, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 58-2. - Construction and scope. 
(a)  Construction . In the interpretation of this chapter affecting parks, its provisions shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Any term in the singular shall include the plural. 
(2)  Any term in the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter. 
(3)  Any requirement or provisions of these rules and regulations relating to any act shall respectively extend to and include the causing, procuring, aiding, or abetting, directly or indirectly, of such act; or the permitting or allowing of any minor in the custody of any persons, doing any act. 
(4)  No provisions hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed by any officer or employee of the department of parks and recreation in line of duty or work as such, or by any person, his agents or employees, in the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with the board. 
(5)  Any act otherwise prohibited by this chapter, provided it is not otherwise prohibited by law, shall be lawful if performed under, by virtue of and strictly in compliance with the provisions of a permit and to the extent authorized thereby. 
(6)  This chapter is in addition to and supplements all municipal, state and federal laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Territorial scope. This chapter effecting parks shall be effective throughout, within and upon all areas under the supervision and control of the board, and/or other publicly owned recreation areas in the City of Millersville, and shall regulate the use thereof by all persons. 
(Ord. No. 09-555, § 2, 10-20-2009) 
Sec. 58-3. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Property, drives, bridges and equipment. No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove, fill in, raise, destroy, or tamper with any property, facility, or equipment, real or personal owned or leased by the Millersville government or under the supervision or control of the board. 
(b)  Trees, shrubs, flowers and grass. No person shall in any park destroy, cut, break, deface, mutilate, injure, disturb, sever from the ground or remove any growing thing. No person shall attach any posters, or directional signs to trees. 
(c)  Littering, rubbish, refuse and pollution. 
(1)  Littering, rubbish, refuse. No person shall take into, carry through, leave in, or throw, cast, lay, drop or discharge into or on any park any rubbish of any sort in any recreation area. No person shall place household refuse and garbage in receptacles which are provided solely for litter resulting from normal park use. 
(2)  Pollution of waters. No person shall throw, or discharge into the waters in any park, any substance, which may result in the pollution of the waters. 
(d)  Advertising. No person shall distribute, display, transport, carry or construct any flag, banner, sign, emblem, model, device, pictorial representation, or other matter, within any park for advertising or political purposes, or cause noise to be made in any park for the purpose of advertising, unless such activity is expressly approved by the board of parks and recreation, subject to such conditions and restrictions as said board deems proper. 
(e)  Disorderly conduct. No person shall, in any park: 
(1)  Disobey the lawful and reasonable order of a police officer or park employee in the discharge of their duties or disobey or disregard the notices, prohibitions, instructions or directions on any park sign, including rules and regulations posted on the grounds or buildings; 
(2)  Use threatening, abusive or insulting language; 
(3)  Do any obscene or indecent act; 
(4)  Throw, cast or propel stones or other missiles; 
(5)  Solicit alms, subscriptions or contributions for any purpose; 
(6)  Interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any part of a park; 
(7)  Climb or lie upon any wall, fence, shelter, seat, statue, monument or other structure; 
(8)  Do any act tending to or amounting to a breach of peace; 
(9)  Enter or leave any park facility except at established entrance ways or exits, or at established times; or use or gain admittance to the facilities in any park for the use of which a charge is made without paying the charge or price fixed by the board; 
(10)  Engage in, instigate, or encourage a dispute or fight; 
(11)  Jump off of any bridge structure into water; or 
(12)  Plan any games of chance, sell futures, or participate in the conduct of a lottery. 
(f)  Explosives, firearms, and weapons. No person shall bring into or have in their possession in any park any firearms slingshots, firecrackers, torpedoes, fireworks or other missile-propelling instruments or explosives, except: 
(1)  City employees in the performance of their duties; 
(2)  Other individuals duly authorized by the city fire marshal or chief of police; or 
(3)  Handguns in the possession of persons authorized to carry handguns pursuant to T.C.A. § 39-17-1351. 
(g)  Aviation . No person shall voluntarily bring, land or cause to descend or alight within or upon any park, any airplane, flying machine, balloon, parachute or other apparatus for aviation, unless such activity is expressly approved by the board of parks and recreation, subject to such conditions and restrictions as said board deems proper. 
(h)  Camping . No person shall tent or camp or erect or maintain a tent, shelter or camp in any park, unless in a designated area. 
(i)  Permits . A permit to do any act shall authorize the act only insofar as it may be performed in strict accordance with the written terms and conditions thereof. Any violations of any law, ordinance, provisions of this code, or rule or regulation of the board or of any other Millersville department by the holder or the agents or employees of the holder of any permit of any term or condition thereof, shall constitute grounds for revocation of the board or by its authorized representative, whose action therein shall be final. In case of revocation of any permit, all monies paid for or on account thereof shall, at the opinion of the board, be forfeited to and be retained by the government; and the holder of such permit, together with his agents and employees who violated such permit, shall be jointly and severally liable to the government of Millersville for all damages and loss suffered by it in excess of money so forfeited. 
(j)  Exhibitions, parade, racing, etc. No person shall erect any structure, stand or platform, exhibit dramatic performance or show of any kind or nature; or parade, or hold any athletic contest; in any park except in accordance with the rules and regulations of the board. 
(k)  Rules and regulations. The board shall adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations consistent with the proper use and protection of the park property under its supervision and control, and consistent with this chapter. 
(l)  Meetings, etc. No person shall erect any structure, hold any meeting, perform any ceremony, make a speech, address or oration in any park except by permit issued by the board or its authorized representative. The board shall establish criteria for approval and denial of permits. 
(m)  Picnics and outings. The board is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations governing picnics or outings consistent with the proper use and protection of park property. 
(n)  Peddling, sales, photographs, etc. No person shall, in any park or to any person in any park, exhibit, sell or offer for sale, hire, lease or let out any object or merchandise, or service of commercial nature, except under a permit issued by the board. 
(o)  Protection of animals. No person shall within any park, attempt to chase, molest, kill, wound, or trap, any feral animal, reptile, bird, bird's nest or squirrel's nest or remove the young of any such animal or the eggs or young of any such reptile or bird. 
(p)  Fires, lighted cigars, etc. No person shall kindle, build, maintain, or use a fire except in fireplaces provided or in self-supporting barbecue grills or stoves in designated picnic areas or under special permit. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person over 18 years of age from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar or cigarette in any park or park-street. 
(q)  Boating . No boat, raft or vessel shall be laid up, stored, repaired or placed, except at boat launchings, for any other purpose on park land except by permits. 
(r)  Games . No person shall in any park engage in any sport, game or competition in places specifically prohibited. 
(s)  Animals at large. No person owning or being custodian or having control of any animal shall cause or permit such animal to go at large in the park. 
(t)  Horses or beasts of burden . No person shall use, lead, ride, or drive a horse or other beast of burden in any park, except on designated bridle paths, or along routes customarily used for access to and from bridle paths, unless otherwise authorized by the board. 
(u)  Hours. No person shall remain in any park between the hours of one-half hour after sundown and one-half hour before sunrise without permission from the board or its authorized representative. The board may in its discretion, alter park closing times. The board may establish different closing times for different parks. 
(v)  Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or have under his control beer, ale, or other alcoholic beverages in any public park or recreation area, except as allowed by the parks and recreation department policy manual approved by resolution of the Millersville Board of Commissioners. 
(w)  Traffic control. All persons shall at all times comply with direction of the police officers and park employees indicated by gesture or otherwise in using parks and shall further comply with directions on traffic signs along the routes in the parks. 
(x)  Speed limits. No person shall drive a vehicle within any park at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. Where no special hazard exists, the maximum speed limit in all parks shall be ten miles per hour unless otherwise posted. 
(y)  Restrictions on vehicles. Vehicles, including trailers, carrying merchandise or samples of merchandise, or other commercial vehicles, are prohibited from entering any park except to make deliveries to the park. 
(z)  Soliciting passengers. No person shall solicit passengers for any automobile, coach, taxi, omnibus or other vehicle in any park except in such areas as may be designated. 
(aa)  Hitchhiking . No person shall in any park or park street attempt to stop or stop by any visible or audible sign or signal, any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting a ride, except in case of emergency. 
(bb)  Careful driving. No person shall in any park, operate or drive or propel, and no owner thereof shall cause or permit to be operated, driven or propelled any vehicle recklessly or negligently or at a speed or in such a manner as to endanger or injure persons or property. 
(cc)  Restricted areas. No person shall in any park, drive or operate a vehicle off of paved roadways or in restricted areas. 
(dd)  Driving instructions. Instructions in operating automobiles or motorcycles is prohibited in parks at all times. 
(ee)  Obstructing traffic. No person shall cause or permit any vehicle to obstruct traffic in any park, or to stop such vehicle except at those places specifically designated or maintained for the purposes of stopping or parking, except in cases of emergency. 
(ff)  Towing and projecting articles. No person shall cause or permit a vehicle to be towed by another vehicle in any park, except that in case of a breakdown, a disabled vehicle may be towed to the nearest exit. Licensed towing operators may enter such park in response to a call from an owner or operator of a disabled vehicle, or by the park's employees or a police officer. 
(gg)  Working on vehicles. No person shall in any park, grease, lubricate, or make repairs to any vehicle except those of a minor nature and then only in cases of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 09-555, § 3, 10-20-2009; Ord. No. 12-609, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 58-4. - Policy manual for operation of city property. 
(a)  A policy manual relating to the regulations and general operation of the Millersville Community Center, park, playground and other city-owned property shall be developed and presented to the board of commissioners for approval by resolution. 
(b)  The city manager or director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to modify the policy manual as deemed necessary and in the best interest of the city with the requirement that such recommendations shall be reported to the board of commissioners at its next regularly scheduled meeting or work session. 
(c)  This section shall further extend to the parks director the authority to set program rates on city-owned property that are separate and apart from rental rates. 
(Ord. No. 11-593, §§ 1-3, 9-20-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-593, §§ 1-3, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 58-4. 
Secs. 58-5-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 58-31. - Creation of board; members. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board consisting of nine members appointed by the mayor with the consent of the board of commissioners and two additional ex-officio non-voting members, one being a member of the board of commissioners and one being a member of the planning commission, also appointed by the mayor with the consent of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 93-201, § 1, 10-19-1993; Ord. No. 12-609, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 58-32. - Powers and duties. 
    The board shall develop rules and regulations of organization and procedure which shall be subject to approval by the board of commissioners. The board shall have control and jurisdiction over all playgrounds, community and recreation centers, public parks, and other lands acquired by the city for such purposes, and shall recommend to the board of commissioners rules of operation for all such facilities, as well as the laying out and improving of such properties. The board of commissioners shall review all such recommendations and shall approve or amend the same. 
(Ord. No. 93-201, § 3, 10-19-1993) 
Sec. 58-33. - Election of members; duties. 
    A chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary shall be elected by the parks and recreation advisory board members. These offices shall be elected annually by the voting members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 93-201, §§ 2, 4, 10-19-1993; Ord. No. 12-609, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 58-34. - Meetings of the board. 
    All meetings of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be held in a public location and shall be open to the general public. The board shall meet on a regular monthly basis, the location, day and time to be set in the bylaws of the board. The agenda for regular meetings shall be posted at the door of City Hall and at the door of any building regularly used for such meetings at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. The agenda for any meetings other than the regularly scheduled monthly meeting shall be posted in a similar fashion at least 48 hours prior to such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 93-201, § 5, 10-19-1993; Ord. No. 12-609, 1-15-2013) 
Sec. 58-35. - Bylaws. 
    The bylaws for the parks and recreation advisory board shall [be] adopted by majority vote of the Millersville Board of Commissioners and shall set forth regulations pertaining to the powers and duties, membership, election of officers, meetings, and order of business of the parks and recreation advisory board. Amendments to the bylaws shall be adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12-609, 1-15-2013) 
Secs. 58-36-58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RATES AND CHARGES FOR RENTAL AND USE OF CITY PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-592, §§ 1-3, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 58-61-58-63. 

Sec. 58-61. - Establishment of schedule of rates and charges. 
    A schedule of rates and charges shall be established for the rental of city-owned property, including the community center building, amphitheater, pavilions, furnishings, and all city-owned or controlled property. 
(Ord. No. 11-592, § 1, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 58-62. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article and relating to rental classifications, the following definitions shall apply. 
    Commercial means a business, company or organization that does not have not-for-profit 501(c)(3) status. 
    Non-resident means an individual who does not live within the city limits of Millersville. 
    Not-for-profit means a person or entity with a valid 501(c)(3) status and proof of that status. 
    Open to the public means an event where the general public is invited to attend. 
    Private event means an event where attendance is restricted to a specific group, as defined by the person or organization responsible for renting a city-owned facility. 
    Resident means a person who lives within the city limits of Millersville. 
(Ord. No. 11-592, § 2, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 58-63. - Rental rates. 
    The board of commissioners shall set the rates, fees, and charges for the rental and use of city-owned property. Said rates, fees and charges will be established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 11-592, § 3, 9-20-2011) 
Chapter 62 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 62-31. - Creation; membership; terms of office; vacancies. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of T.C.A. § 13-4-101, there is hereby created a municipal planning commission. The planning commission shall consist of seven members; one of whom shall be the mayor or the mayor's designee and one a member of the board of commissioners selected by the board of commissioners. The remaining five members shall be appointed by the mayor. All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation. The terms of the appointive members shall be for three years. The terms of the mayor and the member selected by the board of commissioners shall be coterminous with their respective terms of office. Any vacancy in an appointive membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 81-5, § 1, 9-1-1981; Ord. No. 89-128, § 1, 10-17-1989; Ord. No. 00-351, § 1, 4-18-2000) 
Sec. 62-32. - Organization, powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall be organized and shall carry out its powers, functions and duties in accordance with all applicable provisions of T.C.A. § 13-1-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 81-5, § 2, 9-1-1981) 
Chapter 66 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YARD SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-31. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Failure to obtain the permit described in division 2 of this article before conducting any yard sale shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 87-101, § 4, 10-20-1987) 
Secs. 66-32-66-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 66-51. - Required. 
    No endeavor or undertaking in which merchandise of any kind or any item of value is exchanged for cash or bartered, i.e., any activity commonly known as a yard sale, shall be conducted in the city in the out of doors without a permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-101, § 1, 10-20-1987) 
Sec. 66-52. - Issuance; display. 
    Permits shall be issued at no cost by the city recorder. Permits shall be prominently displayed at the site of sale. 
(Ord. No. 87-101, § 2, 10-20-1987) 
Sec. 66-53. - Issuance to specific location; duration. 
    Permits shall be issued for the location of sale. There shall be no more than two sales at one location in any calendar year. The maximum length of time for any permit shall be three days. 
(Ord. No. 87-101, § 3, 10-20-1987) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 32; health and sanitation, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Refuse means garbage, rubbish, leaves, brush, and refuse as those terms are generally defined, except that dead animals and fowls, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks, and similar materials are expressly excluded therefrom and shall not be stored therewith. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 1, 4-17-1990) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-32. - Premises to be kept clean. 
    All persons within the city are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of refuse except when stored as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 2, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 70-33. - Storage. 
    Each owner, occupant, or other responsible person using or occupying any building or other premises within this municipality where refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate, shall provide and keep covered an adequate number of refuse containers. The refuse containers shall be strong, durable, and rodentproof and insectproof. They shall each have a capacity of not less than 20 nor more than 32 gallons, except that this maximum capacity shall not apply to larger containers owned or maintained by the city or commercial disposal companies. No refuse shall be placed in a refuse container until such refuse has been drained of all free liquids. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 3, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 70-34. - Disturbing containers. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over, or in any other manner disturb or use any refuse container belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse containers for their intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 4, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 70-35. - Collection vehicles. 
(a)  The collection of refuse shall be by means of vehicles with beds constructed of impervious materials which are easily cleanable and so constructed that there will be no leakage of liquids draining from the refuse onto the streets and alleys. Furthermore, all refuse collection vehicles shall utilize closed beds or such coverings as will effectively prevent the scattering of refuse over the streets or alleys. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, institution or organization to transport any loose cargo by truck or other motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city unless such cargo is covered and secured in such manner as to prevent depositing of litter or refuse on public and private property. 
(c)  The duty and responsibility imposed by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be applicable alike to the owner of the truck or other vehicle, the operator thereof, and the person, firm, corporation, institution or organization from whose residence or establishment the cargo originated. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 5, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 70-36. - Disposal. 
    The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person or entity in any place, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city is expressly prohibited and shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 6, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 70-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code, upon conviction of such offense in the municipal court. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 7, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 70-38. - Violation of article; notice; abatement; expenses; reimbursement of city. 
    The city manager or building inspector or those persons they may designate, shall inspect any property within the city suspected of being in violation of section 70-32, 70-33, 70-34 or 79-36. If the city manager, building inspector, or any of their designees determine that a violation of this article exists, the city manager or building inspector will cause a notice to be sent to the property owners as shown upon the tax book of the city. The notice shall advise the owners that a violation of this article exists and that if compliance is not effected within seven calendar days from the date of mailing of such notice, the city will cause removal of the condition to be accomplished, and the expense thereof charged to the property and the owners thereof. The notice shall be forwarded to the last known address of all owners of the subject property by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If the removal of the offending condition is not completed in the time allowed in the notice, the city manager is further authorized and directed to cause the removal to be done at the expense of the city. The city manager shall then notify the owners of the property of the amount of such expense in the same manner as provided in this section, and shall further notify such owners that reimbursement of such expense is required within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 8, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 70-39. - Failure to reimburse city; lien; penalties and interest; litigation. 
    The city, after notification of the property owners as set out in section 70-37, shall have authority to abate the conditions described in sections 70-32, 70-33, 70-34 and 70-36 by removing from the property the condition or substance or thing causing the violation as set forth in section 70-38. All owners of property shall be liable jointly and separately for the expense of removal of the condition from their property, and the property itself shall be subject to suit for reimbursement of such expenses. If the expense of such removal shall not have been paid within the ten-day period allowed following notice as provided in section 70-38, then the expenses shall be entered upon the tax books of the city as a lien against such parcel of property whereon such expense was incurred. If such expense shall not have been reimbursed by the date upon which taxes are due and payable for the year in which the expense was incurred, then the city manager shall cause to be added to such amounts penalty and interest as are applicable to delinquent assessments which shall constitute a lien on the property. If litigation is necessary to collect any of the amounts provided in this section, there shall be added thereto all costs of such litigation and reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 2, § 9, 4-17-1990) 
Secs. 70-40-70-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION BY CITY 

Sec. 70-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes includes burned or incinerated material such as wood, coal, and other debris, but does not include any materials considered hazardous. 
    Commercial user means the owner or operator of a city licensed commercial business that contracts with the city for refuse collection. 
    Construction means building materials and solid waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, cleanup, or demolition operations that are not hazardous. This term includes, but is not limited to, asphalt, concrete, Portland cement concrete, brick, lumber, gypsum wallboard, cardboard and other associated packaging, roofing material, ceramic tile, carpeting, plastic pipe and steel. 
    Hazardous materials means any materials having properties that may result in risk or injury to health, destruction of life or facilities. Hazardous materials, as defined, include toxic, flammable, infectious, corrosive, asphyxiating, and explosive materials. 
    Household means, for the purpose of this division, as a residential living unit within the City of Millersville, whether occupied or not, to which garbage and refuse pickup service is furnished by the City of Millersville, and available for use, whether utilized or not, and for which pick up service is not otherwise provided for under sections of this division. 
    Industrial waste means a type of solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial operations. 
    Infectious material means waste capable of producing an infectious disease because it contains pathogens of sufficient virulence and quantity so that exposure to the waste by a susceptible human host could result in an infectious disease. 
    Refuse means and include garbage, rubbish, leaves, grass clippings, brush, and white goods, as those terms are generally defined except that dead animals, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks, hazardous materials, infectious materials, industrial waste, construction materials, agricultural waste, and similar materials are expressly excluded and shall not be stored therewith. 
    Residential user means the owner of any building or other premises, or the owner of land leased or rented to the owner of a building or other premises placed on said land, that is used in full or part as a residential household, including single-family homes, mobile homes, multifamily units, apartment units, travel trailers, or any dwelling used for residential occupancy for more than 30 days at the same physical address or location. 
    White goods means any household appliance, including stoves, washing machines, dryers, window air conditioners, freezers and refrigerators. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, §§ 1-10, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-47. - Premises to be kept clean. 
    All persons within the municipality are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of refuse except when stored as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 11, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-48. - Storage-Residential generally. 
    Each owner of a residential premises within the city where refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate, unless otherwise exempted within this division, shall be provided by the city, free of charge, one refuse container for storage of refuse for collection by the city as follows: 
(1)  Each owner shall be responsible for keeping the refuse container clean and sanitary in compliance with health and sanitation requirements and shall keep container lids closed at all times. 
(2)  Any potentially infectious materials generated by the household, including hypodermic syringes, shall be sealed in packaging that prevents leaking and/or puncturing prior to being placed in the refuse container. 
(3)  All refuse placed in the container shall be in plastic garbage bags having a sufficient thickness and strength as to prevent rupture during the normal handling of the bags. 
(4)  The container will remain the property of the city and must not be painted, abused, mutilated, altered or modified in any manner. Each owner shall be responsible for replacing the refuse container if it is damaged or destroyed by the resident or as a result of negligence, by payment of the replacement price set forth by the city in the most current schedule of charges and fees. 
(5)  The city shall replace any refuse container that is worn out by normal wear and tear or if it is stolen or damaged though vandalism. If the container is stolen or vandalized, the owner must notify the police department and the public works department. Leaving the container street side for an unnecessary period of time after being emptied shall be considered negligence in the event of theft or vandalism and the owner may be responsible for its replacement. 
(6)  The container shall not be filled to overflowing. Residents may purchase additional refuse containers, if such is needed for extraordinary amounts of refuse. The price and fees for additional containers shall be set forth in the most current schedule of charges and fees. 
(7)  In the event that an owner or occupant should move, the refuse container is to remain at the original assigned location and the owner is responsible for the container and shall notify the public works department of the move out date. 
(8)  If the owner delegates or directs an occupant or another responsible person to make payment of fees and assume the responsibility for the container, such agreement is exclusive of the city and the owner shall remain responsible for the container and payment of all incurred fees. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 12, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-49. - Same-Apartment buildings and multifamily buildings. 
    Each apartment unit or multifamily unit shall be considered a residential household and participate in the city wide solid waste collection program as follows: 
(1)  Each residential unit within an apartment or multifamily building shall be provided an individual refuse container and shall comply with the provisions set forth under section 70-48 of this division. The public works department will designate the placement of the containers. 
(2)  The owners of the buildings shall be responsible for the containers and for payment of the solid waste collection fee. 
(3)  Apartment buildings and multifamily buildings having four or more units per building and comprising a complex of 12 or more residential units may make application to the public works department for exemption from use of the individual containers and, upon approval, utilize a dumpster(s) for the storage and collection of refuse. The city may, at its option, require the use of a city provided and serviced dumpster(s) or permit the owner to contract with a private dumpster service which conforms to the requirements and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 13, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-50. - Same-Mobile home parks. 
    Mobile homes shall fall under the residential provisions set forth in section 70-48 of this division. Each mobile home shall be provided a container. Mobile home parks shall not be exempt from participating in the solid waste program by use of private dumpsters. Mobile home parks that utilize a dumpster(s) and are obligated under a private contract for refuse collection and disposal at the time the city activates the solid waste collection program, shall be exempt from the program for the duration of the private contract, not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 14, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-51. - Same-Residential exemptions. 
    Exemption from the city provided waste collection service will be considered only upon written application by the owner. No households shall be exempted from the city provided waste collection service or fees based upon the use of a private collector, access to a dumpster or other disposal facility, disposal of solid waste on the property, or on the basis of sharing a container, unless otherwise provided for in this division. Those residential units that may be exempt from the city collection service and fees are as follows: 
(1)  Homes that are vacant shall not be subject to payment of a collection fee. If a home is occupied for part of a monthly billing cycle, the monthly fee will be pro-rated. If a home is vacant but continues to require the collection of refuse, as the result of cleaning, yard work or other activity, the normal monthly fee shall apply. For exclusion from the fee, the owner shall make application for exclusion with the public works department prior to the date of vacancy. The owner must secure the container assigned to the home until public works picks up the container or until the home is occupied. 
(2)  Empty lots within a mobile home park shall not be subject to payment of a collection fee. If a lot is occupied for part of a monthly billing cycle, the monthly fee will be pro-rated. For exclusion from the fee, the park owner shall make application for exclusion with the public works department prior to the time the lot is vacated. The park owner must secure the container assigned to the lot until public works picks up the container or until the lot is occupied. 
(3)  Residential property utilizing an approved dumpster, as determined by the regulations stated in section 70-52 of this division, may make application for exclusion from the use of the standard residential refuse cart and have a reduction in the monthly fee, as 
set forth in fee schedule. The resident must provide proof that a dumpster is placed on the property and serviced in accordance with the regulations set forth in this division. 
(4)  All other exemptions shall be at the direction of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 15, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-52. - Residential dumpsters. 
    Other than for the temporary use during construction or remodeling of a residence, dumpsters shall not be permitted on residential properties of less than two acres. Multiple dumpsters or a dumpster in excess of eight cubic yards may not be located on any residentially zoned property without authorization from the Millersville Board of Zoning Appeals. Dumpsters on residential property shall be located at the rear of the premise and screened from public view by fence or landscaping. All dumpsters shall have the location and screening approved by the public works department. To help control odors, insects, and other vermin, dumpsters used in conjunction with the storage of household refuse must be kept covered and may be required to be emptied as often as once per week. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 16, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 04-447, § 1, 7-20-2004; Ord. No. 04-451, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 70-53. - Disturbing containers. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over, or in any other manner disturb or use any refuse container belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse containers for their intended use. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 17, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-54. - Residential refuse collection. 
    The city will service the refuse container once a week. The city shall not pick up refuse left on or around the container on a regular basis. An occasional over-run of household refuse, because of visitors, holidays, etc., shall be handled with the normal weekly pick-up. Households experiencing an over-run more often than once per month, as determined by the public works department, shall be required to purchase additional containers, in accordance with the most current schedule of charges and fees. Residential refuse accumulations other than normal weekly container collection of household garbage, such as debris, routine yard waste, shrub trimmings, tree limbs, grass clippings, and white goods, will be picked up on an occasional basis. All refuse placed at the street for pickup must be separated for disposal. Brush, leaves, limbs, white goods, etc. must be stacked in separate piles. Trees, limbs, brush and other debris generated by commercial tree trimmers, landscape contractors, building contractors or other businesses generating refuse shall be removed by the contractor or business. Commercial businesses that deliver and install new appliances are required to remove the old appliance from the premises (if no longer wanted by the owner) and insure proper disposal. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 18, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-55. - Location of containers-Standard. 
    All households, except those approved for special assistance due to age, handicap or illness or approved under special circumstances specified in this division, shall place their wheeled container at curbside or street side at such times as shall be scheduled by the public works department. Containers shall not be placed in the street. The public works department may specify the exact placement of the container. As soon as practicable after the container has been emptied, it shall be removed by the owner or occupant to within, or to the rear of, the premises and away from the street line until the next scheduled time for collection. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 19, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-56. - Same-Special exceptions. 
    Those residents that have a documented hardship that would make transporting the container to the curb or street unusually difficult, including handicap, age, illness, or extreme distance, may make application to the public works department for authorization to use an off street pickup location. The public works department must approve the application and, if approved, the public works department shall designate the alternate pickup location and scheduled pickup time. Additional fees may be assessed for off street pickup, as stated on the application and schedule of charges and fees. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 20, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-57. - Commercial refuse collection. 
    Commercial establishments shall store and remove refuse in such a manner as to maintain a clean and sanitary environment. Commercial establishments may contract with a private collector that is approved by the city. The city may, upon request and at its option, service standard city refuse carts for commercial businesses in accordance with the rates set forth by the city commission and in the most current schedule of charges and fees. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 21, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-58. - Private refuse collectors. 
    Private refuse collectors may engage in the collection and disposal of refuse from any nonresidential properties within the city. All private refuse collectors operating within the city must be approved by the city manager. Such approval may be denied or revoked should it be determined that the collector has a history of or is presently operating as a hazard to the community through unsafe vehicle operation, leakage or spillage of refuse from the vehicles, or improper disposal practices. Only the city shall engage in the normal collection of refuse from residential households. This shall not preclude the removal of residential refuse by building contractors, carpet installers, landscapers, tree trimmers and other businesses generating refuse in the operation of their business. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 22, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-59. - City wide refuse collection. 
    Except as otherwise herein provided, all households in the city shall be included in the city's solid waste collection system. Choosing not to use the city service for waste collection and disposal shall not release the household from responsibility for the payment of the collection fee. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 23, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-60. - Establishing charges and fees. 
    A refuse collection fee shall be charged to and collected from each residential and commercial user, in accordance with the terms of this division. The Millersville Board of Commissioners shall establish the fee for refuse collection and disposal services. The fee shall be billed in calendar month increments on a schedule set by the city manager. The public works department, with the approval of the city manager, shall set charges, fees and deposits for the purchase, lease or replacement of containers and dumpsters. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 24, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-61. - Collection and disposal fee. 
(a)  The monthly fee for collection and disposal services shall be as follows: 
Residential user, standard street side collection. An automatic four percent increase annually will occur on July 1 of each year as of July 1, 2018. ..... $15.60 
Residential user, approved special exception off street collection. An automatic four percent increase annually will occur on July 1 of each year as of July 1, 2018. ..... 15.60 
Residential user, requested off street collection. An automatic four percent increase annually will occur on July 1 of each year as of July 1, 2018. ..... 23.40 
Each additional container, residential (*) ..... 8.00 
Apartment user, utilizing city serviced dumpsters (per unit) ..... 13.00 
Residential user, dumpster exclusion per section 70-51(c) ..... 6.00 
Commercial user, designated pick-up location. An automatic four percent increase annually will occur on July 1 of each year as of July 1, 2018. ..... 15.60 
Each additional container, commercial ..... 16.00 
(*)  Residential users engaged in a home occupation may be billed the commercial rate for additional containers and the public works department may place limitations on the materials eligible for collection. 
(b)  Group billing monthly collection rates for mobile homes and apartment units. 
(1)  The homes must be part of a bona fide mobile home park or apartment complex with a minimum of ten occupied homes or units per billing group. 
(2)  All users must be serviced by standard street side collection. 
(3)  All homes in the mobile home park or complex must be included in the group billing. 
(4)  Bills not paid by the due date will be assessed a $2.00 penalty per residence. 
(5)  Penalties for nonpayment of fees, as described in section 70-63, shall apply individually to each residence in a billing group. 
(6)  A minimum of ten users will be billed on any group billing, regardless of occupancy. 
(7)  All other provisions of this division shall apply. 
(c)  A non-refundable administrative fee of $30.00 shall be charged for the following solid waste department actions: 
(1)  Activation of a new solid waste account. 
(2)  Assignment of an additional refuse container. (If more than one additional container is assigned, the fee shall be charged for each additional container.) 
(3)  Cancellation of the use an additional container made within 12 months of container delivery. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 25, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 08-539, §§ 1, 2, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 16-663, Exh. A, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 70-62. - Responsibility for payment of fees. 
    The owner of the building or other premises, or the owner of land leased or rented to the owner of a building or other premises placed on said land, shall be responsible for payment of all fees. If the owner authorizes or directs a tenant, occupant or other responsible person to make payment of the fees to the city, such agreement is exclusive of the city and the owner shall remain responsible for all incurred fees. The city may place a lien against the property as security for any unpaid fees, including late charges, penalties, court costs, legal expenses associated with collecting the fees, inclusive of attorney fees, and lien recording fees. If the city utilizes an independent fee collection service, the commissions and expense of such service shall be added to the amount due. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 26, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-439, 1-20-2003; Ord. No. 08-539, § 3, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 70-63. - Penalty for nonpayment of fees. 
    It is unlawful to refuse or neglect to pay the collection fee when billed. Each user shall be given ten days from the billing date to make payment to the city. The city may assess late fees on all past due accounts. Accounts more than 30 days past due may subject the user to a $50.00 fine and a $50.00 fine for each additional 30-day period that the collection fee remains unpaid. The user shall be responsible for all collection and court costs resulting from the collection of unpaid fees. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 27, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-64. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to institute collection mechanisms, rules, and regulations as shall be deemed by the city manager to be efficient, appropriate and expedient to effect refuse and fee collections. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 28, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 70-65. - Implementation. 
    For the purpose of an orderly and efficient transition between the method of refuse collection utilized prior to passage of this division and the method provided for within this division, residents shall continue to use private collectors or other means to have refuse removed until this program is implemented. The provisions set forth herein shall be implemented in one or more phases, over a time period not to exceed 12 months. The city shall notify the users of the service at least 30 days prior to the beginning of city provided refuse collection. 
(Ord. No. 02-420, § 29, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 70-66-70-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTERING AND ILLEGAL DUMPING 

Sec. 70-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter means garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste materials. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes. 
(Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 4-16-1982) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-72. - Throwing, dumping, or depositing litter. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to throw, dump, deposit, or cause to be thrown, dumped or deposited litter on property owned by another person without the permission of the owner or occupant of such property or on any public highway, street or road or upon any other public property except that property designated for that use. 
(Ord. No. 82-26, § 2, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 70-73. - Evidence against driver of motor vehicle. 
    If the throwing, dumping or depositing of litter was done from a motor vehicle, it shall be prima facie evidence that the throwing, dumping or depositing was done by the driver of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 82-26, § 3, 4-16-1982) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 70-74. - Objects bearing name as evidence. 
    If an object of litter is discovered on another's property without his permission, on any public highway, street or road, or upon any other public property except that property designated for that use, bearing a person's name, it shall be prima facie evidence that the person whose name appears on the object threw, dumped, deposited or caused it to be thrown dumped or deposited there. 
(Ord. No. 82-26, § 4, 4-16-1982) 
Sec. 70-75. - Prosecution by peace officer or private citizen. 
    Prosecution for a violation of this article may be initiated by a peace officer who witnessed an offense in violation of this article or who discovered an article bearing a person's name on the property of another, or any public highway, street or road, or upon any other public property except that designated for that use, or by any private citizen, who witnessed an offense or discovered incriminating evidence, who is willing to make the initial charge and testify for the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-26, § 5, 4-16-1982) 
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes for such improvement saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); possession and consumption in parking lots open to the public, § 6-1; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 32; libraries, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 58; planning, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90; floodplain district, § 90-231 et seq.; subdivision regulations, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Road construction, depth specifications. 
(a)  All new roads within the city will be constructed with a minimum of six inches of aggregate base, two inches of binder and 11/2 inches of asphalt. 
(b)  All roads could be subject to more than six inches of aggregate base and will depend on soil on which roads are being built. Final determination will be made by the city engineers. 
(c)  Curbs shall be a minimum of six inches high, 12 inches width concrete placed on top of a two-inch asphalt binder and locked in place with a 11/2-inch asphalt finish topping and backfilled with dirt for support. 
(Ord. No. 95-282, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-1996; Ord. No. 01-374, §§ 1-3, 5-15-2001) 
Sec. 74-2. - Road maintenance fee. 
    A road maintenance fee is hereby established. The road maintenance fee will be used for the sole purpose of funding the street fund and will only be used to improve the condition of the roads and street equipment within the city. The fee schedule will be as follows: Home and business owners who have paid this fee or whose home or business was built prior to this section will not be charged a second time if their home or business has been destroyed by a natural disaster (accidental fire, flood or high winds). 
Single-family homes (per dwelling) ..... $150.00 
Mobile homes (per dwelling) (Individual lots in a designated mobile home park will be charged $75.00 per move in.) ..... 150.00 
Modular homes (per dwelling) ..... 150.00 
Apartment complex (per unit) ..... 150.00 
Duplex (per unit) ..... 150.00 
Triplex (per unit) ..... 150.00 
Townhouses and all other single-family dwellings (per unit) ..... 150.00 
Hotels, motels (per room) ..... 50.00 
All other commercial businesses will be charged $0.15 per square foot with a base minimum of $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 96-286, §§ 1, 2, 8-27-1996; Ord. No. 00-360, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 74-3. - Paving of private driveways intersecting with city streets. 
(a)  All new private driveways, streets and roads connecting to a city street or road, permitted after the date this section takes effect, shall have the first ten feet of surface paved. 
(b)  Currently existing private driveways, streets and roads will not be required to pave the entry unless new construction or development occurs. All existing private driveways, streets and roads that connect to a city street or road shall have the first ten feet of surface paved, in conjunction with the permitted construction of a new residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural building. Residential storage buildings and similar small residential accessory buildings are excluded from this requirement. 
(c)  The paved of a residential driveway shall be comprised of asphalt, concrete, paving brick or other material, as approved by the building inspector, that will form a solid surface and help prevent gravel, dirt, and other loose material from spilling or washing onto the adjoining road surface. 
(d)  The paved of a commercial driveway shall be comprised of asphalt, concrete, paving brick or other material, as approved by the planning commission, that will form a solid surface and help prevent gravel, dirt, and other loose material from spilling or washing onto the adjoining road surface. 
(e)  The paved of a private street or road shall meet the road construction requirements set forth by the planning commission. 
(f)  The owner of a private driveway, street or road shall maintain the paved section and keep it in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 03-424, §§ 1-6, 3-18-2003) 
Sec. 74-4. - Honorary street name policy. 
(a)  General . The city commission shall adhere to the following policy when designating an honorary street name. This policy applies only to streets within the city limits of Millersville. The placement of an honorary sign on Highway 31W or Bethel Road requires approval from the Tennessee Legislature and Tennessee Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Purpose . The designating of an honorary street name is a program allowing citizens to honor individuals who have made a significant contribution to the city by temporarily assigning an honorary name to an existing city street. Individual family tribute or commercial and corporate related recognition does not qualify. 
(c)  Definition . Honorary street name signs are signs which are intended to recognize and honor certain individuals without changing the official name of the street or the official addresses of residences and businesses on the street. 
(d)  Description and placement . Honorary signs may be mounted on the same post as the existing street sign or mounted free standing on a separate post. If mounted with an existing sign, the honorary sign shall be similar in size and shape to a standard street sign and mounted above the existing sign. Free standing signs shall be no larger than 432 square inches and the shape and design must be approved by the planning commission. Free standing signs must be placed a minimum of 150 feet from the intersection of any street and shall not obstruct motorist or pedestrian view of traffic, crosswalks, other street signs or any potential hazard. Honorary signs shall not be placed in locations wherein additional signage might cause or contribute to confusion or distraction for motorists. Honorary signs will be of a different color than the normal green and white for public streets and will have the printing "HONORARY" beneath the name. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, the color of honorary signs shall be a brown background with white letters. Signs placed on a state highway shall be authorized and placed at the discretion of the Tennessee Department of Transportation (TDOT). 
(e)  Duration . The approval of the request by the city commission shall be for a period of five years from the date of such approval. The city may remove the sign at the end of the five-year period. If requested, the sign may be given to the applicant or family member of the honoree. 
(f)  Renewal . A renewal, if desired at the end of the five-year period, will be handled like new requests with all applicable rules and fees in effect at that time. If a renewal is not arranged, the honorary designation will be discontinued at the end of the five years. 
(g)  Cost . For each sign location approved, a fee of $375.00 shall be charged, which will cover the cost of design, fabrication, installation and maintenance of the sign. The fee shall be paid upon city commission approval of the sign. If the sign is stolen or damaged before the end of the five-year approval period, the sign will be replaced at the applicant's option and cost. 
(h)  Criteria for nomination. The city may consider a petition to designate an honorary name for up to a one mile section of an existing street in the city upon the application meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  This method of honoring individuals is reserved for those having citywide impact or fame. Individual family tribute or commercial-related and corporate-related recognition does not qualify. 
(2)  The designation is limited to a one mile or less section of the requested city street and no more than one designation shall be made within any one mile road section. 
(3)  There will be only two designations per calendar year approved by the city. Requests will be reviewed in the order in which they are received and only one honorary street sign per designation will be installed. 
(4)  At least 70 percent of the number of owners of real property (as shown on the city tax records) adjoining the street or portion of street proposed for such honorary naming shall have signed a petition in favor of the designation. 
(5)  Requests for an honorary street designation shall be made in a letter form to the mayor or city planner. The letter of request must include the following: 
a.  The official name of the street being requested for honorary designation; 
b.  The portion of the street to receive the designation (beginning and ending 911 addresses); 
c.  The name of the person, group or organization that will be responsible for payment of the costs associated with the design, fabrication, installation and maintenance of the sign, if approved; 
d.  The requested location of the sign; 
e.  The name of the person to be honored; 
f.  The historical significance of the person whose name is proposed to be the secondary honorary name for the street; 
g.  Such person's history of contributions to the City of Millersville; 
h.  Such person's heroic service or personal sacrifice to the City of Millersville, State of Tennessee or United States of America; 
i.  Such person's history of residence in the city, including duration and location of such residence. The person whose name is proposed for such honorary naming shall have resided in the City of Millersville at least five years during his/her lifetime, during which time such person shall have preferably resided on the street in question; 
j.  History of the street, including its current and any prior name(s), official and prior honorary; 
k.  An attached copy of the petition of support; and 
l.  An attached drawing indicating the preferred appearance of the requested sign and the exact spelling of the name and any other words or abbreviations to be included on the sign. Note: Methods of fabrication, size, applicable laws and other factors may dictate the final appearance of the sign. 
(i)  Approval process. Requests for an honorary sign shall be reviewed by a committee of city staff, including the police chief, fire chief, public works director, codes administrator, city planner, and city manager. The staff committee shall consider how the requested sign and location could impact public safety, road and right-of-way maintenance, current sign regulations and any other factors that may negatively affect the public or city. Staff review shall not apply to signs on state highways and under the control of TDOT. The letter of request, along with any staff findings or concerns shall then be sent to the planning commission for review. The planning commission shall consider the sign request based upon how it conforms to the criteria for nomination and how it impacts the general planning and development of the city and street in question. The planning commission shall forward the results of its vote to recommend approval or denial of the sign request to the city commission. After review of all information, the city commission shall approve or deny the sign request by majority vote of the entire commission. 
(j)  State highways. The honorary naming of Highway 31W and Bethel Road requires approval from the Tennessee State Legislature and Tennessee Department of Transportation. Upon request for the honorary naming of a state highway, the above criteria for nomination and the approval process shall be followed. If approved, a resolution of support shall be passed by the city commission and sent to the state legislature. City fees shall not apply to signs manufactured and placed at the expense of TDOT. 
(Ord. No. 12-598, 2-21-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-598, adopted Feb. 21, 2012, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 74-4. 
Secs. 74-5-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-31. - Driveway cuts. 
    No one shall cut, build, or maintain a driveway which joins a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the public works director or his designee. Such permit will not be issued when the contemplated driveway is to be so located or constructed as to create a drainage problem or an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. Driveway aprons shall not extend out into the street. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 4, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-32. - Barricades required. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or others doing the excavating, who shall dig or cause to be dug any ditch, drain, or other excavation or cause any embankment or other obstruction to be constructed in, on, under, across, or adjoining any street, alley, road, sidewalk, or other public way, or shall perform work in and around any utility manhole in or adjoining any public way within the jurisdiction of the city shall have the same guarded at all times with a substantial barricade, sufficient and suitable to warn persons traveling on or using such street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way of the presence of such excavation or utility manhole and against danger therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 5, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-33. - Safety precautions. 
(a)  Every person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or others, who shall dig or cause to be dug any ditch, drain, trench, or other excavation or cause any embankment or other obstruction to be constructed in, on, under, across, or adjoining any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or shall perform work in and around any utility manhole in or adjoining any public way, within the jurisdiction of the city shall, in addition to the barricades heretofore specified, post or otherwise place warning lights at the end and sides of each excavation, utility manhole, or other obstruction during the entire night, and if such excavation or other obstruction shall extend more than 50 feet along such street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, then additional warning lights shall be placed each 25 feet or fraction thereof. Where excavations or other obstructions shall extend across any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, warning lights shall be placed at six-foot intervals along such excavation or other obstruction. All lights shall be secured in such a manner as not to be displaced by winds or storms. 
(b)  If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed and provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to adhere to the Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. 
(c)  The permittee shall carry on the work authorized by the permit in such manner as to cause minimum interference with traffic. He shall provide adequate warning signs and devices to warn and guide traffic, and shall place the signs and warning devices in a position of maximum effectiveness. Where the public works director or his designee determines that difficult or potentially hazardous conditions exist, competent flagmen shall be provided by the permittee to effect a safe and orderly movement of traffic. Where insufficient traffic lanes exist because of street openings, adequate bridging shall be supplied by the permittee. When traffic congestion occurs in spite of all precautions, the permittee shall be responsible for providing police assistance. On main thoroughfares and in congested districts, sufficient traffic lanes shall be kept open at all times to permit substantial normal traffic flow, except when emergency conditions require otherwise. Unless this can be accomplished, work shall be done only during the periods as the public works director may designate. In the case of emergency occurring in any important thoroughfares, the permittee shall notify the police and fire department immediately. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 6, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-34. - Testing for flammable gases and/or liquids in utility manholes. 
    No person engaged in working in and around any utility manhole shall enter the utility manhole until testing by an instrument or other acceptable method has been performed to determine whether or not the manhole is free from toxic or flammable gases and/or liquids. When tests indicate the presence of toxic and/or flammable gases and/or liquids, the manhole shall be properly ventilated prior to entering of manhole by any person. Tests are to be repeated at such intervals as are necessary to make certain that toxic or flammable gases and/or liquids do not recur in hazardous quantities. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 7, 3-18-1997) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 82. 
Sec. 74-35. - Safety standards. 
    All work shall be performed in and about any utility manhole in or adjoining any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, or any public way in accordance with OSHA standards. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 8, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-36. - Excavation and/or removal of materials. 
    Any person who shall dig, quarry, or cause to be dug or quarried any dirt, earth, sand, stone, or paving and/or shall remove such materials from in, on, or under any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way within the jurisdiction of the city without the specific direction and/or permission of the public works director or his designee, shall be subject to such a violation, with each location of such diggings, quarrying, and/or removal to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 9, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-37. - Unguarded excavations or openings adjacent to sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
    It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association or others, to make any excavation, or to establish any opening adjacent to any sidewalk or public right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city without the erection of barricades or other proper precautions to prevent danger to persons or vehicles passing along such sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 10, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-38. - Refilling excavated areas. 
    Every person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association or others, who shall dig or cause to be dug any ditch, drain, trench, or other excavation in, on, under, or across any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way within the jurisdiction of the city, shall refill carefully all such ditches, drains, trenches, or other excavations by replacing with crushed stone in paved areas and roadway shoulders pending replacement of pavements and/or other improvements, and shall fill such ditch, drain, trench, or other excavation with selected earth materials in unpaved or otherwise unimproved areas. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 11, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-39. - Replacement of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, pavements or other special structures. 
    Every person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association or others, excavating in, on, under, or across any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way within the jurisdiction of the city shall replace all curbs, gutters, sidewalks, pavements, or other special structures disturbed, displaced, or removed, at the expense of such persons making the excavations and in accordance with the standard requirements and specifications of the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 12, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-40. - Article not applicable to work performed by city. 
    This article shall not apply to any excavation in connection with a public improvement or public work where the work is performed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 14, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-41. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    The violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $50.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 15, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-42. - Effect of conflict between ordinances. 
    In case of conflict between this article or any part thereof and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the city, the most restrictive provision shall in all cases apply. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 18, 3-18-1997) 
Secs. 74-43-74-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 74-61. - Required before making excavations; time of performing excavation. 
(a)  No person, firm, association, corporation, public or private utility, or others shall dig or cause to be dug any ditch, drain, trench, or other excavation, nor cause any embankment or other obstruction to be constructed in, on, or under any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way within the jurisdiction of the city without having first applied for and obtained from the public works director or his designee permission so to do. Any person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or others maintaining pipes, lines, or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way may proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately and a permit cannot reasonably and practicably be obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the office of the department of public works is open for business, and such permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun. 
(b)  Every permittee holding a valid permit to perform excavation or to otherwise cause any obstruction in, on, or under any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way within the jurisdiction of the city shall perform the work permitted only within the hours stipulated on such permit. Work not completed during any stipulated period of hours shall be bridged, backfilled, or otherwise rendered usable for pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic until the next period of hours during which work is permitted. Each violation of the permitted hours of work shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 1, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-62. - Applications. 
    Application for such permits shall be made to the public works director, or such person designated by him to receive such applications, and shall state thereon the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof; the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or others doing the actual excavating, and the name of the person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or others for whom the work is being done, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. Such application shall be rejected or approved by the public works director or his designee in a timely fashion. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 2, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-63. - Fees. 
    For the privilege of excavating in, on, or across streets, roads, alleys, sidewalks, or other public ways within the jurisdiction of the city, a fee of $25.00 will be charged for each application or permit requested in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 3, 3-18-1997) 
Sec. 74-64. - Bond and insurance required. 
    No permit shall be issued by the public works director or his designee to any person, firm, corporation, public or private utility, association, or others, for the privilege of excavating in, on, or across any street, road, alley, sidewalk, or other public way within the jurisdiction of the city, until a bond is posted in the amount of $10,000.00 to ensure faithful performance of all work and payment of fees and shall have further furnished certificates of liability insurance in total amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. Such liability insurance policies shall contain a rider annexed to such policies containing the following provision: "This policy shall not be cancelled, terminated, nullified, or changed by the company unless 30 days prior written notice is sent to the insured by registered mail addressed to the public works director of the City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee." 
(Ord. No. 97-301, § 13, 3-18-1997) 
Secs. 74-65-74-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 74-91. - Pedestrian and bicycle ways, greenways generally. 
(a)  All developers creating major subdivisions of land in the residential zoning districts of R-5M, R-5, and R-4 shall be required to build sidewalks on both sides of all streets. Developers of major subdivisions in the residential zoning districts of R-1, R-2, and R-3 shall build sidewalks on one side of the street. The planning commission may exempt developers of this requirement, or require the lower density subdivisions (R-1, R-2, and R-3) to build sidewalks on both sides of the street. 
(b)  The planning commission may require additional sidewalks, bicycle paths, and greenways between lots or away from roads to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access and shortcuts to other streets or open spaces and public facilities. These perpetual and unobstructed easements may be up to 20 feet in width, and shall be indicated on the plat. 
(c)  The planning commission may require the construction of sidewalks on any new commercial development to endanger long-term community connection. 
(d)  Concrete curbs and appropriate storm sewers are required for all public ways where sidewalks are to be constructed. The standards of which shall be in accordance with the applicable subdivision regulations for the City of Millersville. 
(Res. of 11-10-2003) 
Sec. 74-92. - Design criteria. 
(a)  All sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width along minor residential streets. 
(b)  All sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet in width along collector and arterial streets. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be separated from the curb or street by four or more feet under normal conditions. The planning commission may allow a separation of less than four feet, but not less than two feet where extraordinary topographical features would require a retaining wall in excess of three feet in height if other solutions, such as a wider separation, are not desirable. It is the intent of this section to allow for the installation of underground easements to be placed within the median strip created between the sidewalk and the street curb. 
(1)  When sidewalks are to be constructed in a subdivision adjoining a developed area with sidewalks, the sidewalks shall be joined and extended along the same side(s) of the street. 
(2)  The median strip shall be grassed or otherwise landscaped. 
(3)  Mailboxes shall not be installed, nor landscaping features placed in the location for the sidewalk. 
(4)  The planning commission may require an unobstructed easement of up to ten feet on either side of a sidewalk where reasonable to facilitate pedestrian access to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby public ways and may require a street separation of up to ten feet along major arterial streets. 
(Res. of 11-10-2003) 
Sec. 74-93. - Construction criteria. 
    All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or brick. Concrete sidewalks shall rest on not less than four inches of compacted base material and shall be at least four inches in thickness of 3500 PSI or stronger concrete and shall contain structural reinforcement. Concrete pavers or brick shall be installed in accordance with the Interlocking Concrete Pavement Institute, but with not less than six inches of appropriately compacted base. Sidewalks that are likely to be subjected to vehicular traffic shall rest on not less than eight inches of appropriately compacted base material and shall be at least six inches in thickness of 3500 PSI or stronger concrete and shall contain such other structural requirements as specified by the city engineer. 
(Res. of 11-10-2003) 
Sec. 74-94. - Maintenance of sidewalks, drainage structures. 
(a)  Until time of public dedication the developer shall repair and maintain all sidewalks and drainage structures and cut all grass and maintain all vegetation between the roadway and the property line of the individual lot owners. 
(b)  Homeowners' associations. In subdivisions with homeowners' associations the developer shall file copies of the recorded covenants and/or homeowner's association charter and bylaws with the city. 
(1)  The developer may dedicate the aforementioned maintenance obligations of subsection (a), and all public improvements, to the homeowners' association and that entity shall be liable for those obligations. 
(2)  The homeowners' association may offer to dedicate the sidewalks, and all public improvements to the City of Millersville, pursuant to their covenant code and bylaws. 
(Res. of 11-10-2003) 
Sec. 74-95. - Surety of sidewalk improvements. 
(a)  All required sidewalks not constructed at the time a final plat is filed in the office of the registrar of deeds shall be covered by a form of a letter of irrevocable credit that meets the applicable requirements set forth by the city regarding the surety of all public improvements. 
(b)  A letter of irrevocable credit will be required in commercial districts if a building is occupied prior to construction of sidewalks. This letter will be released following receipt of an engineering certificate of compliance and issuance of a final use and occupancy permit. The bond for sidewalk construction will be released upon construction or at the time of road acceptance by the City Commission of Millersville. Prior to acceptance all sidewalk construction shall be complete. 
(Res. of 11-10-2003) 
Secs. 74-96-74-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURES OVER WATERWAYS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-573, §§ 1-7, adopted Apr. 17, 2012, enacted provisions regulating the construction of structures over waterways but did not specify manner of codification. At the editor's discretion, said provisions have been incorporated as herein set out in Art. IV. 

Sec. 74-111. - "Waterway" defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, the term "waterway" shall include rivers, streams, tributaries, natural or constructed drainage ditches, and any other conveyance of stormwater. The designation of any waterway as a stream shall be determined by the state department of environment and conservation. 
(Ord. No. 10-573, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 74-112. - Structures shall not impede water flow. 
    All new, renovated or expanded private driveways, walkways, streets and roads that cross a waterway shall utilize a culvert, bridge or swale that is designed in such a way as to not impede the existing flow of water, including increased flow due to rainfall, in such a way that flooding is or may be caused. 
(Ord. No. 10-573, § 2, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 74-113. - Structure design shall minimize risk of obstruction and flooding. 
    Structures crossing a waterway shall be designed to reduce the likelihood that debris may be caught on the structure, which can cause obstruction and flood. Multiple culverts shall not be permitted and bridges with a span length of less than 20 feet shall be single span construction. Swales must be designed at an elevation that will permit the flow of water and not create stagnant water pools. 
(Ord. No. 10-573, § 3, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 74-114. - Building entrances shall support heavy vehicles. 
    Structures crossing a waterway and serving as an entrance to a residential, commercial, or industrial building shall be constructed to support heavy vehicles such as trash collection trucks, fire engines and emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 10-573, § 4, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 74-115. - State and federal approval shall be obtained as required. 
    The design of structures crossing a stream may require approval of the state department of environment and conservation or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The owner shall be responsible to obtain the necessary approval and submit documentation of such approval to the codes department before a construction permit or certificate of use may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 10-573, § 5, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 74-116. - Owner responsible for obtaining all required permits. 
    Working in or near waterways may require permits and special sediment control and pollution prevention measures. It is the responsibility of the owner to identify and obtain any permits required by the city, state department of environment and conservation, and any other entity authorized to require permits. 
(Ord. No. 10-573, § 6, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 74-117. - Owner responsible for maintenance. 
    The owner of a private driveway, street, road or walkway shall maintain any bridge, culvert, or swale in good repair and function. 
(Ord. No. 10-573, § 7, 4-17-2012) 
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing regulations for the operation or parking of vehicles on specific streets or portions thereof, not inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; evidence against driver of motor vehicle littering, § 70-73; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; traffic control safety, app. A, § B-2.05. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - State offenses. 
    The state offenses cited under T.C.A. §§ 55-1-101-55-52-106, and which are not specifically made a violation of any other ordinance of the city, are hereby declared to be municipal misdemeanors, the definition of such offenses to be the same as those contained in the state statutes; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any offenses which are made exclusively a violation of state law. 
(Ord. No. 81-13, § 1, 12-15-1981) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt public records, T.C.A. § 6-54-502(a); "public records" defined, T.C.A. § 6-54-501(3); "public records" include state statutes, T.C.A. § 6-54-501(3)(A). 
Secs. 78-2-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 78-31. - Acceptance of driver's license in lieu of bail for certain traffic offenses. 
(a)  Deposit of license. Whenever any person lawfully possessed of a chauffeur's or operator's license theretofore issued to him by the state department of safety, or under the driver licensing laws of any other state or territory or the District of Columbia, is issued a citation or arrested and charged with a violation of any city ordinance or state statute regulating traffic, except those statutes, the violation of which call for the mandatory revocation of an operator's or chauffeur's license for any period of time, such person may have the option of depositing his chauffeur's or operator's license with the officer or court demanding bail in lieu of any other security required for his appearance in city court in answer to such charge before the court. 
(b)  Receipt. Whenever any person deposits his chauffeur's or operator's license as provided, either the officer or the court demanding bail shall issue such person a receipt for the license upon the form approved or provided by the state department of safety. 
(c)  Authority. This section is in furtherance of the provisions of T.C.A. § 55-50-801 et seq., now in effect or as hereafter amended, and the provisions hereof shall be governed and controlled in accordance with T.C.A. § 55-7-401 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 82-21, §§ 1-3, 2-9-1982) 
Secs. 78-32-78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-61. - Child restraint law adopted. 
(a)  In accordance with its provisions, T.C.A. § 55-9-602 is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety as an ordinance of the city. Violation of any provision of the statute is likewise a violation of this section. 
(b)  Anyone convicted of any violation shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-136, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-1990) 
Secs. 78-62-78-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to set speed limits, T.C.A. § 55-8-153(c). 

Sec. 78-81. - General limits within city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of 30 miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating other speed limits in which cases the posted speed limit shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 81-14, § 1, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 78-82. - Limits in school zones. 
    Any person who shall drive at a speed exceeding 20 miles per hour when passing a school during a recess period when a warning flasher or flashers are in operation, or during a period of 40 minutes before opening hour of a school or a period of 40 minutes after the closing hour of a school, while children are actually going to or leaving school, shall be prima facie guilty of reckless driving. 
(Ord. No. 81-14, § 2, 12-15-1981) 
Sec. 78-83. - Speed limits for U.S. 31 W. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 45 miles per hour on any portion of U.S. 31 W. 
(Ord. No. 89-31, 11-21-1989) 
Sec. 78-84. - Speed limit in certain subdivisions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour in the Millersville subdivisions of Cimmaron Trace, Deep Wood Glen, North Point, Ridgecrest, Quailwood, Sassafras, Shenandoah, Sterling Creek, Turner's Point and Willow Creek. 
Sec. 78-85. - Slaters Creek Road and Pole Hill Road speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour on Slaters Creek Road and Pole Hill Road. 
(Ord. No. 89-31, 11-21-1989) 
Sec. 78-86. - Crawford Hill Road speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour on Crawford Hill Road. 
(Ord. 08-530, 2-19-2008) 
Sec. 78-87. - Woody Lane speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour on Woody Lane. 
(Ord. No. 09-550, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 78-88. - Ridge Hill Road speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour on Ridge Hill Road. 
(Ord. No. 13-618, 9-17-2013) 
Secs. 78-89-78-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Off-street parking and loading, § 90-461 et seq. 

Sec. 78-111. - General restrictions. 
    The restrictions and prohibitions on parking are as follows: 
(1)  No person shall park any motor vehicle licensed and/or primarily used for commercial purposes and having a gross weight in excess of 8,000 pounds and/or in excess of 22 feet in length on any street within a residential zoning district or upon any residential lot; nor shall any person allow any such motor vehicle to be parked in violation of this section on their property or on property under their control. 
(2)  No person shall park any trailer or other nonmotorized vehicle on any street within a residential zoning district except in designated parking areas or as provided for in subsection (5) of this section. 
(3)  No person shall park any trailer or other nonmotorized vehicle in excess of 22 feet in length upon any lot within a residential zoning district; nor shall any person allow any such trailer to be parked in violation of this section on their property or on property under their control. 
(4)  Due to the volume of traffic present on Highway 31W (Louisville Highway) and Highway 257 (Bethel Road), no person shall park any vehicle within 12 feet of the outside edge of the shoulder stripe of Highway 31W and Highway 257 inside the city limits. Nor shall it be lawful for anyone to store or leave items or vehicles including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, recreation vehicles, lawn mowers, tractors or any other item displayed for sale on the right-of-way of State Route 31W and State Route 257. 
(5)  Excluded from this section are emergency service vehicles that include, but are not limited to, police vehicles, fire vehicles, ambulances, public utility vehicles, and any road construction vehicles being operated by or for the city in connection with repairs on property or rights-of-way owned by the city. Vehicles parked in the ordinary course of their business while actively performing a commercial service on the property, including, but not limited to moving vans, trucks, landscaping trailers, refuge collection vehicles, construction vehicles and tow trucks involved in moving disabled vehicles are also exempt from the provisions of subsection (4) of this section. It is presumed that a vehicle is not actively performing commercial service on property when such vehicle is parked on a residential street between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(6)  The length of any trailer covered by the regulations of this section shall be measured from the ball connection to the rearmost part of the trailer. 
(7)  No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended on any street without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor, removing the ignition key, and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward the nearest curb or gutter of the street. 
(8)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway. 
(9)  No person shall wash, grease, or work on any vehicle, except to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is parked on a public street. 
(10)  No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any sign placed or erected by the state or city, nor: 
a.  On a sidewalk. 
b.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
c.  Within an intersection or within 15 feet thereof. 
d.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
e.  Within a pedestrian crosswalk. 
f.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance. 
g.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when other traffic would be obstructed. 
h.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
i.  Upon any bridge. 
j.  Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the city. 
k.  So as to block in or prevent from being moved any vehicle upon any public street within the city or upon private property open to the public use. 
(11)  When any unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of this article, there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle is responsible for such illegal parking. 
(12)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle I violation of any of the parking regulations as set out in this section, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle, if present, to move the same, to a position off the roadway. 
(13)  It shall be further illegal for any operator of any vehicle to park a motor vehicle or other conveyance in any area designated by the city as a fire lane at any time. It shall further be illegal for any operator to leave a vehicle standing at any area designated as a fire lane as set out in this section. 
(14)  For purposes of this article, a fire lane shall be designated as any area close to or adjacent to an existing building, where the city has designated the roadway be painted with the appropriate yellow lines and the designation as a fire lane. 
(15)  It shall be further illegal for anyone to occupy or park in or stand in a space or lane designated for handicapped parking unless such vehicle or operator displays a handicapped driver permit on a prominent place upon the vehicle so parked. 
(16)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00. 
(17)  Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its license number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner to answer for the violation at the next regular court date and at a place specified in the citation. 
(18)  For parking violations the offender may waive his right to a judicial hearing and have the charges disposed of out of court, subject to payment of the fines as determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 99-340, § 1, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 00-362, § 1, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 01-395, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 78-112. - Effect of conflict with other ordinances. 
    In case of conflict between this article or any part thereof and the whole or part of any existing or future ordinance of the city, the most restrictive shall in all cases apply. 
(Ord. No. 99-340, § 2, 10-19-1999) 
Secs. 78-113-78-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES AND ACCESSORIES 

Sec. 78-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means any motorized vehicle that is incapable of being moved under its own power or does not display current licenses and registration. 
    Motor vehicle accessories means any parts of any motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 90-143, § 2, 4-2-1990) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-142. - Prohibited acts; removal generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a building, structure, or property to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle or any motor vehicle accessories. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to keep the premises of such property clean and to remove from the premises all such abandoned motor vehicles and motor vehicle accessories upon notice from the city manager, building inspector, or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 90-143, § 3, 4-2-1990) 
Sec. 78-143. - Inspections; notice of violation; abatement deadline; abatement by city; expenses. 
    The city manager or building inspector or those persons they may designate, shall inspect any property within the city suspected of being in violation of section 78-142. If the city manager, building inspector, or any of their designees determine that a violation of this article exists, the city manager or building inspector will cause a notice to be sent to the property owners as shown upon the tax book of the city. The notice shall advise the owners that a violation of this article exists and that if compliance is not effected within seven calendar days from the date of mailing of such notice, the city will cause removal of the condition to be accomplished, and the expense thereof charged to the property and the owners thereof. The notice shall be forwarded to the last known address of all owners of the subject property by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If the removal of the offending condition is not completed in the time allowed in the notice, the city manager is further authorized and directed to cause the removal to be done at the expense of the city. The city manager shall then notify the owners of the property of the amount of such expense in the same manner as provided in this section, and shall further notify such owners that reimbursement of such expense is required within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 90-143, § 4, 4-2-1990) 
Sec. 78-144. - Failure to reimburse city; lien; penalties and interest; litigation. 
    The city, after notification of the property owners as set out in section 78-143, shall have authority to abate the conditions described in section 78-142 by removing from the property the condition or substance or thing causing the violation as set forth in this article. All owners of property shall be liable jointly and separately for the expense of removal of the condition from their property, and the property itself shall be subject to suit for reimbursement of such expenses. If the expense of such removal shall not have been paid within the ten-day period allowed following notice as provided in section 78-143, then the expenses shall be entered upon the tax books of the city as a lien against such parcel of property whereon such expense was incurred. If such expense shall not have been reimbursed by the date upon which taxes are due and payable for the year in which the same was incurred, then the city manager shall cause to be added to such amounts penalty and interest as are applicable to delinquent assessments which shall constitute a lien on such property. If litigation is necessary to collect any of the amounts provided in this section, there shall be added thereto all costs of such litigation and reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 90-143, § 5, 4-2-1990) 
Sec. 78-145. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code upon conviction of such offense in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 90-143, § 6, 4-2-1990) 
Secs. 78-146-78-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - JUNKED VEHICLES 

Sec. 78-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Codes administrator and building inspector shall mean the individuals employed by the city to act on behalf of the city in carrying out the duties and responsibilities as described in the applicable job descriptions for each position. 
    Hobby cars shall mean vehicles used for the purpose of a hobby, i.e. racecars and car restoration activities. 
    Junked vehicle shall mean a vehicle of any age that does not display a current license plate and vehicle registration and/or is damaged or defective in any one or combination of any of the following ways that either makes the vehicle immediately inoperable or would prohibit the vehicle from being operated in a reasonably safe manner upon the public streets and highways under its own power if self-propelled or while being towed or pushed, if not self-propelled: 
(1)  Flat tires, missing tires, missing wheels, or missing or partially or totally disassembled tires and wheels. 
(2)  Missing or partially or totally disassembled essential part or parts of the vehicle's drive train, including, but not limited to engine, transmission, transaxle, drive shaft, differential or axle. 
(3)  Extensive exterior body damage or missing or partially or totally disassembled essential body parts, including, but not limited to, fenders, doors, engine hood, bumper or bumpers, windshield or windows. 
(4)  Missing or partially or totally disassembled essential interior parts, including, but not limited to, driver's seat, steering wheel, instrument panel, clutch, brake or gear shift lever. 
(5)  Missing or partially or totally disassembled parts essential to the starting or running of the vehicle under its own power, including, but not limited to, starter, generator or alternator, battery, distributor, gas tank, carburetor or fuel injection system, spark plugs or radiator. 
(6)  Interior is a container for metal, glass, paper, rags or other cloth, wood, auto parts, machinery, waste or discarded materials in such quantity, quality and arrangement that a driver cannot be properly seated in the vehicle. 
(7)  Lying on the ground (upside down, on its side, or at another extreme angle), sitting on block or suspended in the air by any other method. 
(8)  General environment in which the vehicle sits, including but not limited to vegetation that has grown up around, in or through the vehicle, the collection of pools of water in the vehicle, and the accumulation of other garbage or debris around the vehicle. 
    Person shall mean any natural person, or any firm, partnership, association, corporation or other organization of and kind and description. 
    Private property shall include all property that is not public property, regardless of how the property is zoned or used. 
    Traveled portion of any public street or highway shall mean the width of the street from curb to curb, or where there are no curbs, the entire width of the paved portion of the street, or where the street is unpaved, the entire width of the street in which vehicles ordinarily use for travel. 
    Vehicle shall mean any machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by the use or wheels, treads self-laying tracks, runners, slides or skids, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, go-carts, campers, tractors, trailers, tractor-trailers, buggies, wagons, earth moving equipment and any part of the same. 
(Ord. No. 07-505, § 1, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 78-172. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful and a civil offense for a person to: 
(1)  Park or in any other manner place and leave unattended on the traveled portion of any public street or highway a junk vehicle for any period of time, even if the owner or operator of the vehicle did not intend to permanently desert or forsake the vehicle. 
(2)  Park or in any other manner place and leave unattended on the untraveled portion of any street or highway, or upon any other public property, a junk vehicle for more than 48 continuous hours, even if the owner or operator of the vehicle did not intend to permanently desert or forsake the vehicle. 
(3)  Park, store, keep and/or maintain on private property a junk vehicle for more than ten days. 
(Ord. No. 07-505, § 2, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 78-173. - Exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be permissible for a person to park, store, keep and maintain a junked vehicle on private property under the following conditions: 
(1)  The junk vehicle is completely enclosed within a building where neither the vehicle nor any part of it is visible from the street or from any other abutting property. However, this exception shall not exempt the owner or person in possession of the property from any zoning, building, housing, property maintenance and other regulations governing the building in which such vehicle is enclosed. 
(2)  The junk vehicle is parked or stored on property lawfully zoned for business engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles. However, this exception shall not exempt the owner or operator of any such business from any other zoning, building, fencing, property maintenance and other regulations governing business engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles. 
(3)  No person shall park, store, keep and maintain on private property a junk vehicle for any period of time if it poses an immediate threat to the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Hobby cars and stored in one of the following methods or a combination thereof: 
(1)  Inside an enclosed building. 
(2)  Behind a privacy fence where neither the vehicle nor any part of it is visible from the street or the abutting property. The fence must be in compliance with all current zoning regulations. 
(3)  Hobby cars may be stored inside an enclosed vehicle trailer. 
(4)  Hobby cars may be stored outdoors if covered with a well maintained and properly fitting fabric car cover or tied down tarpaulin that is designed to cover all sides of the vehicle. Plastic sheeting and unsecured tarpaulins are not acceptable covers. Grass, shrubbery and other growth under or surrounding the vehicle shall be well trimmed at all times. Hobby cars stored outside shall be limited to two vehicles on the property and shall be stored on a driveway or in the side or rear yard of the property and closer to the principle structure than the property line of any adjacent property. 
(5)  All materials and items associated with the keeping, maintaining, or using of a hobby car, including, but not limited to, car parts, tires, tools, fuel and fluid storage containers, jacks, and ramps, shall be enclosed within a building or within the hobby vehicle where such materials and items are not visible from the street or from any other abutting property. 
(6)  Storage and maintenance areas must not create excessive noise or the accumulation of spare vehicle parts about the property. 
(7)  Vehicle fluids must be properly handled in accordance with all city, state, EPA and storm water regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-505, § 3, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 78-174. - Enforcement. 
    Any person in violation of the provisions of this artilce shall be alleged to be guilty of a strict liability offense, and shall be cited into the city court for disposition. The maximum fine per day for violation of this article shall be $50.00 plus the cost of the cause. Each day the violation continues after due notice has been served may be deemed a separate offense. In addition thereto, or in lieu thereof, the codes enforcement officer may commence corrective or clean up actions to abate the unlawful conditions that constitute a violation of this Code. Costs of any corrective or clean up action taken by the city shall be charged against the real estate upon which the violation occurs and continues, and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(Ord. No. 07-505, § 4, 2-20-2007) 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; electrical code, § 18-61 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; testing for flammable gases and/or liquids in utility manholes, § 74-34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Credit card payments allowed. 
    The city shall accept payment for such bills as utility bills, trash collection bills, city court related payments, tax payments (etc), by credit card, and the processing fee for same shall be three percent of the amount of the bill being paid. 
(Ord. No. 05-515, 8-21-2007) 
Secs. 82-2-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 32. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-31. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for the disposal of wastewater in the service area of the city, wastewater treatment system. The objectives of the article are to: 
(1)  Protect the public health; 
(2)  Provide problem free wastewater collection and treatment service; 
(3)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater treatment system, which will interfere with the system operation, will cause the city's discharge to violate its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or other applicable state requirements will cause physical damage to the wastewater treatment system facilities; 
(4)  Provide for full and equitable distribution of the cost of the wastewater treatment system; 
(5)  Enable the city to comply with the provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act, the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403), and other applicable federal and state laws and regulations; 
(6)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the wastewater treatment system. 
(b)  In meeting these objectives, this article provides that all persons in the service area of the city must have adequate wastewater treatment either in the form of a connection to the municipal wastewater treatment system or, where the system is not available, an appropriate private disposal system. This article also provides for the issuance of permits to system users; for the regulations of wastewater discharge volume and characteristics; for monitoring and enforcement activities; and for the setting of fees for the full and equitable distribution of costs resulting from the operation, maintenance, and capital recovery of the wastewater treatment system and from other activities required by the enforcement and administrative program established in this article. 
(c)  This article shall apply to the city, and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city users of the municipal wastewater treatment system. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the sewer superintendent of the city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 1(1.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Categorical standards means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standard. 
    City means the City of Millersville or the board of commissioners, City of Millersville, Millersville, Tennessee. 
    Compatible pollutant means BOD, suspended solids, ph, and fecal coliform bacteria, and such additional pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the city's NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment works where sewer works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants. 
    Control authority means approval authority or the superintendent if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Customer means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or group who receives sewer service from the city under either an express or implied contract requiring payment to the city for such service. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Domestic wastewater means wastewater that is generated by a single family, apartment or other dwelling unit or dwelling unit equivalent containing sanitary facilities for the disposal of wastewater and used for residential purposes only. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of municipal wastewater treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act, (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the municipal wastewater treatment system. 
    National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the program for issuing, conditioning, and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into navigable waters, the contiguous zone, and the oceans pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days of proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    ph means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical substances, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 40.36(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, the term "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city users of the city's POTW. 
    Publicly owned treatment works treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentrations of flows during normal operation or any discharge of whatever duration that causes the sewer to overflow or back up in an objectionable way or any discharge of whatever duration that interferes with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment facilities or pumping stations. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a pipe or conduit which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes; it may, however, carry cooling waters and unpolluted waters, upon approval of the superintendent. 
    Superintendent means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA (307(a)) or other acts. 
    Twenty-four-hour flow proportional composite sample means a sample consisting of several sample portions collected during a 24-hour period in which the portions of a sample are proportioned to the flow and combined to form a representative sample. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment systems means the same as POTW. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigations systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 1(1.2), 8-19-1988) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-33. - Connection to public sewers; requirements for proper wastewater disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the service area of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any waters of the state within the service area of the city any sewage or other pollutant in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-34. - Enforcement and abatement. 
(a)  Issuance of cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this article, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the superintendent shall issue and order to cease and desist, and direct that these persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements, or provisions to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; 
(2)  Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the superintendent; 
(3)  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a threatened violation; or 
(4)  Surrender his applicable user's permit if ordered to do so after a show cause hearing. 
Failure of the superintendent to issue a cease and desist order to a violating user shall not in any way relieve the user from any consequences of a wrongful or illegal discharge. 
(b)  Submission of time. When the superintendent finds that a discharge of wastewater has been taking place in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this article, or wastewater source control requirements, effluent limitations of pretreatment standards, or the superintendent shall require the user to submit for approval, with such modifications as it deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of requirements. Such schedule shall be submitted to the superintendent within 30 days of the issuance of the cease and desist order. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. 
(1)  The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the board of commissioners why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the board of commissioners regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the board of commissioners why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. 
(2)  The board of commissioners may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the water and sewer department to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the board of commissioners notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
b.  Take the evidence; 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the board of commissioners for action thereon. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The transcript, as recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(4)  After the board of commissioners has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing related appurtenances and are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(d)  Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the chancery court of this county. 
(e)  Emergency termination of service. If an actual or threatened discharge to the POTW of any pollutant which in the opinion of the superintendent presents or may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or cause interference with POTW, the superintendent, or in his absence the person then in charge of the treatment works, shall immediately notify the mayor of the nature of the emergency. The superintendent shall also attempt to notify the industrial user or the person causing the emergency and request their assistance in abating the emergency. Following consulting with such officials of the city or, in their absence, such elected officials of the city as may be available, the superintendent shall temporarily terminate the service of such user or users as are necessary to abate the condition when such action appears reasonably necessary. Such service shall be resorted by the superintendent as soon as the emergency situation has been abated or corrected. 
(f)  Public nuisance. Discharges of wastewater in any manner in violation of this article or of any order issued by the superintendent, as authorized by this article, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city codes or ordinances governing such nuisance. 
(g)  Correction of violation and collection of costs. In order to enforce the provisions of this article, the superintendent shall correct any violation thereof. The cost of such correction shall be added to any sewer service charge payable by the person violating the article or the owner or tenant of the property upon which the violation occurred, and the city shall have such remedies for the collection of such costs as it has for the collection of sewer service charges. 
(h)  Damage of facilities. When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage, or any other physical or operational impairment to facilities, the superintendent shall assess a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair the facility and add such charge to the user's sewer service charge. 
(i)  Civil liabilities. Any person or user who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this article, requirements, or conditions set forth in the permit duly issued, or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution or violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation, national standard or performance, pretreatment or toxicity standard, shall be liable civilly. The city shall sue for such damage in any court of competent jurisdiction. In determining the damages, the court shall take into consideration all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs, and the correcting action, if any. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 8, 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-35. - Civil penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the board of commissioners or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article, and the order, rules, regulations and permits issued under this article, shall be fined not less than $50.00 for each offense. Each day of which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 9(9.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-36. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 9(9.2), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-37. - Scope of article applicability. 
    This article and its provisions shall be valid for all service areas, regions, and sewage works under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 11(11.3), 8-19-1988) 
Secs. 82-38-82-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 82-61. - When connections required. 
    Except as provided in section 82-62, the owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the service area and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer in the service area, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 30 days after the date a letter directing connection is mailed, provided that such public sewer is within 200 feet of the building drain. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.1(d)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-62. - Discharge of wastewater to state waters; requirements. 
    The owner of a manufacturing facility may discharge wastewater to the waters of the state, provided that he obtains an NPDES permit and meets all requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, the NPDES permit, and any other applicable local, state, or federal statutes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.1(e)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-63. - When private sewage disposal facilities required. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 82-61, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.1(f)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-64. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation and performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over 20 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromate, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: Grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a ph less than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing any toxic pollutants, chemical elements, or compounds in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, pr regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater causing discoloration of the wastewater treatment plant effluent to the extent that the receiving stream water quality requirements would be violated, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants, (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. 
(11)  Any water or wastes causing an unusual volume of flow or concentration of waste constituting sludge. 
(12)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(13)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(14)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oil, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperature between 32 or 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(15)  Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated a storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent and the state department of public health. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the superintendent and the state department of public health, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-65. - Restrictions on wastewater strength. 
    No person or user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the following set of standards (Table A-User Discharge Restrictions) unless an exception is permitted as provided in this article. Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these requirements shall be considered in violation of this article: 
Table A-User Discharge Restrictions 
Pollutant Daily Average* 
Maximum 
Concentration (mg/l) Instantaneous 
Maximum 
(mg/l) Concentration Antimony 5.0 8.0 Arsenic 1.0 1.5 Cadmium 1.0 1.5 Chromium (total) 4.0 7.0 Copper 3.0 5.0 Cyanide 1.0 2.0 Lead 1.0 1.5 Mercury 0.1 0.2 Nickel 3.0 4.5 Pesticides and herbicides 0.5 1.0 Phenols 10.0 15.0 Selenium 1.0 1.5 Silver 1.0 1.5 Surfactants, as MBAS 25.0 50.0 Zinc 3.0 5.0  
* Based on 24-hour flow proportional composite samples. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.2), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-66. - Protection of treatment plant influent. 
    The superintendent shall monitor the treatment works influent for each parameter in the following table (Table B -Plant Protection Criteria). Industrial users shall be subject to reporting and monitoring requirements regarding these parameters as set forth in this article. If the influent at the POTW reaches or exceeds the levels established by this table, the superintendent shall initiate technical studies to determine the cause of the influent violation and shall recommend to the city the necessary remedial measures including, but not limited to, recommending the establishment of new or revised pretreatment levels for these parameters. The superintendent shall also recommend changes to any of these criteria if the POTW effluent standards are changed, there are changes in any applicable law or regulation affecting the same, or changes are needed for more effective operation of the POTW: 
Table B-Plant Protection Criteria 
Parameter Maximum 
Concentration 
mg/l (24-hour flow) 
Proportional 
Composite Sample Maximum 
Instantaneous 
Concentration 
(mg/l) (Grab Sample) Aluminum dissolved (Al) 3.0 6.0 Antimony (Sb) 0.5 1.0 Arsenic (As) 0.06 0.12 Barium (Ba) 2.5 5.0 Boron (B) 0.4 0.8 Cadmium (Cd) 0.004 0.008 Chromium Hex 0.06 0.12 Cobalt (Co) 0.03 0.06 Copper (Cu) 0.16 0.32 Cyanide (CN) 0.03 0.06 Fluoride (F) 0.6 1.2 Iron (fe) 3.0 6.0 Lead (Pb) 0.1 0.2 Manganese (Mn) 0.1 0.2 Mercury (Hg) 0.025 0.05 Nickel (Ni) 0.15 0.3 Pesticides and herbicides 0.001 0.002 Phenols 1.0 2.0 Selenium (Se) 0.01 0.02 Silver (Ag) 0.05 0.1 Sulfide 25.0 40.0 Zinc (Zn) 0.3 0.6 Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) 45.0 90.0 Oil and grease 50.0 100.0 MBAS 5.0 10.0 BOD * COD * Suspended solids *  
*Not to exceed the design capacity of treatment works. 
BDL equals Below Detectable Limits 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.3), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-67. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.4), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-68. - Right to establish more restrictive criteria. 
    No statement in this article is intended or may be construed to prohibit the superintendent from establishing specific wastewater discharge criteria more restrictive where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the facilities of the POTW; or to create a public nuisance; or to cause the discharge of the POTW to violate effluent or stream quality standards; or to interfere with the use or handling of sludge; or to pass through the POTW resulting in a violation of the NPDES permit; or to exceed industrial pretreatment standards for discharge to municipal wastewater treatment systems as imposed; or as may be imposed by the state department of public health and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.5), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-69. - Special agreements. 
    Nothing in sections 82-64-82-71 shall be construed so as to prevent any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any user of the wastewater treatment system whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any payments or user charges as may be applicable. The making of such special agreements or arrangements between the city and the user shall be strictly limited to the capability of the POTW to handle such wastes without interfering with unit operations or sludge use and handling or allowing the pass through of pollutants which would result in a violation of the NPDES permit. No special agreement or arrangement may be made without documentation by the industry of the use of good management practice in the reduction of wastewater volume and strength. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.6), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-70. - Exceptions to discharge criteria. 
(a)  Application for exception. Nonresidential users of the POTW may apply for a temporary exception to the prohibited and restricted wastewater discharge criteria listed in sections 82-64 and 82-65. Exceptions can be granted according to the following guidelines: 
(1)  The superintendent shall allow applications for temporary exceptions at any time. However, the superintendent shall not accept an application if the applicant has submitted the application or a substantially similar application within the preceding year and the application has been denied by the city. 
(2)  All applications for an exception shall be in writing, and shall contain sufficient information for evaluation of each of the factors to be considered by the city in its review of the application. 
(b)  Temporary nature; subject to revocation; demonstration of necessity and safety. All exceptions granted under this section shall be temporary and subject to revocation at any time by the superintendent upon reasonable notice. The user requesting the exception must demonstrate to the superintendent that he is making a concentrated and serious effort to maintain high standards of operation control and housekeeping levels, etc., so that discharges to the POTW are being minimized. If negligence is found, permits will be subject to termination. The user requesting the exception must demonstrate that compliance with stated concentration and quantity standards is technically or economically infeasible and the discharge, if excepted, will not: 
(1)  Interfere with the normal collection and operation of the wastewater treatment system. 
(2)  Limit the sludge management alternatives available and increase the cost of providing adequate sludge management. 
(3)  Pass through the POTW in quantities and/or concentrations that would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
The user must show that the exception, if granted, will not cause the discharger to violate its in force federal pretreatment standards unless the exception is granted under the provisions of the applicable pretreatment regulations. A surcharge shall be applied to any exception granted under this section. These surcharges shall be applied for that concentration of the pollutant for which the variance has been granted in excess of the concentration stipulated in this article based on the average daily flow of the user. 
(c)  Review of application by the superintendent. All applications for an exception shall be reviewed by the superintendent. If the application does not contain sufficient information for complete evaluation, the superintendent shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and request additional information. The applicant shall have 30 days following notification by the superintendent to correct such deficiencies. This 30-day period may be extended by the city upon application and for just cause shown. Upon receipt of a complete application, the superintendent shall evaluate the application within 30 days and shall submit his recommendations to the city at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)  Review of application by the city. The city shall review and evaluate all applications for exceptions and shall take into account the following factors: 
(1)  Whether or not the applicant is subject to a national pretreatment standard containing discharge limitations more stringent than those in division 3 of this article and grant an exception only if such exception may be granted within limitations of applicable federal regulations. 
(2)  Whether or not the exception would apply to discharge of a substance classified as a toxic substance under regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of section 307(a) of the Act (33 USC 1317), and then grant an exception only if such exception may be granted within the limitations of applicable federal regulations. 
(3)  Whether or not the granting of an exception would create conditions that would reduce the effectiveness of the treatment works taking into consideration the concentration of such pollutant in the treatment works influent and the design capability of the treatment works. 
(4)  The cost of pretreatment or other types of control techniques which would be necessary for the user to achieve effluent reduction, but prohibitive costs alone shall not be the basis for granting an exception. 
(5)  The age of equipment and industrial facilities involved to the extent that such factors affect the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(6)  The process employed by the user and process changes available which would affect the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(7)  The engineering aspects of various types of pretreatment or other control techniques available to the user to improve the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.7), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-71. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Protection from accidental discharge. All industrial users shall provide such facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonable necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW of waste regulated by this article from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, from inplant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, and from diked areas or holding ponds of any waste regulated by this article. The wastewater discharge permit of any user who has a history of significant leaks, spills, or other accidental discharge of waste regulated by this article shall be subject on a case-by-case basis to a special permit condition or requirement for the construction of facilities to minimize the potential for such accidental discharge. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent before the facility is constructed. The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Notification of discharge. Any person causing or suffering from any accidental discharge shall immediately notify the superintendent or his designated official by telephone to enable countermeasures to be taken by the superintendent to minimize damage to the POTW, the health and welfare of the public, and the environment. This notification shall be followed, within five days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the cause of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve the user of liability for any expense loss, or damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or state or federal law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 6(6.8), 8-19-1988) 
Secs. 82-72-82-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL USERS 

Sec. 82-91. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The installation of a monitoring facility shall be required for all industrial users having wastes which receive pretreatment, are otherwise altered or regulated before discharge, or are unusually strong and thereby subject to a surcharge. A monitoring facility shall be a manhole or other suitable facility approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  When, in the judgement of the superintendent, there is a significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the superintendent may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate source of discharge. 
(c)  Monitoring facilities that are required to be installed shall be constructed and maintained at the user's expense. The purpose of the facility is to enable inspection, sampling and flow measurement of wastewater produced by a user. If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the superintendent, it shall be provided and installed at the user's expense. 
(d)  The monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on the user's premises outside of the building. The superintendent may, however, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street right-of-way with the approval of the public agency having jurisdiction of that right-of-way and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(e)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(f)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the superintendent's requirements and all applicable local agency construction standards and specifications. When, in the judgment of the superintendent, an existing notified in writing. Construction must be completed within 180 days following written notification unless an extension is granted by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 7(7.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-92. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of preforming their specific responsibility. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any manufacturing process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the level and sources of discharge to the sewers, waterways, or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 7(7.2), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-93. - Compliance date report. 
    Within 180 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 7(7.3), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-94. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the superintendent during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the superintendent, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow. At the discretion of the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the superintendent may agree to alter the months during which such reports are to be submitted. 
(b)  The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. 
(c)  The reports required by this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass limitation where requested by the superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the wastewater discharge and be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the superintendent. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 7(7.4), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-95. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this division shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this division. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(b)  Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirement established in this division shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years all records monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this division) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the superintendent, director of the division of water quality control state department of public health, or the Environmental Protection Agency. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when requested by the superintendent, the approval authority, or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 7(7.5), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-96. - Safety. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the monitoring and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 7(7.6), 8-19-1988) 
Secs. 82-97-82-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 82-121. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent as required by division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.2(a)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-122. - Owner responsible for costs and expenses. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and inspection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.2(b)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-123. - Separate building sewer required for each building; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.2(c)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-124. - Use of old building sewer. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and tested by the superintendent to meet all requirements of this article. All others must be sealed to the specifications of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.2(d)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-125. - Building sewer requirements. 
    Building sewers shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum size. The minimum size of a building sewer shall be four inches. 
(2)  Depth. The minimum depth of a building sewer shall be 18 inches. 
(3)  Grade. Four-inch building sewers shall be laid on a grade greater than one-eighth of an inch per foot. Larger building sewers shall be laid on a grade that will produce a velocity when flowing full of at least two feet per second. 
(4)  Slope and alignment. Slope and alignment of all building sewers shall be neat and regular. 
(5)  Materials. Building sewers shall be constructed only of: 
a.  Concrete or clay sewer pipe using rubber or neoprene compression joints of approved type; 
b.  Cast iron soil pipe with leaded or compression joint; 
c.  Polyvinyl chloride pipe with solvent welded or with rubber compression joints; 
d.  ABS composite sewer pipe with solvent welded or rubber compression joints of approved type; 
e.  Such other materials of equal or superior quality as may be approved by the superintendent. Under no circumstances will cement mortar joints be acceptable. 
(6)  Cleanouts. A cleanout shall be located five feet outside of the building, one as it taps on to the utility lateral and one at each change of direction of the building sewer which is greater than 45 degrees. Additional cleanouts shall be placed not more than 75 feet apart in horizontal building sewers of four-inch nominal diameter and not more than 100 feet apart for larger pipes. Cleanouts shall be extended to or above the finished grade level directly above the place where the cleanout is installed. A "Y" (wye) and one-eighth-inch bend shall be used for the cleanout base. Cleanouts shall not be smaller than four inches on a four-inch pipe. 
(7)  Connection specifications. Connections of building sewers to the public sewer system shall be made the appropriate existing wye or tee branch using compression type couplings or collar type rubber joint with corrosion resisting or stainless steel bands. Where existing wye or tee branches are not available, connections of building services shall be made by either removing a length of pipe and replacing it with a wye or tee fitting or cutting a clean opening in the existing public sewer and installing a tee-saddle or tee-insert of a type approved by the superintendent. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(8)  Pipe elevation; lifters. The building sewer may be brought into the building below the basement floor when gravity flow from the building to the sanitary sewer is at a grade of one-eighth of an inch per foot or more if possible. In cases where basement or floor levels are lower than the ground elevation at the point of connection to the sewer, adequate precautions by installation of check valves or other backflow prevention devices to protect against flooding shall be provided by the owner. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the expense of the owner. 
(9)  Code specifications. The methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling the trench, or other activities in the construction of a building sewer which have not been described in this section shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or to the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and Water Pollution Control Federal Manual of Practice No. 9 materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(10)  Gastight and watertight. An installed building sewer shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.2(e)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-126. - Safeguards for excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.2(f)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-127. - Connection to surface runoff sources. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, basement drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.2(g)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-128. - Inspection of connections. 
(a)  The sewer connection and all building sewers from the building to the public sewer main line shall be inspected before the underground portion is covered by the superintendent or his authorized representative. 
(b)  The applicant for discharge shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.3), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-129. - Maintenance of building sewers. 
    Each individual property owner or user of the POTW shall be entirely responsible for the maintenance of the building sewer located on private property. This maintenance will include repair or replacement of the service line as deemed necessary by the superintendent to meet specifications of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 2(2.4), 8-19-1988) 
Secs. 82-130-82-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 82-151. - When required; when connection to public system required. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 82-61, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section and sections 82-152-82-158. 
(b)  Any residence, office, recreational facility, or other establishment used for human occupancy where the building drain is below the elevation to obtain a grade equivalent to one-eighth inch per foot in the building sewer but is otherwise accessible to a public sewer as provided in division 4 of this article, the owner shall provide a private sewage pumping station as provided in section 82-125(8). 
(c)  Where a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to such sewer within 30 days after the date a letter directing connection is mailed. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 3(3.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-152. - Certificate of inaccessibility of public system prerequisite to construction. 
    A private domestic wastewater disposal system may not be constructed within the service area unless and until a certificate is obtained from the superintendent stating that a public sewer is not accessible to the property and no such sewer is proposed for construction in the immediate future. No certificate shall be issued for any private domestic wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than that specified by the city and Sumner County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 3(3.2(a)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-153. - Permit required. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written permission from the city and Sumner County Health Department. The owner shall supply any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city and Sumner County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 3(3.2(b)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-154. - Approval of system; inspections. 
    A private sewage disposal system shall not be placed in operation until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city and Sumner County Health Department. They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event, the owner shall notify the city and Sumner County Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within a reasonable period of time after the receipt of notice by the city and Sumner County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 3(3.2(c)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-155. - Registration and records of septic tank cleaners. 
    Every person who operates equipment for the purpose of removing digested sludge from septic tanks, cesspools, and other sewage disposal installations on private or public property must register with the building inspector and furnish such records of work done within the corporate limits as may be deemed necessary by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 90-145, ch. 3, § 5, 4-17-1990) 
Sec. 82-156. - Type, capacity, location and layout specifications. 
    The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of public health and the city and Sumner County Health Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 3(3.2(d)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-157. - Owner to operate and maintain in sanitary manner. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 3(3.2(e)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-158. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city and Sumner County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 3(3.2(f)), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-159. - Regulation of holding tank waste disposal. 
(a)  Permit. No person, firm, association or corporation shall clean out, drain, or flush any septic tank or any other type of wastewater or excreta disposal system, unless such person, firm, association, or corporation obtains a permit from the superintendent to perform such acts or services. Any person, firm, association, or corporation desiring a permit to perform such services shall file an application on the prescribed form. Upon any such application, such permit shall be issued by the superintendent when the conditions of this article have been met, and provided that the superintendent is satisfied the applicant has adequate and proper equipment to perform the services contemplated in a safe and competent manner. 
(b)  Fees. For each permit issued under the provisions of this article, an annual service charge therefor shall be paid to the city to be set as specified in division 7 of this article. Any such permit granted shall be for one full fiscal year or fraction of the fiscal year, and shall continue in full force and effect from the time issued until the ending of the fiscal year unless sooner revoked, and shall be nontransferable. The number of the permit granted under this section shall be plainly painted on each side of each motor vehicle used in the conduct of the business permitted under this section. 
(c)  Designated disposal locations. The superintendent shall designate approved locations for the emptying and cleansing of all equipment used in the performance of the services rendered under the permit provided for in this section, and it shall be a violation hereof for any person, firm, association or corporation to empty or clean such equipment at any place other than a place so designated. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. Failure to comply with all the provisions of this article shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of such permit by the superintendent. The possession within the service area by any person of any motor vehicle equipped with a body type and accessories of a nature and design capable of serving a septic tank of wastewater or excreta disposal system cleaning unit shall be prima facie evidence that such person is engaged in the business of cleaning, draining, or flushing septic tanks or other wastewater or excreta disposal systems within the service area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 4, 8-19-1988) 
Secs. 82-160-82-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 82-181. - Domestic wastewater. 
(a)  All users or prospective users which generate domestic wastewater shall make application to the superintendent for written authorization to discharge to the municipal wastewater treatment system. Applications shall be required from all new dischargers as well as for any existing dischargers as well as for any existing discharger desiring additional service. Connection to the municipal sewer shall not be made until the application is received and approved by the superintendent, the building sewer is installed in accordance with division 4 of this article and an inspection has been performed by the superintendent or his representative. 
(b)  The receipt by the city of prospective customer's application for service shall not obligate the city to render the service. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with this article and the city's rules and regulations and general practice, the connection charge will be refunded in full, and there shall be no liability of the city to the applicant for such service, except that conditional waivers for additional services may be granted by the superintendent for interim periods if compliance may be assured within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 5(5.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-182. - Industrial wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  General requirements. All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing industrial users connected to or contributing to the POTW within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Applications. Applications for wastewater discharge permits shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the superintendent an application in the form prescribed by the superintendent, and accompanied by the appropriate fee. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. 
(2)  The application shall be in the prescribed form of the city and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: Name, address, and SIC number of the applicant; wastewater volume; wastewater constituents and characteristics; discharge variations, daily, monthly, seasonal and 30 minute peaks; a description of all toxic materials handled on the premises; site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details showing all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; a description of existing and proposed pretreatment and/or equalization facilities; and any other information deemed necessary by the superintendent. 
(3)  Any user who elects or is required to construct new or additional facilities for pretreatment shall as part of the application for a wastewater discharge permit submit plans, specifications and other pertinent information relative to the proposed construction to the superintendent for approval. Plans and specifications submitted for approval must bear the seal of a professional engineer registered to practice engineering in the state. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be issued until such plans and specifications are approved. Approval of such plans and specifications shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the application shall include the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "pretreatment standard," shall include either a national pretreatment standard or a pretreatment standard imposed by division 2 of this article. 
(5)  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(6)  The receipt by the city of a prospective customer's application for a wastewater discharge permit shall not obligate the city to render the wastewater collection and treatment service. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with this article or the city's rules and regulations and general practice, the application shall be rejected, and there shall be no liability of the city to the applicant for such service. 
(7)  The superintendent will act only on applications containing all the information required in this section. Persons who have filed incomplete applications will be notified by the superintendent that the application is deficient and the nature of such deficiency and will be given 30 days or within such extended period as allowed by the superintendent, the superintendent shall submit the application to the mayor with a recommendation that it be denied and notify the applicant in writing of such action. 
(c)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of disch;rge or requirements and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspections and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports of discharge reports; 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharged; 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(d)  Modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. A user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the superintendent within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the superintendent during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in this permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(e)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be slated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(f)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, a user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(g)  Revocation. Any permit issued under the provisions of this article is subject to be modified, suspended, or revoked, in whole or in part, during its term for cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit or other applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation. 
(2)  Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts. 
(3)  A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge. 
(4)  Intentional failure of a user to accurately report the discharge constituents and characteristics or to report significant changes in plant operations or wastewater characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 5(5.2), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-183. - Confidential information. 
(a)  All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaire permit application, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or any other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for uses related to this article or the city's or user's NPDES permit; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the superintendent as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the superintendent until and unless prior and adequate notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 5(5.3), 8-19-1988) 
Secs. 82-184-82-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 82-201. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide for the equitable recovery of costs from user's of the city's wastewater treatment system, including costs of operation, maintenance, administration, bond service cost, capital improvements, depreciation, and equitable cost recovery of EPA administered federal wastewater grants. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 10(10.1), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-202. - Types of charges and fees. 
    The charges and fees as established in the city's schedule of charges and fees may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Inspection fee and tapping fee; 
(2)  Fees for applications for discharge; 
(3)  Sewer use charges; 
(4)  Surcharge fees; 
(5)  Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees; 
(6)  Fees for industrial discharge monitoring; and 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 10(10.2), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-203. - Fees for applications for discharge. 
    A fee may be charged when a user or prospective user makes application for discharge as required by division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 10(10.3), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-204. - Inspection fee and tapping fee. 
    An inspection fee and tapping fee for a building sewer installation shall be paid to the city's sewer department at the time the application is filed. Fees shall cover the costs of inspecting new and/or existing plumbing within subject building establishments. An inspection fee and tapping fee shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 10(10.4), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-205. - Procedure for establishing sanitary charges. 
(a)  Purpose of charges and fees. A schedule of charges and fees shall be adopted by the city, which will enable it to comply with the revenue requirements of section 204 of the Clean Water Act. Charges and fees shall be determined in a manner consistent with regulations of the Federal Grant Program to ensure that sufficient revenues are collected to defray the cost of operating and maintaining, including replacement, adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems. Specific charges and fees shall be adopted by a separate ordinance, this section describes the procedure to be used in calculating the charges and fees. Additional charges and fees to recover funds for capital outlay, bond service costs, and capital improvements may be assessed by the city. These charges and fees shall be recovered through the user classification established in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Classification of user. All users shall be classified by the superintendent either by assigning each one to a user classification category according to the principal activity conducted on the user's premises, by individual user analyzation, or by a combination thereof. The purpose of such collective and/or individual classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharges based on wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(c)  Types of charges and sewer fees. The charges and fees as established in treatment works schedule of charges and fees, may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  User classification charges; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring requested by user; 
(3)  Fees for permit applications; 
(4)  Appeal fees; 
(5)  Charges and fees based on wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(6)  Fees for use of garbage grinders; 
(7)  Fees for holding tank wastes. 
(d)  Changes in building occupancy; application fees. Any change in the occupancy of any building or residence connected to the city's sanitary sewer system shall require the completion of an application for sewer service by the new occupant, unless the owner has previously completed such application, and shall continue to be liable for payment of all sewer service charges. The application fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Owner of residential and commercial property ..... $30.00 
(2)  Tenant of residential and commercial property .....  50.00 
(e)  Basis of determination of charges. Charges and fees may be based upon a minimum basic charge for each premises, computed on the basis of normal wastewater from a domestic premises with the following characteristics: 
BOD 5 300 milligrams per liter COD 600 milligrams per liter TXN 60 milligrams per liter NH 3 -N 30 milligrams per liter Suspended solids 300 milligrams per liter Fats, oil, and grease 100 milligrams per liter  
The charges and fees for all classifications of users other than the basic domestic premises shall be based upon the relative difference between the average wastewater constituents and characteristics of that classification as related to those of a domestic premises. The charges and fees established for permit users shall be based upon the measured or estimated constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharge of that user which may include, but not be limited to, BOD, COD, SS, NH 3 as N, chlorine demand, and volume. 
(f)  User charges. Each user shall be levied a charge for payment of bonded indebtedness of the treatment system and for that user's proportionate share of the operations and maintenance costs of the system. A surcharge will be levied against those users with wastewater that exceeds the strength of normal wastewater. The user charge will be computed from a base charge plus a surcharge. The base charge will be the user's proportionate share of the costs of operation and maintenance (O&M) including replacement for handling its periodic volume of normal wastewater. 
(1)  Operation and maintenance user charges. Each user's share of operation and maintenance costs will be computed by the following formula: 
Cu =  Ct / Vt   × (Vu) 
Where: Cu = User's charge for O&M per unit of time. Ct = Total O&M cost per unit of time. Vt = Total volume contribution from all users per unit of time. Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time.  
Operation and maintenance charges may be established on a percentage of water use charge only if water use charges are based on a constant cost per unit of consumption. 
(2)  Surcharges. The surcharge will be the user's proportionate share of the O&M costs for handling its periodic volume of wastewater which exceeds the strength of BOD 5 suspended solids, and/or other elements in normal wastewater, including toxic wastes. The amount of the surcharge shall be determined by the following formula: 
Cs = (Bc × B) + (Sc × S) + (Pc × P) Vu 
Where: Cs = Surcharge for wastewaters exceeding the strength or normal wastewater expressed in dollars per billing period. Bc = O&M cost for treatment of a unit of BOD 5 expressed in dollars per pound. B = Concentration of BOD 5 from a user above the base level of 2.50 pounds/1,000 gallons expressed in pounds per 1,000 gallons. Sc = O&M costs for treatment of a unit of suspended solids expressed in dollars per pound. S = Concentration of suspended solids from a user above the base level of 2.50 pounds/1,000 gallons expressed in pounds per 1,000 gallons. Pc = O&M cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant which the publicly owned treatment works is committed to treat by virtue of an NPDES permit or other regulatory requirement expressed in dollars per pound. P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above base level. Base levels for pollutants subject to surcharges will be established by the superintendent. Vu = Volume contribution of a user per billing period (expressed in thousands of gallons).  
The values of parameters used to determine user charges may vary from time to time. Therefore, the superintendent is authorized to modify any parameter or value as often as necessary. Review of all parameters and values shall be under taken whenever necessary; but in no case less frequently than annually. 
(g)  Industrial users. 
(1)  In compliance with the provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and with the provisions of the Metropolitan Sewer Use Ordinance, (Bill No. 80-343, Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, Tennessee), all significant industrial users, as defined in division 4 of this article, shall obtain an industrial user's permit before discharging any industrial/commercial wastewater into the city sanitary sewer system. All industrial user's shall comply with the terms and provisions of the industrial user's permit, which is attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated in this subsection (g) by reference. 
(2)  Significant industrial user is hereby defined as: 
a.  All categorical industrial users as defined in 40 CFR 122 and 403. 
b.  Any noncategorical industrial user which: 
1.  Discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (process wastewater excludes sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters); 
2.  Contribute a process wastewater which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (BOD, TSS, etc.) capacity of the treatment plant; or 
3.  Has a reasonable potential in the opinion of the control or approval authority, to adversely affect POTW treatment plant (inhibition, pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination, or endangering of POTW workers). 
(3)  Any violation of this article shall be punishable under section 1-9 of this Code. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Notification. Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(i)  Biennial review of operation and maintenance charges. The city shall review not less often than every two years the wastewater contribution of users and user classes, the total costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment works and its approved user charge system. The city shall revise the charges for users or user classes to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes as required in this section; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the treatment works; and 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operational and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 88-113, §§ 1-7, 8-19-1988; Ord. No. 89-132, § 1, 12-26-1989; Ord. No. 90-156, § 1, 10-26-1990; Ord. No. 03-428, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 82-206. - Specific fees and charges. 
(a)  The charges and fees for users of the city's sanitary sewer system shall be: 
Residential users: 0-1,500 gallons $14.12 minimum bill All gallons over 1,500   5.84 per 1,000 gallons Commercial users: 0-1,500 gallons  14.12 minimum bill All gallons over 1,500   5.84 per 1,000 gallons Hotel/motel and 
campgrounds: All gallons used   9.27 per 1,000 gallons  
(b)  All households on wells will be charged a flat rate of $31.68. 
(c)  The City of Millersville will allow adjustments for leaks no more than two times in a calendar year. All adjustments will be based on the average bill for the previous six months. 
(d)  All bills not paid by the due date shall be subject to a late fee of ten percent of the original amount billed. All legal fees, collection fees and other expenses incurred in the collection of an unpaid balance shall be added to the balance due. 
(e)  Dry sewer taps will not be charged a minimum fee. A property shall be considered to have a "dry tap" if a tapping fee has been paid but the connection to the sewer system has not been made or if the water to the property has been permanently turned off and the water meter removed. 
(f)  All new user connections to the system, requested or required, shall be required to pay a tap fee of $1,525.00 plus applicable new customer fees. The new user shall be responsible for the purchase of and installation of all equipment and materials necessary to connect with the tap. New connections to the system shall be inspected and approved by the city before activating the connection. 
(Ord. No. 85-68, § 1, 12-17-1985; Ord. No. 89-133, § 2, 11-9-1989; Ord. No. 90-148, § 1, 7-17-1990; Ord. No. 95-269, § 7, 8-28-1995; Ord. No. 01-388, § 3, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 03-432, §§ 1-9, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 06-490, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 06-502, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 10-568, § 1, 7-20-2010; Ord. No. 15-644, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-568, § 1, adopted July 20, 2010, is effective beginning with the August 2010 billing cycle. 
Sec. 82-207. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees. 
    A fee may be charged for the issuance of an industrial wastewater discharge fee in accordance with division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 10(10.6), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-208. - Fees for industrial discharge monitoring. 
    Fees may be collected from the industrial users having pretreatment or other discharge requirements to compensate the city for the necessary compliance monitoring and other administrative duties of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 10(10.7), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-209. - Billing. 
    The billing for normal domestic wastewater services shall consist of monthly billing in accordance with the rates specified by the city, subject to net and gross rates. 
(Ord. No. 88-112, § 10(10.8), 8-19-1988) 
Sec. 82-210. - Responsibility for payment of fees. 
(a)  The owner of a building or other premises, or the owner of land leased or rented by the owner of a building or other premises placed on said land, shall be responsible for payment of all sewer fees incurred in servicing that property. If the owner authorizes or directs a tenant, occupant or other responsible person to open an account and make payment of the fees to the city, such agreement is exclusive of the city and the owner shall remain responsible for all incurred fees. 
(b)  The city may refuse to provide sewer services to any property having past due fees that are unpaid. Refusal of service shall entail the disconnection of water service to the property. The city shall make reconnection of service upon payment of all fees, late charges, legal and collection expenses, reconnection fees and all other fees due on the account, subject to the reconnection policies and procedures utilized. 
(c)  The city may secure a past due account by recording a lien against the property in the respective county. 
(Ord. No. 05-472, 9-20-2005) 
Chapter 86 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 86-31-86-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 86-61. - Board established. 
    The city hereby establishes a board, known as the Millersville Towing Authority, for the purpose of regulating the operation of wreckers and/or any vehicles used for towing other vehicles in the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-410, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-2002) 
Sec. 86-62. - Membership; appointment. 
(a)  The city towing authority shall be comprised of three persons, the make-up of which shall be one member of the board of commissioners as appointed by the mayor, the city manager, one private citizen who lives within the corporate boundaries of the city as appointed by the mayor, and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The city towing authority shall appoint a chairman and recording secretary from among its membership, and establish any other officers it deems appropriate for its operation. 
(Ord. No. 02-410, §§ 3, 4, 5-21-2002) 
Sec. 86-63. - Authority to establish rules and regulations; hear formal complaints. 
(a)  The city towing authority shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations pertaining to fees, permits, territories of operation, and/or other relevant rules and criteria, for the operation of wreckers or other towing vehicles within the city limits as approved by the city commission. 
(b)  The city towing authority shall hear all formal complaints lodged against any wrecker company or sole proprietor who tows vehicles for fees. The board, after providing the wrecker company and/or operator an opportunity for a full and fair hearing, shall have the authority, through majority vote of the board's full membership, to take disciplinary action against the wrecker company and/or operator up to and including reprimanding, suspending or revoking the permit to operate a wrecker within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 02-410, §§ 5, 6, 5-21-2002) 
Secs. 86-64-86-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, T.C.A § 7-51-1003. 

Sec. 86-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operate a taxi franchise means the operating of one taxicab within the corporate limits of the city by the owner thereof, for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the taxicab himself or having the taxicab driven by his agent or employee. Any grantee may operate one or more taxicabs, but such grantee must secure a separate franchise for each and every taxicab in his fleet, and the grantee must otherwise comply with all the requirements of this article concerning each separate taxicab. 
    Taxi franchise Each individual taxicab shall constitute a single franchise separate and apart from all others. The city shall be the grantor while the person holding such franchise shall be the grantee. 
    Taxicab means any and all vehicles carrying passengers for hire, except buses and other common carriers operating over designated routes in and through the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 1, 12-18-2001) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-92. - Taxicab franchise required; application made to city recorder, issuance by the city commission; not applicable to buses, etc. 
(a)  No person shall operate any taxicab within the corporate limits of the city except under a franchise granted under this article. 
(b)  The recorder shall take application from any person who gives satisfactory evidence of his compliance with the terms and conditions of this article, and shall present such application at the next regular or special called meeting of the board of commissioners, and upon a majority vote in favor thereof, the city recorder shall issue a franchise to the grantee to operate taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to buses or other passenger conveyances regulated by the state public service commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 2, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-93. - Limitation on number of taxicabs. 
    Until conditions warrant otherwise, not more than six vehicles shall be operated as taxicabs upon the public highways, streets, boulevards, or alleys of the city; provided that the number of taxicabs provided for in this section may be increased or diminished as conditions may require, and upon the applications of interested parties when, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, the increase diminution of the number of taxicab vehicles is warranted by the safety and welfare requirements of the public. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 3, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-94. - Requirement as to application. 
    No person shall be eligible to apply for or to receive a taxicab franchise if he has been convicted of a felony within the past five years. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 4, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-95. - Qualifications for franchise and driver's permit. 
    No person shall be granted a franchise nor driver's permit to operate a taxicab in the city unless he complies with the following to the satisfaction of the city recorder: 
(1)  Makes written application to the city recorder. 
(2)  Is at least 18 years of age and holds a state special chauffeur's license. 
(3)  Is clean in dress and person and is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
(4)  Produces affidavits of good character from two reputable citizens of the city who have known him personally and have observed his conduct for at least two years next preceding the date of his application. 
(5)  Has not been convicted of any felony within the past five years. 
(6)  Has not been convicted of driving under the influence of an intoxicant or drug during a period of five years immediately preceding the date of his application. 
(7)  Has not been convicted of three or more traffic violations during a period of three years immediately preceding the date of his application. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 5, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-96. - Conduct of drivers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver, while on duty, to be under the influence of, or to drink any intoxicating beverage or beer, use profane or obscene language, shout or call to prospective passengers, unnecessarily blow the automobile horn, or to otherwise disturb the peace and tranquility of the city in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 6, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-97. - Transportation of more than one passenger at the same time. 
    No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a passenger without the consent of such other passenger. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 7, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-98. - Permit required of drivers. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab, other than the franchise owner, or his agent or employee, without being in possession of a city taxicab driver's permit issued by the city recorder. Such permit shall cost $25.00 and shall be issued by the city recorder only after the applicant's driving history has been thoroughly investigated and the applicant has otherwise complied with the requirements of this article. Such permit shall be valid and in effect until suspended by the board of commissioners for violation of this article and shall be renewable every two years. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 8, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-99. - Taxicabs to be kept clean and mechanically sound. 
    All taxicabs operated in the city shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition inside and out. They shall also be kept in such mechanical condition as is reasonably necessary to provide for their satisfactory operation and the safety of the public. Taxicabs shall be equipped with such lights, brakes, and other mechanical equipment and devices as are required by state law and this article for motor vehicles generally. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 9, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-100. - Drivers to comply with laws and ordinances. 
    All taxicabs shall be operated in strict compliance with this Code and ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 10, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-101. - Insurance required of franchisees. 
    No taxicab franchise shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect, insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of a $1,000,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a franchise holder, his servants, or agents. Proof of such insurance shall be filed in the office of the city recorder and shall be written through an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 11, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-102. - Drivers prohibited from engaging in unlawful acts. 
    No driver shall help, aid, assist, or use, or knowingly allow his taxicab to be used, or otherwise engage in the commission of, or in the furtherance of, any unlawful act, nor to be used or driven in violation of any city ordinance, or in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 12, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-103. - Public taxistands authorized and regulated. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may authorize public taxistands in such place or places upon the streets of the city as it deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city. The board of commissioners shall not create a public taxistand on the streets except when deemed necessary for the convenience of the general public. The board of commissioners shall prescribe the number of cabs that shall occupy such taxistands. The board of commissioners shall not create a public taxistand in front of any place of business where the abutting property owners object to the taxistand or where such taxistand would tend to create a traffic hazard. 
(b)  Public taxistands shall be used by taxicab drivers on a first-come, first-served basis. Each driver shall pull onto the taxistand from the rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their cabs. They shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at the public taxistand. Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding any cab of his choice that is parked in a public taxistand. 
(c)  No vehicle other than a taxicab shall at any time occupy any space upon the streets that has been established as either a public taxistand or a callbox stand. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 13, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-104. - Transfer of franchise. 
    No franchise may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without the consent of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 14, 12-18-2001) 
Sec. 86-105. - Suspension or revocation of franchise. 
    The board of commissioners shall have the power to suspend a taxi franchise upon a public hearing, after which a ten day notice has been given and when it has been established that such grantee has discontinued operation or has violated, refused, or neglected to observe any of the proper orders, rules, or regulations of this article, or willfully or persistently violated any of the laws of the state, or ordinances of the city relative to the operation of such vehicles. If the board of commissioners should deem, after hearing that the offenses of the grantee have been so flagrant as to warrant such action, then it may revoke the franchise issued to the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 01-396, § 15, 12-18-2001) 
Chapter 90 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance of the city rezoning property or amendments thereto saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Authority of chapter provisions. 
    This chapter, in pursuance of the authority granted by T.C.A §§ 13-7-201-13-7-210, shall provide for the establishment of districts within the city; regulate within such districts, the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot occupancy, the size of open spaces, the density of population, and the uses of land, buildings, and other structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities and similar purposes to include special districts for areas subject to flooding and areas developed as a planned development; provide regulations governing nonconforming uses and structures; provide for a board of appeals and for its powers and duties; provide for permits; establish and provide for the collection of fees; provide for the administration of this chapter and for the official, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions thereof; and provide penalties for the violation of this chapter; and provide for conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-101, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-2. - Title of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be known as The Zoning Ordinance of Millersville, Tennessee. The zoning map shall be referred to as the "Official Zoning Map of Millersville, Tennessee," and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-102, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-3. - Purpose of chapter provisions. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare by: 
(1)  Enhancing the character and stability of residential, business, commercial, and industrial areas, and promoting the orderly and beneficial development of such areas. 
(2)  Preventing overcrowding of land. 
(3)  Conserving the value of land and buildings. 
(4)  Minimizing traffic hazards and congestions. 
(5)  Preventing undue concentration of population. 
(6)  Providing for adequate light, air, privacy, and sanitation. 
(7)  Reducing hazards from fire, flood, and other dangers. 
(8)  Assisting in the economic provision, utilization, and expansion of all services provided by the public including, but not limited to, roads, water and sewer service, recreation, schools, and emergency services. 
(9)  Encouraging the most appropriate uses of land. 
(10)  Enhancing the natural, manmade and historical amenities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-103, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-4. - Enactment. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, no building shall be erected or structurally altered, nor shall any building or premises be utilized for any purpose, other than those permitted in the zoning district in which the building or premises is located. No land or lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed in this chapter, nor shall the lot area per family be reduced in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations hereby established for the district in which such building is located. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or other open space for any other building. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-104, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-5. - Repeal of previous zoning ordinance. 
    The existing zoning ordinance of the city, dated January 5, 1982, as amended, is hereby repealed. The adoption of this chapter, however, shall not affect or prevent any pending or future prosecution of an action to abate any existing violation of such regulations, as amended, if the violation is also a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-105, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-6. - Scope of chapter provisions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth in this chapter, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
(2)  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(4)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(5)  The words "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended," "designed," or "arranged to be used" or "occupied." 
(6)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-201, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-7. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined in this section shall have their standard dictionary definition or such as the context may imply. 
    Access means the right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property. 
    Accessory apartment means an accessory living space contained within, or connected to, an owner occupied single family residence. The space generally has its own kitchen and bathroom facilities, not shared with the principal residence. The apartment must be connected to the principal residence by use of common water and electric meters and service. Occupancy is restricted to domestic employees or caregivers and the apartment may not be used as rental property. 
    Accessory building or structure means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith. 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult bookstore and adult video store means any commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, firms, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or an adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the above any or all of the described materials. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel, inn, or similar commercial establishment which offers: 
(1)  Accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has signage or advertising visible from the public right-of-way which suggests the availability of this type of adult photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theaters means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, firms, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" excluding, however, "R" and "NC-17" rated movies. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly feature persons in a state of nudity or seminudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    Advertising means any writing, printing, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign, or other device designs used or intended for advertising, whether placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree stumps, or other natural structures or on buildings, structures, milestones, signboards, wallboard, roofboard, frames, supports, fences or other manmade structure, and any such advertising is a structure within the meaning of the word "structure" as utilized in this chapter. 
    Advertising sign or structure. See Sign. 
    Agriculture use means the use of a tract of land five acres or more in size including all forms of agriculture, growing of crops in the open, dairying, grazing, the raising and maintaining of poultry and other livestock, horticulture viticulture, floriculture, forests, and wood, provided, however, all health codes of the county are complied with. The feeding or disposal of community or collected garbage to animals shall not be deemed an agricultural use nor shall the commercial feed lots, the raising of fur-bearing animals, fish or minnow hatcheries. 
    Agricultural accessory use means those structures or equipment which are normally required in the operation of agricultural uses. 
    Alley means a minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility and public service purposes. 
    Alteration means, as applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts, or an enlargement, whether by extending a side or by increasing its height or structural changes, other than repairs, that would affect safety. The term "alter" in its various modes and tenses and its practical forms, refers to the making of an alteration. 
    Area, building, means the total areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all necessary buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps. 
    Attached means the connection of one structure to another structure by means of an accessible doorway on a common wall. 
    Automobile wrecking means the dismantling, storage, sale or dumping of used motor vehicles, trailers, or parts thereof. Any lot or place of business which is exposed to weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically feasible to make operative are placed, located, or found. 
    Average ground elevation means the elevation of the mean finished grade at the front of a structure. 
    Basement means a story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average ground elevation or when subdivided and used for commercial activities. 
    Board means the city board of zoning appeals. 
    Breezeway means a covered and sometimes enclosed walkway used to connect different residential structures and their accessory buildings. Breezeways located in the side or front yard shall not exceed a length greater than 30 feet. 
    Buffer strip means a visual screen comprised of planted material and/or fencing affording visual privacy and sight relief between properties of dissimilar uses and/or character of buildings of not less than six feet in height. Visual privacy shall include screening from automobile headlights, trash concentrations, vehicular parking, traffic, and elevated yard lights. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, mobile homes or trailers, and similar structures whether stationary or movable. 
    Building area of a lot means that portion of a lot bounded by the required rear yard, side yards, and the building setback line. 
    Building inspector means the zoning codes officer or his authorized representative appointed by the board of commissioners. 
    Building, main or principal, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
    Building setback line means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed, except as otherwise provided. 
    Building setback line, front, means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way, or if an official future street right-of-way has been established, from that future street right-of-way line, and the front of a building on a lot. The front building setback line extends the full width of the lot and is parallel to the street right-of-way. 
    Building setback line, rear, means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the rear property line and a building on a lot (other than for permitted accessory structures). The rear setback line extends the full width of the lot. 
    Building setback line, side, means a line delineating the minimum distance between the side property line and a building on a lot. The side setback line extends from the front building setback line to the rear building setback line. 
    Bulk means the size of buildings or other structures and their relationship to each other and to open areas and lot lines. 
    Camping ground means a parcel of land used or intended to be used, let, or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents, or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
    Carport means an accessory building constructed to house vehicles, land-driven or otherwise, that is open on at least two sides. 
    Clinic. See Medical facility. 
    Conditional use (special exception) means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning districts but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning district as conditional uses, when specific provisions for such use is made in this chapter. For the purposes of administration of this chapter, conditional uses shall be construed as synonymous with special exceptions, as controlled by T.C.A. § 13-7-107. 
    Convenience sales means the retail sale of small convenience items such as toiletries, tobacco, and magazines. The dispensing of petroleum products may be included as accessory to convenience food products retailing. 
    Convenience services means services which are typically needed frequently or recurrently, such as barber and beauty care; and includes the operation of self-service laundromats but excludes other apparel, cleaning and repair services. 
    Country club means a chartered, nonprofit membership club, with facilities catering primarily to its membership or social amenities: golf, riding, clubhouse, pool, dining facilities, lounge. 
    Coverage means the percentage of a lot which is covered by all buildings located therein, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. 
    Day care center means day care for more than seven preteenage children in any kind of building. 
    Day care home means day care in an occupied residence of not more than seven children, including children living in the home. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, or drilling operations. Agricultural activities such as plowing or cultivating and gardening activities are not included in this definition of development. 
    Dwelling means a building or part thereof used as a habitation under one of the following categories: 
    Boardinghouse means a building and accessories thereto principally used, designed, or adapted to provide living accommodations for not more than six occupants and having common cooking and dining facilities. 
    Condominium means an apartment building or townhouse containing three or more dwelling units separated by a common vertical or horizontal wall. 
    Duplex means two attached household dwelling units separated by a common wall with separate entrances and under a common roof. Duplexes shall be held in single ownership on a single lot but may have separate utility services and connections. 
    Mobile home dwelling means a detached one-family dwelling constructed as a single self-contained unit and mounted on a single chassis in addition to these other distinguishing characteristics: 
a.  A mobile home dwelling is designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
b.  A mobile home dwelling is a structure manufactured before June 15, 1976, that is not constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.). It is a structure that is transportable in one or more sections that in the traveling mode is eight body-feet or more in width and 40 body-feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and that is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes any plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. A mobile home, manufactured before or after June 15, 1976, shall also be defined as a home manufactured on a permanent chassis. 
    Multifamily apartment or dwelling means a building and accessories thereto principally used, designed, or adapted for use by three or more households, especially in terms of specified cooking and eating areas. The units may be either adjacent to each other, or on separate floors. 
    Newly constructed multifamily dwellings, or those existing that are repaired to 50 percent or more of its assessed value, are subject to the Millersville design review criteria for commercial, industrial, and multifamily dwellings. 
    Prefabricated, manufactured, or manufactured double-wide dwelling means a single detached dwelling constructed primarily off-site, designed to be transported on a flatbed truck or trailer, provided that it is installed on a permanently enclosed concrete or masonry foundation, with sewer and water connections designed for permanent connection to municipal or sanitary or on-site systems, and permanently connected to such systems. Prefabricated or manufactured dwellings further mean: 
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that "manufactured home" includes any structure which meets all the requirements of T.C.A. ch. 126. 
    Roominghouse means a building and accessories thereto principally used, designed, or adapted to provide living accommodations for not more than six occupants and without owner-provider cooking and dining facilities. 
    Single detached dwelling means a building and accessories thereto principally used, designed, or adapted for use by a single household. 
    Townhouse means a residential structure containing three or more nondetached dwelling units separated by a common vertical wall. 
    Establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business and a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business operations to any other business or sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family (except as set forth in this definition) shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family or families, and that four or less boarders, including roomers, may be accommodated. The term "family" shall not be construed to mean a fraternity, sorority, club, or institutional group. The term "family," as used in this chapter, shall be construed to include groups of eight or fewer unrelated mentally retarded or physically handicapped persons and with three additional persons acting as houseparents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally retarded or physically handicapped persons residing in the house. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, T.C.A. § 13-24-102. 
    Farming uses means the current employment of land for the primary purpose of obtaining a profit in money by raising, harvesting and selling crops or the feeding, breeding, management and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, furbearing animals or honeybees or for dairying and the sale of dairy products or any other agricultural or horticultural use or animal husbandry or any combination thereof. 
    Farm-type structure means a building primarily located on farms and is used for many purposes, notably for the housing of livestock, storage of crops, storage of equipment, and as a covered workplace. Farm type structures are also used to describe buildings such as tobacco and dairy barns. 
    Floor area means the total of the gross horizontal area of all floors, including usable basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer surface of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the centerlines of party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof, or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roof line of the building or portions thereof without walls, but excluding in the case of nonresidential facilities; arcades, porticoes, and similar open areas which are accessible to the general public, and which are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas. 
    Frontage means all the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Garage means a fully enclosed building for one or more motor vehicles with at least one operable door that is 50 square feet, or larger. 
    Gasoline service station means any area of land, including structures thereon, that is utilized for the retail sale of gasoline, oil, or automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand car washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including painting or major repair. 
    Grade, finished, means the completed surfaces of lawns, walks, and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto. 
    Health department means the county department of environment and conservation. 
    Height of building or structures means the vertical distance from the average ground elevation or finished grade at the building line, whichever is the highest, to the highest point of the building or structure. 
    Home addition means an enclosure which itself is heated and cooled and connected to the principle structure by a common wall, with continuing roof and floors, which is directly accessible from the heated and cooled living space of the principle structure by a doorway on the common wall. 
    Home occupation. See section 90-432. 
    Hospital. See Medical facilities. 
    In-law apartment means an accessory living space contained within, or connected to, an owner occupied single family residence. The space generally has its own kitchen and bathroom facilities, not shared with the principal residence. The apartment must be connected to the principal residence by use of a common water and electric meters and service. Occupancy is restricted to relatives of the homeowner, related by blood, marriage or adoption and the apartment may not be used as rental property. 
    Junkyard or salvage yard means a lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storing, and selling of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storing and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running conditions for the sale of parts thereof. 
    Landholder means the legal or beneficial owners of all the land proposed to be included in a planned development. The holder of an option or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less than 50 years in duration, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest may be considered a landholder for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Landscaping means the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, lawns, and other ground cover, or materials. 
    Loading space means an area ten feet by 40 feet with a 14-foot height clearance providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of a truck or other vehicle. 
    Lot means a piece, plot, or parcel of land in one ownership, which may include one or more lots of records, occupied or to be occupied by one or more principal building and accessory buildings, including the open spaces required under this chapter. 
    Lot, area, means the total surface land area included within lot lines. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot of which at least two adjoining sides abut their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two such sides is less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, depth, means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
    Lot, frontage, means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley or adjacent lots. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county register of deeds, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the county register of deeds prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Lot width means the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines of each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sac, where the 80 percent requirements shall not apply. 
    Marina means a facility for the docking and servicing of boats. 
    Medical facilities: 
    Convalescent, rest or nursing home means a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation or fee. 
    Dental clinic or medical clinic means a facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical care for sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, emergency medical services, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility. 
    Public health center means a facility utilized by a health unit for the provision of public health services. 
    Mobile home park means any area, tract, site or plot of land whereupon mobile homes as herein defined are placed, located or maintained, and shall include all accessory buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment thereof. 
    Nonconforming use means a building, structure, or use of land existing at the time of enactment of this chapter which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Non-profit association, corporation, or philanthropic organization means a group organized for any lawful activity other than generating profit. This includes, but is not limited to: religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational, athletic or sport organizations, or any such organization listed with the Tennessee Department of State, Division of Business Services (or equivalent), or in the Internal Revenue Code § 501(c). 
    Noxious matter means material in gaseous, liquid or solid form which is capable of causing injury to living organisms, chemical reactions, or detrimental affects upon the social, economic or psychological well-being of individuals. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who may pay money or any other forms of consideration. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means the exposure of or the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or the female breast. 
    Open space means an area on the same lot with a main building which is open, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground to the sky except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Owner means his duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devise, fiduciary, and a person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question. 
    Parking lot means an off-street facility including parking spaces with adequate provisions for drives and aisles for maneuvering and obtaining access, and for entrance and exit. 
    Parking space means an off-street space available for parking one motor vehicle and having an area of not less than 162 square feet exclusive of passageways and driveways giving access thereto, and having access to a street or alley. 
    Permittee and/or licensee means a person in whose name a permit or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as any person listed as an applicant on the application for a permit or license. 
    Person means an individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or any entity. 
    Planned development means a relatively large, interrelated commercial development adhering to a master development plan and located on a single tract of land, or on two or more tracts of land which may be separated only by a street or other right-of-way. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission. 
    Pole barn means a type of construction of a wooden framed structure that does not have a foundation including footings. 
    Principal roof means the section of a roof, over a building with multiple roofs and rooflines, that is the largest in square footage as compared to the other roofs. 
    Principal structure means a structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential or agricultural district, any dwelling shall be deemed the principal structure on the lot on which the same is situated. Carports and garages if permanently attached to the principal structure shall be deemed a part of the principal structure. Awnings, porches, patios, or similar attachments shall be deemed a part of the principal structure with two meeting any yard requirement. 
    Principal use means the specific primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
    Professional office means the office of a physician, dentist, attorney, architect, engineer, planner, accountant, or similar professions. 
    Public uses means public parks, schools, and administrative, cultural, and service buildings, not including public land or buildings devoted solely to storage and maintenance of equipment and materials. 
    Recreational accessory structure means well houses, gazebos, or other reasonably related structures that are 149 square feet or less. 
    Roadway means the actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities including ditches and curbs and gutters, which is used to transport motor vehicles. 
    Roof pitch means the mathematical relationship where the rise (height) of a building's exterior cover is divisible by its run (horizontal width) in the direction of the slope. 
    Sanitary landfill means an area or site utilized by a public or private entity for disposal of solid waste or refuse in a manner which meets the regulations imposed upon the operation and maintenance of sanitary landfill sites by the state department environment and conservation. 
    Screening means the method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features. 
    Seminude means a state of dress in which the clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or other devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, physical contact between person of the same or opposite sex, to include such activities, but not limited to, wrestling and tumbling where any of the participants are in a state of nudity or seminudity. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model studio or a sexual encounter center. 
    Shopping center means a group of compatible commercial establishment, planned, developed, and managed as a single unit, with an automobile storage area provided on the property; the center must also be related in location, size, and type of businesses to its trade area. 
    Sign, billboard, or other advertising device means any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto, or represented thereon, which shall display or include any letter, words, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, or any representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction or advertisement. The word "sign" includes the word "billboard" or any other type of advertising device, but does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit. 
    Billboards means a type of advertising sign having more than 100 square feet of display surface which is either erected on the ground or attached to or supported by a building or structure. 
    Business sign means a sign which directs attention to the business or profession conducted on the premises. 
    Flashing sign means any illuminated sign, whether stationary, revolving, or rotating, which exhibits changing light or color effects, provided that revolving or rotating signs which exhibit no changing light or color effects other than those produced by revolution or rotation, shall be deemed flashing signs only if they exhibit sudden or marked changes in such light or color effects. 
    Ground sign means a sign supported by a pole, uprights, or braces on the ground. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign designed to give forth any artificial light or reflect such light from an artificial source. 
    Indirect illumination sign means any illuminated nonflashing sign whose illumination is derived entirely from an external artificial source and is so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residence or streets. 
    Marquee sign means a projecting sign attached to or hung from a marquee and such marquee shall be known to mean a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building, when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building, building line, or property line. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign relating to a product, service, or establishment that is not on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    On-premises sign means a sign relating to a product, service, or establishment that is on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Pole sign or banjo sign means a type of ground sign at least ten feet above the ground supported on a single post or pole most commonly associated with gasoline service stations. 
    Roof sign means a detached sign supported upon the roof or wall of a building. 
    Temporary sign means any sign banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of wood, metal, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light material, with or without frames, where either by reason of construction or purpose the sign is intended to be displayed for a short period of time only. 
    Wall or flat sign means any sign erected parallel to the face or on the outside wall of any building which projects out at any angle therefrom and projects not more than 12 inches beyond the face of such wall. 
    Special exception means a use which is specifically permitted if the owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the board that it will meet certain standards, enumerated safeguards, or qualifying conditions. 
    Specified anatomical areas means the male genitals and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals or a female breast. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation; 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above; or any portion of a building between the topmost floor and the roof which is used for human occupancy in which the floor area with eight feet or more of head clearance equals less than 50 percent of the floor area of the story next below; provided, however, that it is not used as a dwelling unit, a top floor in which the floor area with eight feet or more of head clearance equals less than 50 percent of floor are of the story next below shall be a half-story. A basement shall be considered as a story if more than one-half of its height is above the average ground level from which the height of a building is measured or if it is used for commercial purposes. 
    Street means a public road, highway, or thoroughfare which constitutes, or is designed to constitute, the main access to more than one lot and which has been legally dedicated and accepted for public use. 
    Substantial enlargement means the increase in floor areas occupied by the sexually oriented business by more than 25 percent of the original floor as it existed at passage of this chapter. 
    Toxic materials means materials (gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate) which are capable of causing injury to living organisms even when present in relatively small amounts. 
    Transfer of ownership or control means any or all of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the sexually oriented business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing ownership or control. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses. 
    Travel trailer park means a plot of land designed and equipped to accommodate travel trailers for short periods of time. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky except as otherwise provided in this chapter, provided that accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard. 
    Yard, front, means the yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the nearest part of the principal building, including porches, and the front lot line. 
    Yard, rear, means the yard extending across the entire width of the lot between the nearest part of the principal building, including porches, and the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side, means the required space unoccupied except as provided in this chapter, measured between the side lot line and the nearest point of the principal building and between the front yard and the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-202, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 03-434, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 05-457, § 2, 2-28-2005; Ord. No. 06-487, § 1, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 06-497, §§ 1-4, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-533, § 1, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 14-625, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 14-626, § 1, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 16-650, Exh. A, 2-16-2016; Ord. No. 15-641, § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-8. - Use classification system. 
    The provisions of this section shall be known as the use classifications. The purpose of the provisions of this section is to classify land uses into a number of specifically defined types on the basis of common functional characteristics and similar compatibility with other uses, thereby with criteria which are directly relevant to the public interest. The provisions of this section shall apply throughout the zoning regulations of this chapter. Where there is a question concerning the appropriate activity classification for any use not listed in this section, the board of zoning appeals shall make the determination based upon the characteristics of the unlisted use. 
(1)  Listing of activity classifications. All activities are hereby classified into the following activity types: 
a.  Residential activities. 
1.  Permanent. 
Dwelling, duplex 
Dwelling, mobile home 
Dwelling, multifamily 
Dwelling, single detached 
Mobile home park 
2.  Semipermanent. 
Boardinghouse 
Roominghouse 
b.  Community facility activities. 
Administrative 
Community assembly 
Community education 
Cultural and recreation services 
Essential services 
Extensive impact facilities 
Health care facilities 
Intermediate impact facilities 
Personal and group care facilities 
Religious facilities 
c.  Commercial activities. 
Animal care and veterinarian services 
Automotive parking 
Automotive services and repair 
Building materials and farm equipment 
Consumer repair services 
Construction sales and services 
Convenience commercial 
Entertainment and amusement services 
Financial, consulting, and administrative services 
Food and beverage services 
Food service drive-in 
General business and communication services 
General personal service 
General retail trade 
Group assembly 
Medical and professional services 
Transient habitation 
Transport and warehousing 
Undertaking services 
Vehicular, craft, and related equipment sales, retail and delivery 
Wholesale sales 
d.  Manufacturing activities. 
Extensive 
Intermediate 
Limited 
e.  Agricultural, resources production, and extractive activities. 
Agricultural services 
Commercial feed lots and stockyards 
Crops, animal and poultry raising 
Mining, drilling, and quarrying 
Plant and forest nurseries 
(2)  Accessory uses. In addition to the principal activities expressed in subsection (1) of this section, each activity type shall be deemed to include activities customarily associated with, and appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal activity. The accessory uses permitted are presented with the regulation section of each district as set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  Residential activities. Residential activities shall include permanent residential and semipermanent residential activities as follows: 
a.  Permanent residential. The occupancy of living accommodations on a monthly or longer basis with none of the living units under the same ownership or management on the same zone lot being occupied on a less-than-monthly basis. This shall not include institutional living arrangements involving the provision of any kind of special care or forced residence such as nursing homes, orphanages, asylums, halfway houses or prisons, except as provided by general law of the state. The following dwelling types are permanent residential activities; however, only those dwelling types as indicated by individual district regulations may be permitted therein: 
Dwelling, duplex 
Dwelling, mobile home 
Dwelling, multifamily (apartment, townhouse) 
Dwelling, single detached 
Mobile home park 
b.  Semipermanent residential. The occupancy of living accommodations partly on a monthly or longer basis and partly for a shorter time period, but with less than 30 percent of the living units under the same ownership or management on the same zone lot being occupied on a less-than-monthly basis. This shall not include institutional living arrangements involving the provision of any special kind of care or forced residence, such as nursing homes, orphanages, asylums, half-way houses, and prisons, except as provided by general law of the state. The following dwelling or rooming unit types as defined by this chapter are considered as semipermanent residential activities; however, only those dwelling or rooming unit types as indicated by individual district regulations may be permitted therein. 
Boardinghouse 
Roominghouse 
(4)  Community facility activities. 
a.  Administrative services. Administrative services are the activities typically performed by public, utility, and nonprofit private administrative offices. These activities would include: 
City, county, state, and federal offices 
Civil defense facilities 
Court buildings 
Fire department facilities 
Police department facilities 
Post offices 
b.  Community assembly. Community assembly activities are typically performed by or at institutions and installations for various social, athletic, and recreational purposes. These activities do not include facilities primarily utilized for profit. They would include: 
Civic, social, fraternal, and philanthropic associations 
Private (nonprofit) clubs, lodges, meeting halls, and recreation centers 
Temporary nonprofit festivals 
c.  Community education. The activities typically performed by the following institutions: 
Kindergarten, primary and secondary schools 
Public and private nursery schools 
d.  Cultural and recreational services. The activities of a cultural or recreational nature which are either owned by, or operated for the use and enjoyment of, the general public. This does not embrace such facilities which are privately owned and operated for profit. These activities would include: 
Art galleries 
Libraries 
Museums 
Parks, playgrounds, and playfields 
Planetariums and aquariums 
Recreational centers and gymnasiums 
Swimming pools and beaches 
Zoological and botanical gardens 
e.  Essential services. Essential services include the maintenance and operations of the following installations: 
Electrical and gas substations 
Electrical, gas, water, and sewer distribution and collection lines 
Pumping facilities for water and sewer systems 
Rights-of-way for transportation modes 
Telephone switching facilities 
f.  Extensive impact facilities. The activities that have a high degree of impact upon surrounding land uses due to their hazards or nuisance characteristics, as well as traffic generation, parking, and land requirements and typically performed by, or the maintenance and operation of, the following institutions and installations: 
Airports, air cargo terminals, heliports, or other aeronautical devices 
Correction and detention institutions 
Electricity generating facilities and transmission lines 
Garbage incineration plants, including cogeneration facilities and sanitary landfills 
Major fuel transmission lines and facilities 
Major mail processing centers 
Military installations 
Public and private utility corporations and truck yards, including storage yards 
Railroad yards and other transportation equipment marshaling and storage yards 
g.  Health care facilities. Health care facilities include the activities typically performed by the following institutions but not including the offices, clinics, etc., of private physicians or other health care professionals: 
Centers for observation or rehabilitation 
Convalescent homes 
Hospitals 
Medical clinics 
h.  Intermediate impact facilities. The activities that have a significant effect upon surrounding land uses due to their traffic generation characteristics, parking requirements, land requirements, or potential nuisances and typically performed by, or the maintenance and operation of the following institutions or installations. 
Cemeteries, columbariums, and mausoleums 
Colleges, junior colleges, and universities, but excluding profit-making business schools 
Commercial boat docks, marinas, and yacht clubs 
Country clubs 
Golf courses 
Radio and TV transmission facilities 
Water storage facilities, water and sewage treatment plants 
i.  Personal and group care facilities. The activities and facilities to provide for the care of preteenage children, disabled and handicapped persons needing special care or supervision, care for the elderly and other individuals requiring supervised care, but excluding facilities for delinquent, criminally dangerous, or psychotic people. These activities would include: 
Associations for physically or mentally handicapped persons 
Day care centers 
Group homes for physically or mentally handicapped persons 
Nursing homes 
Orphanages 
Retirement or rest homes 
j.  Religious facilities. The activities or facilities utilized by various religious organizations for worship or community service functions but excluding any facility the primary functions of which is to produce products or printed matter for sale or general distribution. The activities include: 
Chapels 
Churches 
Convents or monasteries 
Sanctuaries 
Synagogues 
Temples 
(5)  Commercial activities. 
a.  Animal care and veterinarian services. The animal care and veterinarian service activities include the provision of animal care, treatment, and boarding services. 
Veterinarian clinics and kennels 
b.  Automotive parking. Automotive parking includes the parking and/or storage of motor vehicles but excludes junk or scrap vehicles. 
Auto parking lots 
Parking garages 
c.  Automotive services and repair. Automotive services and repair activities include the sale, from the premises, of goods and the provision of services which are generally required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of motorist needs, as well as cleanup, painting and repair of automotive vehicles, including body work and installation of accessories. 
Auto cleaning and repair services 
Auto glass repair and replacement shops 
Auto inspection and diagnostic services 
Auto paint shops 
Auto towing services 
Car washes 
Gasoline, fuel, and oil sales and service 
Radiator and muffler shops 
Tire retreading and repair shops 
Wheel alignment and transmission repair shops 
d.  Building materials and farm equipment. These activities include the retail and wholesale sales and storage of materials used in the construction of buildings and other structures as well as the retail and wholesale sale and storage of implements, equipment, feed and seed used in agricultural pursuits. 
Farm equipment and supplies 
Feed milling and sales 
Heating, plumbing, and electrical supplies 
Lumber and other building material dealers 
Retail nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores 
Seed storage and sales 
e.  Consumer repair services. These activities include the servicing and repair of appliance, furniture, and equipment generally used or owned by individuals, not including the repair of any type of automobile. 
Blacksmith shops 
Electrical repair shops 
Gunsmith shops 
Instrument repair shops 
Lawn mower repair shop 
Locksmith shops 
Office equipment cleaning and repair 
Reupholstery and furniture repair 
Saddlery repair shops 
Watch, clock, and jewelry repair 
f.  Construction sales and services. Construction sales and services include the offices, buildings, and shops of various types of contractors as well as incidental on-site construction and storage. 
Builder's hardware 
Carpentry contractors 
Concrete contractors 
Excavation contractors 
General building contractors 
Glazing contractors 
Highway and street construction contractors 
Masonry, stonework, tile setting, and plastering contractors 
Painting, paper hanging, and decorating services 
Plumbing, heating, and electrical contractors 
Roofing and sheet metal contractors 
g.  Convenience commercial. Convenience commercial includes the retail sale, from the premises, of groceries, drugs, and other frequently needed personal convenience items, as well as the provision of personal convenience services which are typically needed frequently or recurrently, provided than no establishment shall exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Barbershops 
Beauty shops 
Drugstores 
Fruit and vegetable markets 
Grocery stores 
Hardware store (no outside storage) 
Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations 
Liquor stores 
Newsstands 
Self-service gasoline pumps 
Tobacco shops 
h.  Entertainment and amusement services. Entertainment and amusement services include the provisions of cultural, entertainment, educational, and athletic services, other than those classified as community facility activities, to assembled groups of spectators or participants. 
Art galleries (commercial) 
Batting and golf driving ranges 
Bowling alleys and billiard parlors 
Coin-operated amusement arcades 
Dancehalls and studios 
Exhibition halls and auditoriums 
Recording and TV production services 
Skating rinks 
Theaters 
Theatrical producers, bands, orchestras, and entertainers 
i.  Financial, consulting, and administrative services. Financial, consulting, and administrative services include the provision of financial, insurance, and real estate brokerage services, as well as advice, designs, information, or consultations of a professional nature (other than those classified as community facility activities, medical and professional service, or business and communication services). These also include the executive, management, or administrative activities of private, profit oriented firms, but exclude the sale and/or storage of goods or chattel unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
Agricultural credit institution 
Banking and bank-related functions 
Credit unions 
Holding and investment organizations 
Insurance carriers, agents, brokers, and service 
Money management and investment offices 
Real estate brokers, managers and appraisers 
Rediscount and financing institutions for credit agencies other than banks 
Savings and loan associations 
Securities commodities, brokers, dealers, and exchanges 
Title offices 
j.  Food and beverage services. Food and beverage services include the retail sale of prepared food or beverages for primarily on-premises consumption within the principal structure on the zone lot. 
Restaurants 
Taverns 
k.  Food service drive-in. A food service drive-in includes the retail sale of prepared food or beverages for either home or on premises consumption either within the principal structure or within a parked car on the same zone lot. 
Drive-in restaurants 
Fast food restaurants with drive-through service 
l.  General business and communication services. General business and communication services include the provision of service of a clerical, goods brokerage, and communications of a minor processing nature, copying and blueprinting services, custom printing (except books) but include the sale and/or storage of goods and chattel unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
Advertising agencies and services 
Commercial cleaning services 
Commercial testing laboratories 
Communications services: 
Radio and television broadcasting studios 
Telegraph offices and message centers 
Telephone exchanges and relay towers 
Television and recording production studios 
Computer and data processing services 
Credit reporting, adjustment, and collection agencies 
Detective agencies and protective services 
Drafting services 
Employment, personnel, and temporary help services 
Exterminating services 
Interior decorator and consulting services 
Mailing, reproduction, and commercial art services 
Management, consulting, and public relations services 
Membership organizations: 
Automobile clubs 
Better business bureaus 
Chamber of commerce 
Labor unions 
Political organizations 
Professional associations 
News syndicates 
Photofinishing services 
Research and development laboratories 
Trading stamp services 
Travel agencies 
Vehicular and equipment rental and leasing services 
m.  General personal service. General personal service includes the provision to individuals of informational and instructional services as well as the provision of care and maintenance for personal items. These activities do not include the storage or sale of goods or chattel, unless otherwise permitted in this section. 
Catering services 
Clothing rental agencies 
Health spas 
Laundry, cleaning, and garment services 
Miscellaneous personal services 
Photographic studios 
Shoe repair and hat cleaning shops 
Special training and schooling services: 
Art and music schools 
Barber and beauty schools 
Business schools 
Dancing schools/exercise studios 
Driving schools 
n.  General retail trade. General retail trade includes the retail sales or rental from the premises, primarily for personal or household use, of goods and/or services but excluding goods and services listed in the other classifications in this section. 
Antique and secondhand merchandise stores 
Automotive parts (no exterior storage) 
Book and stationery stores 
Camera stores 
Candy, nut and confectionery stores 
Children's and infant's stores 
Dairy products stores 
Department stores 
Drapery, curtain, and upholstery stores 
Drugstores and proprietary stores 
Family clothing stores 
Floor covering stores 
Florists 
Fruit stores and vegetable markets 
Furniture stores 
Furriers and fur shops 
Gift shops 
Grocery stores 
Hardware stores 
Hobby, toy, and game stores 
Household appliance stores 
Jewelry stores 
Liquor stores 
Luggage shops 
Meat and seafood markets 
Men's and boy's clothing and furnishing stores 
Miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores: 
Bathing suit stores 
Custom tailors 
Sports apparel stores 
Uniform stores 
Miscellaneous general merchandise stores: 
Direct selling organizations 
Mail order houses 
Miscellaneous home furnishings stores: 
Bedding and linen stores 
Cookware stores 
Cutlery stores 
Glassware and china shops 
Lamp and shade shops 
Paint and wallpaper stores 
Music stores 
Newsstands 
Radio and television stores 
Retail bakeries 
Sewing and piece goods stores 
Shoe stores 
Sporting goods stores 
Tobacco shops 
Variety stores 
Women's accessory and specialty stores 
Women's ready-to-wear store 
o.  Group assembly. Group assembly includes the provision of cultural, entertainment, educational, and athletic services, other than those classified as community facilities, to large groups of assembled spectators and/or participants (500 or more) or that have a substantial potential impact upon adjoining property. 
Amusement parks 
Commercial resorts 
Commercial sports arenas and playing fields 
Race tracks (auto, motorcycle, dog, and horse) 
p.  Medical and professional services. Medical and professional services include the provision of therapeutic, preventive, or corrective personal treatment services by physicians, dentists, and other practitioners, as well as testing and analysis and the offices of various other professionals, the service of which is provided in an office environment. 
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services 
Artist studios (excluding commercial artists) 
Attorneys and law offices 
Chiropractor offices 
Consulting scientists 
Dental offices and laboratories 
Educational and scientific research services 
Engineering and architectural services 
Optometrists 
Physicians' offices and clinics (outpatient services) 
Physiologists and psychotherapists 
Songwriters and music arrangers 
Urban planning services 
Writers and lecturers 
q.  Transient habitation. Transient habitation includes the provision of lodging services to transient guests, having at least 70 percent of its accommodation available on a less-than-weekly basis, other than those classified as residential activities. 
Commercial campgrounds 
Hotels 
Motels 
Tourist courts 
r.  Transport and warehousing. Transport and warehousing include the provision of warehousing, storage, freight handling, shipping, and trucking services. 
Bus and truck maintenance and repair 
Food lockers 
General warehousing 
Household goods storage 
Packing and creating services 
Railroad, bus and transient terminals 
Refrigerated warehousing 
Truck terminals freight handling services 
s.  Undertaking services. Undertaking services include the provision of undertaking and funeral services involving the care and preparation of the human deceased prior to burial. 
Funeral and crematory services 
t.  Vehicular, craft, and related equipment. Vehicular, craft, and related equipment includes the retail or wholesale sale or rental from the premises of vehicular and related equipment with incidental maintenance. 
Boat and motor dealers 
Mobile home dealers 
Motor vehicle dealers 
Motorcycle dealers 
Recreational vehicle and utility trailer dealers 
u.  Wholesale sales. Wholesale sales include the storage and sale from the premises of goods to other firms for resale, as well as the storage of goods and their transfer to retail outlets; but exclude sale or storage of motor vehicles, except for parts and accessories. These would include such uses as: 
Apparel, piece goods, and notions 
Beer, wine and distilled alcoholic beverages 
Chemicals and allied products 
Drugs, drug proprietaries, and sundries 
Electrical goods and appliances 
Farm products raw materials 
Farm supplies 
Furniture and home furnishings 
Groceries and related products 
Hardware, plumbing, and heating equipment and supplies 
Lumber and other construction materials 
Machinery, equipment, and supplies 
Metals and minerals 
Motor vehicles and automotive parts and supplies 
Paper and paper products 
Petroleum and petroleum products 
Sporting, recreational, photographic, and hobby goods 
Tobacco and tobacco products 
Toys and supplies 
v.  Adult entertainment/sexually oriented businesses. 
1.  Intent and limitations. This grouping is intended to include all adult-oriented business and activities defined by this chapter. This grouping includes all facilities wherein material is presented or exhibited which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
2.  Use listing. 
Adult arcade 
Adult bookstore 
Adult minimotion picture theater 
Adult motion picture theater 
Adult escort services 
Body piercing parlors 
Nontherapeutic massage parlors 
Tattoo establishments 
(6)  Manufacturing activities. Manufacturing activities include the on-site production of goods by methods other than agricultural or extractive in nature. 
a.  Limited manufacturing activities. Limited manufacturing activities include the following operations: 
1.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging, treatment, or fabrication of the following products: 
Apparel and accessories 
Art objects 
Bakery goods 
Beverages 
Dairy products 
Instruments for scientific, medical, dental, engineering, and other professional purposes 
Optical instruments and lens 
Printed matter 
Signs 
2.  Activities and operations which include the following: 
Book binding 
Data processing service 
Photocopying 
Photoengraving 
Precision machining of dies, jigs, and fixtures 
Printing 
Publishing 
Record pressing 
Upholstering 
Welding 
b.  Intermediate manufacturing activities. Intermediate manufacturing activities include the following: 
1.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging, treatment or fabrication of products, except for the following: 
Cotton seed oil 
Explosives 
Fireworks 
Organic fertilizers 
2.  Other activities and operations, except for the following: 
Abrasive, asbestos, and nonmetallic mineral processing 
Arsenals 
Asphaltic cement plants 
Atomic reactors 
Automobile wrecking yards, scrap and waste materials 
Cement and/or concrete plants 
Chemical manufacturing in excess of one ton per day 
Cotton ginning 
Fat rendering 
Foundries 
Grain milling 
Junkyards 
Offal processing 
Ore reduction 
Paper mills 
Petroleum refining 
Pulp manufacturing 
Rolling and finishing of ferrous materials 
Slaughtering of animals 
Smelting and refining of metals and alloys 
Steel works (other than those listed) 
Tanning 
c.  Extensive manufacturing activities. Extensive manufacturing activities include all intermediate manufacturing activities (described in subsection (6)b.1 of this section) and the exceptions listed in subsection (6)b.2 of this section, except as follows: 
Arsenals 
Atomic reactors 
Explosives manufacturing and storage 
Fireworks manufacturing 
Hazardous wastes storage and/or transfer 
Radioactive waste handling 
Solid waste landfills 
Solid waste processing and recycling 
Waste incinerators, including hospital and medical waste 
The exceptions of subsection (6)b.3 of this section may be defined to be included within the extensive manufacturing classification only after proper review by the board of appeals. 
(7)  Agricultural, resources production, and extractive activities. 
a.  Agricultural services. Agricultural services include various activities designed to provide needed services for agricultural uses and are appropriately located in close proximity thereto. 
Crop drying, storage, and processing 
Crop planting, cultivating, and protection services 
Horticultural services 
Livery stables 
Riding stables 
Soil preparation services 
b.  Commercial feed lots and stockyards. Commercial feed lots and stockyards include facilities and operations involved in the storage and feeding (other than pasture grazing) of animals for resale or slaughter. 
c.  Crop and animal raising. Crop and animal raising includes the raising of tree, vine, field, forage, and other plant crops intended to provide food or fiber, as well as keeping, grazing, or feeding animals for animal products, animal increase, or value increase, but specifically excluding commercial feed lots and facilities for the processing, packaging, or treatment of agricultural products. 
Dairies 
Farms 
Raising of plants, animals, and fish 
Truck gardens 
d.  Mining, drilling and quarrying. Mining, drilling and quarrying includes drilling operations and facilities either utilized by, or in support of the extraction of minerals, ores, petroleum, and natural gas or in the quarrying and collection of stone, gravel, sand, clay, and other nonmetallic minerals. 
Chemical fertilizer and nonmetallic mineral mining 
Clay, ceramic, and refactory minerals 
Coal mining 
Crude petroleum and natural gas production 
Metal ore and mineral mining 
Sand and gravel quarrying 
Stone quarrying 
e.  Plant and forest nurseries. Plant and forest nurseries includes the cultivation for sale of horticultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, and trees, intended for ornamental, landscaping, or tree planting purposes. 
Forest nursery 
Plant nursery 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-203, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 17-681, Exh. A, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 90-9. - Scope of chapter provisions. 
    No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-301, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-10. - Only one principal structure on any residential lot. 
    Only one principal structure and its accessory structures may hereafter be erected on any residential lot. This section does not prohibit planned development complexes as permitted under section 90-312, multifamily dwellings or mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-302, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-11. - Lot must abut a public street. 
    No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least one publicly maintained road or permanent easement for at least 50 feet. This requirement shall not apply to lots in residential districts abutting a cul-de-sac, which shall abut the public road for at least 40 radial feet. When a permanent easement to a publicly maintained road is used for access to a lot or tract of land having been separated by deed from other acreage, such easement shall not be used to provide access to an additional lot or tract, or be a part of the required road frontage; unless: 
(1)  The developer declares a subdivision; 
(2)  A road, and all other requirements pertinent thereto are constructed so as to meet the city subdivision regulations; 
(3)  The developer dedicates all public improvements to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-303, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 02-403, § 1, 3-19-2002) 
Sec. 90-12. - Reduction in lot area. 
(a)  No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(b)  No part of any yard or other open space or automobile storage area or loading or unloading space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter shall be considered as providing such space similarly required for any other structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-304, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-13. - Rear yard abutting a public street. 
    When the rear yard of a lot abuts a public street, all structures built in that rear yard shall observe the same setback as required for adjacent properties which front on that street. In addition, any structure located within 25 feet of that setback line shall be no closer to any side property line than the distance required for side yards on adjoining properties fronting on that street. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-305, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-14. - Corner lots. 
    The side yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same as the front setback requirements for the next adjacent lot fronting on the street that the side yard of the corner lot faces. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-306, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-15. - Future street line. 
    For the purpose of providing adequate space for the future widening of streets, required setbacks, or front yards, shall be determined by the right-of-way as shown on the latest official city major thoroughfare plan. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-307, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-16. - Obstruction to vision at street intersection. 
    In all districts, on a corner lot within the area formed by the centerlines of intersecting street and a line joining points on such centerlines at a distance of 90 feet from their intersection, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of 31/2 feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street at the centerline thereof. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining walls. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-308, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-17. - Access control. 
    In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict by reducing the points of contact, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  A point of access for vehicles onto a street shall not exceed 30 feet in width. In nonresidential districts, vehicular service uses may be permitted points of access exceeding 30 feet, but not exceeding 40 feet in width, provided that they do not exceed 50 percent of their respective street frontage. All points of access shall be so constructed as to provide for proper drainage. 
(2)  There shall be no more than two points of access to any one public street for each 400 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided, however, that lots less than 100 feet in width shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. 
(3)  No point of access shall be allowed within 20 feet of the curbline (or road line when there is no curb) of a public intersection. 
(4)  No curbs on city streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered without approval of the city street superintendent, or if a state highway, a permit must be obtained from the state department of transportation. 
(5)  Where two driveways are provided for one lot frontage, the clear distance between the driveways shall not be less than 25 feet. 
(6)  Cases requiring variances relative to the provisions of this section due to topographic limitations shall be heard and acted upon by the board of zoning appeals; provided, further, that no curb cuts for off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be permitted where the arrangement would require that vehicles back directly into a public street. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-309, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-18. - Accessory use regulations. 
    The use of land, buildings, and other structures permitted in each of the districts established by this chapter are designed by listing the principal uses. In addition to such principal uses, accessory uses which are customarily incidental to the permitted principal uses are also permitted in each district. Each accessory use shall: 
(1)  Be customarily incidental to the principal use established on the same lot. 
(2)  Be subordinate to and serve such principal use. 
(3)  Be subordinate in area, intent, and purpose to such principal use. 
(4)  Contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of users of such principal use. 
(5)  An accessory structure on any residential lot shall comply with the provisions set forth in section 90-174, Design review standards. 
(6)  Farm-type structures, as permitted in section 90-174, shall be allowed without having a principal residential structure on the parcel. Farm-type structures may be used as standalone structures. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-310, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 00-364, § 1, 11-21-2000; Ord. No. 03-427, § 2, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 05-471, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 14-626, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 90-19. - Buffer strips. 
(a)  Where a use is established in areas zoned commercial or industrial which abuts at any point upon property zoned residential, the developer of such use shall provide a landscaped buffer strip of no less than 25 feet in width at the point of abutment. 
(b)  Furthermore, there shall be installed around the rear of all drive-in restaurants, a four-foot fence designed to catch all litter or trash generated on the site, unless specific conditions deem otherwise as determined in a hearing by the board of zoning appeals. 
(c)  The owner, or his agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials and barriers as may be required by the provisions of this section. All plant material shall be tended and maintained in a healthy growing condition, replaced when necessary and kept free of refuse and debris. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-311, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-20-90-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-51. - Administration of chapter. 
    Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be used and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or moved unless in conformity with the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the community. Where other ordinances, resolutions, or regulations heretofore adopted or which may be adopted hereafter impose greater restrictions than those specified in this chapter, compliance with such other ordinances, resolutions, or regulations is mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-701, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-52. - Enforcement officer. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city building inspector. In performance of administering and enforcing this chapter, he shall: 
(1)  Issue all building permits and make and maintain records thereof. 
(2)  Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof. 
(3)  Issue and renew, where applicable, all temporary use permits and make and maintain records thereof. 
(4)  Maintain and keep current zoning maps and records of amendments thereto. 
(5)  Receive, file and forward to the board of zoning appeals all applications for variances or other matters on which the board of zoning appeals is required to act under the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Conduct inspections as required in this chapter and such other inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the various other general provisions of this chapter. The building inspector shall posses the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his authorized duties. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-702, 4-20-1999) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 90-53. - Building permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures, to commence the moving, alteration, or repair of any structure, or to commence the filling of land without a permit therefore, issued by the building inspector. If such excavation or construction is begun without a proper building permit the building permit fee shall be double or twice the original cost of the permit if legal compliance had been obtained as is required. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, unless there is received a written order from the board of zoning appeals in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or variance as provided by this chapter. 
(1)  Application. Application for a building permit shall be made in writing to the building inspector on forms provided for that purpose. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plan or a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, and showing the following: 
a.  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
b.  The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of buildings or other structures already on the lot and the elevation of the building site. 
c.  The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures. 
d.  Location and design of off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas, and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(2)  Site plan requirements. Site plans containing the information required for the particular use by this section must be submitted to the building inspector at the time of an application for a building permit. It is specifically anticipated that the approval process for one-family and two-family detached houses and individual mobile homes shall be administratively approved by the building inspector. All other uses shall only be approved in the manner set forth in subsection (b)(2)b of this section. 
a.  Site plans required for one-family and two-family detached houses and individual mobile homes. 
1.  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
2.  The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of buildings or other structures already on the lot and the elevation of the building site. 
3.  The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures, upon it, including the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
4.  The size and location of all yards and open areas required by this chapter. 
5.  The dimension and location of all public water and sewer lines from which the property is to be served. 
6.  The location and approximate dimension of all points of access to a public street or road. 
7.  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
8.  Where subsoil sewage disposal is anticipated, certification from the county health department approving the lot for such use. 
b.  Site plans required for all other buildings and activities. This procedure is to be utilized for all buildings and activities, except those subject to the provisions of subsection (b)(2)a of this section. Unless otherwise specified, the reviewing agency shall be the city planning commission. Proposals for planned developments and mobile home parks shall follow separate provisions outlined elsewhere in this chapter, but such proposals shall also be reviewed by the planning commission. The following information shall be included in the site plan: 
1.  General location sketch map at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet, showing: 
i.  The approximate boundaries of the site. 
ii.  External (public access streets or roads in relation to the site). 
iii.  Surrounding development (i.e., general residential, commercial, and industrial areas) within the general vicinity of the site. 
iv.  Any public water and sewer systems in relation to site. 
2.  Site plan drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet, showing: 
i.  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot. 
ii.  The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures already on the lot. 
iii.  The existing and intended use of the lot and of such structures upon it, including, for residential activities, the number of dwelling units the buildings are intended to accommodate. 
iv.  Topographic features, both existing and proposed, with contours at a vertical, interval no greater than five feet. 
v.  Location of all driveways and entrances. 
vi.  Location of all accessory off-street parking areas to include a plan showing design and layout of such parking facilities where five or more accessory off-street parking spaces are to be provided (dimensions shall be shown). 
vii.  Location of all accessory off-street loading berths. 
viii.  Location of open space. 
ix.  Proposed ground coverage, floor area, and building heights. 
x.  Position of fences and walls to be utilized for screening (materials specified). 
xi.  Position of screen planting (type of planting specified). 
xii.  Proposed means of surface drainage, including all drainageways and facilities. 
xiii.  Location of all easements and rights-of-way. 
xiv.  Location of areas subject to flooding. 
xv.  Location and size of all utilities, including all fire hydrants. 
xvi.  Location, type, and size of proposed signs. 
3.  The planning commission as the reviewing body may: 
i.  Recommend approval of the plan as submitted to the building inspector. 
ii.  Recommend disapproval of the plan. 
iii.  Recommend approval of the plan with conditions or recommendations for alterations. 
If no actual construction has begun in the development within one year from the date of approval of the site plan, such approval of the site plan shall lapse and be of no further effect. 
(3)  Fee. The board of commissioners shall establish a schedule of fees and a collection procedure for building permits. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the building inspector and city hall. Only the board of commissioners may alter or amend the fee schedule. Until the appropriate fee has been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application. 
(4)  Issuance of permit. If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall issue a building permit for such excavation or construction. If an application for a building permit is not approved, the building inspector shall state in writing on the application the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as a waiving of any provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Construction progress. Building permits issued shall become invalid and expire one calendar year after issuance, unless extended as provided below. When a permit expires, all site work must stop. Before work may continue on the project, a new building permit must be obtained through application and payment of fees based on the most current permit fee schedule. 
a.  Permit extensions. All site work must stop upon the expiration date of the permit. If, in the opinion of the codes administrator, or designee, progress toward project completion is continuing, extensions to the original building permit expiration date may be granted. Such extensions shall be in intervals not to exceed 180 days each and must be requested as outline below: 
1.  An application for an extension must be filed within 60 days of the expiration of the building permit in question. Note: All site work must stop upon the expiration date of the permit. To prevent interruption of site activity, approval for an extension must be received prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to obtain an extension will require application for a new building permit and payment of new permit fees. 
2.  The application for an extension is considered filed when it is delivered in writing to the Codes Administrator and contains: 
i.  A full explanation detailing the need for an extension of the permit. 
ii.  A projected completion date for the project. 
iii.  Pictures of the current work completed and in progress. 
iv.  All current contact information for the developer, builder, and landowner. 
If the permit extension is approved, an amended permit sign, indicating the extended expiration date, will be issued for posting at the construction site. 
b.  Permit extension fees. Approved permit expiration date extensions shall be subject to the following fees: 
1.  There shall be no fee for the first or second granted extension. 
2.  Application for each subsequent extension must be made prior to the expiration date of the existing extension and shall be subject to a permit fee equaling one-half of the original building permit fee. 
c.  Indefinite construction. If, through the expiration of a building permit and the apparent abandonment of a project, it is the opinion of the codes administrator that a project will never be finished, or, will not be finished in a time frame which would prevent an ongoing safety, health, or environmental hazard, including surrounding property devaluation, the city may move towards condemnation and/or abatement of the site in question. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-703, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 04-449, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 07-513, § 1, 821-2007) 
Sec. 90-54. - Temporary use permits. 
    It shall be unlawful to commence construction or development of any use of a temporary nature unless a permit has been obtained from the city building inspector, as provided for in section 90-431. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made in writing to the building inspector on the form provided for that purpose. A schedule of fees shall be established by the board of commissioners. Such schedule shall be posted in the office of the building inspector and city hall. Until the appropriate fee has been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-704, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-55. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be used until the building inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land, structure, or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Within three days after notification that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or premises or part thereof is found to conform with provisions of this chapter, or, if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause for such refusal. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-705, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-56. - Board of zoning appeals. 
    In accordance with T.C.A. § 13-7-205, a board of zoning appeals for the city shall be established as follows: 
(1)  Name. The entity established by this section shall be known as the board of zoning appeals. 
(2)  Number. The board of zoning appeals shall consist of five members. The board of commissioners shall fix the compensation for the members serving on the board of zoning appeals. 
(3)  Appointment. The appointments to the board of zoning appeals shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Terms of office. Pursuant to T.C.A. § 13-7-205, the terms of the members of the board of zoning appeals shall be such length and so arranged that the term of one member shall expire each year. 
(5)  Vacancies. The replacement or renaming of a member of the board of zoning appeals shall be in accordance with subsection (2) of this section, with the further requirement that the board of commissioners and the general public shall be notified of such vacancy or expired term seven days prior to anyone being nominated and approved to fill such vacancy. Upon notification of such vacancy, the board of commissioners and the general public may submit names to the mayor for his consideration to serve on the board of zoning appeals. Notification to the general public may consist of posting a notice of vacancy on the city hall door. 
(Ord. No. 01-371, §§ 1-5, 2-20-2001) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 90-57. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to modify the strict application of the specific requirements of this chapter in the case of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the zoning regulation, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any regulation enacted under this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exception or undue hardship upon the owner of such property. The variance shall be used only where necessary to overcome some obstacle which is preventing an owner from using his property under this chapter. 
(b)  Application. After written denial of a permit, a property owner may make application for a variance, using any form which might be made available by the board of zoning appeals. 
(c)  Hearings. Upon receipt of an application and fee, the board of zoning appeals shall hold a hearing to decide whether a variance to the chapter provisions is, in fact, necessary to relieve unnecessary hardships which act to deprive the property owner of the reasonable use of his land. The board of zoning appeals shall consider and decide all applications for variances within 30 days of such hearing and in accordance with the standards provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Fee. A fee shall be charged to cover the review and processing of each application for variance, except that the fee shall be waived for a governmental agency. Fees shall be set by the governing body in the form of a resolution. 
(e)  Standards for variances. The board of zoning appeals shall not grant a variance, except where special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings of the board, do not apply generally in the district. The burden of showing that the variance should be granted shall be upon the person applying for the variance. In granting a variance, the board shall ascertain that the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The particular physical surroundings, shape, topographic conditions of the specific property involved that would result in a particular hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict application of this chapter were carried out must be stated. 
(2)  The conditions upon which the petition for a variance is based would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the same district. 
(3)  The granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other land structures, or buildings in the same district. 
(4)  Financial returns only shall not be considered as a basis for granting a variance. 
(5)  The variance is the minimum variance that will relieve such difficulties or hardship and thereby make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
(6)  The variance will not authorize activities otherwise excluded from the particular district in which requested. 
(7)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare, injurious to other property or improvements in the area in which the subject property is located, or a substantial impairment to the intent and purpose of the zoning district wherein such property is located or of the general provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety. 
(9)  That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been knowingly and intentionally created by any person having an interest in the property after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(f)  Restrictions and variances. 
(1)  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(2)  Under no circumstances shall the board of zoning appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in such district. 
(3)  The board of zoning appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the provisions set out in subsection (d) of this section, to reduce or minimize the injurious effect to such variation upon surrounding property and better carry out the general intent of this chapter. The board of zoning appeals may establish expiration dates as a condition or as a part of any variances. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-707, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 16-655, Att. A, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 90-58. - Procedure for authorizing special exceptions. 
(a)  Generally. The procedure described in this section is established to provide procedures for review of a proposed use as a conditional use or special exception by the board of zoning appeals. The procedure shall be the same whether review is required under T.C.A. § 13-7-206, by this chapter, or whether a review is requested by the building inspector to determine whether a proposed use is potentially noxious, dangerous or offensive. 
(b)  Application. An application shall be filed with the board of zoning appeals for review. Such application shall show the location and intended uses of the site, the names of the property owners, existing land uses within 200 feet, and any other material pertinent to the request which the board of zoning appeals may require. 
(c)  General requirements. A conditional use permit (a special exception) shall be granted, provided that the board of zoning appeals finds that it: 
(1)  Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated so that the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected. 
(2)  Will not adversely affect other property in the area in which it is located. 
(3)  Is within the provision of special exceptions as set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  Conforms to all applicable provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is to be located as well as the provisions cited in this section, necessary for public convenience in the location planned. 
(d)  Criteria for review. Prior to the issuance of a special exception, the board of zoning appeals shall make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual special exceptions (this section), and that satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning all the following, where applicable: 
(1)  Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe. 
(2)  Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in subsection (d)(1) of this section, and the economic, noise, vibrations, glare, or odor effects of the special exception on or by adjoining properties and properties generally in or near the district. 
(3)  Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility. 
(5)  Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and character. 
(6)  Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic, safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district. 
(7)  Required yard and other open space. 
(8)  General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district. 
(e)  Restrictions. In the exercise of its approval, the board of zoning appeals may impose such conditions upon the proposed uses of buildings or land as it may deem advisable in the furtherance of the general purposes of this chapter. 
(f)  Validity of plans. All approved plans, conditions, restrictions, and rules made a part of the approval of the board of zoning appeals shall constitute certification on the part of applicant that the proposed use shall conform to such regulations at all times. 
(g)  Time limit. All applications reviewed by the board of zoning appeals shall be decided within 30 days of the date of application, and the applicant shall be provided with either a written notice of approval or denial. 
(h)  Special exceptions appeals. Any person or agency of the county government may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction from the board of zoning appeals' decision as provided under state statutes. The judgment and findings of the board of zoning appeals on all questions of fact that may be involved in any appeal, cause, hearing or proceeding under this chapter shall be final, and subject to review only for illegality or want of jurisdiction. A fee shall be charged to cover review and processing of each application for a special exception. Fees shall be set by the governing body in the form of a resolution. 
(i)  Specific standards for residential activities; special conditions for multifamily dwellings and mobile home park activities. A special exception shall not be granted for the residential activities specified as follows unless the standards established there are met as a part of the conditions for issuing such permit in the applicable zone districts: In addition to the standards contained elsewhere in this chapter for these type developments, the board of zoning appeals shall specifically find that there will be no adverse impact upon adjoining properties or the neighborhood in which such use is proposed. In making this finding, the board of zoning appeals shall consider the effect upon traffic congestion, overcrowding of schools availability of necessary public utilities, and character of adjoining structures, and suitability of the site for the use and such other factors as the board may deem necessary. 
(j)  Specific standards for community facility activities. In addition to the requirements of the applicable district and the general requirements set forth in this section, a special exception shall be granted for the community facility activities specified as follows only when the standards established are met as part of the condition for issuing the permit in the applicable zoning district: 
(1)  Special conditions for administrative services. 
a.  There must be a demonstrated need for such activities to serve the neighborhood or the total community. 
b.  All lot, yard, and bulk regulations of the zone district shall apply. 
c.  Appropriate off-street parking requirements shall apply. 
d.  Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be provided as appropriate to protect surrounding properties and reduce any potential adverse impact. 
e.  The site and architectural plans shall be approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  Day care facilities. For purposes of this chapter day care facilities are classified into two types defined as follows: 
a.  Day care home. Day care home includes day care in an occupied residence of not more than seven children including children living in the home. 
b.  Day care center. Day care center includes day care for more than seven preteenage children in any kind of building. 
1.  Day care home. 
i.  The required lot size, yard, and bulk regulations of the district shall apply. No variances shall be permitted for lots on which such use is to be located. 
ii.  All public utilities and sanitary sewers shall be available and connected to the site unless the site is over one acre in size. The fire department shall approve the facility for safety. 
iii.  All requirements of the state that pertain to the use shall be met. 
iv.  An outdoor play area of at least 200 square feet per child in size shall be available and shall be fenced. 
v.  The facility shall be located so as to be compatible with the surrounding area and provide safety to those using the facility. 
vi.  Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be provided as appropriate to protect the surrounding area. 
2.  Day care center. 
i.  All bulk and setback regulations of the district shall be met. 
ii.  One accessory off-street parking space for each five children accommodated in the child care facility shall be provided. 
iii.  Special passenger loading and unloading facilities shall be provided on the same zone lot for vehicles to pick up or deliver passengers. Such facilities shall provide for driveways that do not require any backup movements by vehicles to enter or exit the zone lot. 
iv.  All regulations of the state that pertain to the use shall be met. 
v.  The facility shall be located so as to be compatible with the surrounding area and provide safety to those using such facility. 
vi.  Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be provided as appropriate to protect the surrounding area. 
vii.  The site and architectural plans of such a facility shall be approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (j)(2)b as well as any other pertinent factors. 
(3)  Special conditions for all other personal and group care activities. 
a.  No such facility shall be permitted on a zone lot unless it contains a minimum of one acre. 
b.  All bulk regulations of the district shall be met. 
c.  The requirements of the accessory off-street parking regulations of this chapter shall apply. 
d.  All regulations of the state shall be met. 
e.  All public utilities and sewage disposal shall be available and connected to the site, and the site and architectural plans for such a facility be approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (j)(3) as well as any other pertinent factors. 
(4)  Special conditions for community assembly. 
a.  No such facilities shall be permitted on a lot unless it contains one acre; provided, however, that if such community assembly includes outdoor activities, the minimum lot area shall be four acres. 
b.  All bulk regulations of the zone district shall apply. 
c.  Off-street parking: 
1.  For nonprofit clubs, lodges, meeting halls and recreation centers, one space for each four seats in an assembly area within the facility, or one space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, shall be provided. 
2.  For temporary nonprofit festivals, the required number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined by the board of zoning appeals, taking into account the traffic generation of such facility, the hours of other such factors as affect the need for off-street parking. 
d.  Except for temporary nonprofit festivals fencing, screening and landscaping shall be provided as appropriate for such facility, except that no landscaped screen shall be located closer than 15 feet of any vehicular entrance or exit to the property. 
e.  The location and operation of such community assembly facility shall be in keeping with the character of the surrounding area and shall not adversely affect the properties within the surrounding area. 
f.  All public utilities and sewage disposal shall be available and connected to the site. 
Except for temporary nonprofit festivals, the site and/or architectural plans shall first be approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (j)(4). 
(5)  Special conditions for cultural and recreational services. 
a.  No such activity shall be permitted on a zone lot unless it contains twice the lot area requirements of the district. 
b.  All bulk regulations of the district shall apply. 
c.  The off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall apply. 
d.  Fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be provided as appropriate to protect the surrounding area and shall not have an adverse affect on properties within the surrounding area. 
e.  The location and operation of such facility shall be in keeping with the character of the surrounding area and shall not have an adverse affect on properties within the surrounding area. 
f.  The site and architectural plans shall first be approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (j)(5). 
(6)  Special conditions for community education. 
a.  No such facilities shall be permitted on a zone lot unless such lot contains the acreage recommended for such facilities by the appropriate state agency. 
b.  The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely accommodated along the streets which will provide access to the site. 
c.  The location and design of such facilities shall not have an adverse effect upon surrounding properties. 
d.  The off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall apply. 
(7)  Special conditions for health care. 
a.  Minimum lot area: 
1.  No health clinic shall be permitted on a zone lot unless it contains twice the lot area requirements of the district. 
2.  No hospitals, or centers for observation or rehabilitation shall be permitted on a zone lot unless it contains a minimum of five acres. 
b.  The minimum side and rear yards for hospitals and centers for observation or rehabilitation shall be 50 feet for a one- or two-story building, increased by five feet for each story above two. 
c.  All other regulations of the district shall apply. 
d.  There shall be provided along the entire site boundaries fencing, screening, and landscaping as appropriate to protect the surrounding residential area. 
e.  The location and operation of such facility shall be in keeping with the character of the surrounding area and shall not have an adverse effect on the properties in the surrounding area. 
f.  All public utilities and sewage disposal shall be available and connected to the site. 
g.  The site and/or architectural plans shall first be approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (j)(7). 
h.  The following activity classes and types may be permitted accessory to the health care activities, provided that they appropriately complement the health care activity, will not impose an adverse impact on the surrounding land use, and be subject to all other provisions of the zoning district: 
1.  Community facility activities. 
2.  Commercial activities: 
Convenience sales and services 
Automotive parking 
Food service 
Medical service 
(8)  Special conditions for intermediate and extensive impact. 
a.  The location, size, and design of such facilities shall be such that the proposed development shall be compatible with the development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the impact upon the surrounding area. 
b.  The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely accommodated along major arterials or collectors without traversing local minor streets. 
c.  The proposed facility shall provide a basic community function or essential service necessary for a convenient and functional living environment in order to be located on the proposed site. 
d.  The off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the board of zoning appeals taking into account characteristics of the use. 
e.  The site plan for such facilities shall be approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (j)(8) as well as any other pertinent factors related to the use and operation of such facility. 
(9)  Special conditions for essential public transport, communication, and utility services. 
a.  The location of such facility shall be within an area in order to provide the most efficient service to the community. 
b.  All of the bulk regulations of the zone district shall apply. 
c.  The location of such facility shall not materially increase traffic on surrounding streets. 
d.  The location of such a facility shall not have an adverse effect on surrounding properties. 
e.  There shall be provided along the entire site boundaries fencing, screening, and landscaping, as appropriate to protect the surrounding residential area. 
f.  The site plan for such facility is first approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (j)(9) as well as any other pertinent factors. 
(10)  Special conditions for religious facilities. 
a.  No such facilities shall be permitted on a zone lot unless it contains one acre. 
b.  The location, size, and design of such facilities shall be situated so that the proposed facility shall be compatible with the development within the surrounding area thus reducing the impact upon such area. 
c.  All bulk regulations of the district shall be met. 
d.  The off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall apply. 
(k)  Specific standards for commercial activities. A special exception shall not be granted for the commercial activities specified as follows unless the standards established therein are met as a part of the conditions for issuing such permit in the applicable districts: 
(1)  Special conditions for group assembly activities. 
a.  The location, size, and design of such facilities shall be situated so that the proposed development shall be compatible with the development within the surrounding area thus reducing the impact upon the surrounding area. 
b.  The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely accommodated along major streets without traversing local minor streets. 
c.  The off-street parking requirements shall be based on the type of use and the needs of the use to adequately accommodate the expected groups of people. 
d.  The site plan for such facilities shall be approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (k)(1) as well as any other pertinent factors related to the use and operation of such facilities. 
e.  When an application for a group assembly permit includes amusement parks, sports arenas, fairgrounds, racetracks, and similar recreational pursuits, the following requirements shall be observed: 
1.  The minimum size site shall be 25 acres. 
2.  The minimum setbacks of all structures from all public roads shall be 100 feet. 
3.  Such facility shall be situated so that no residential use is located closer than 500 feet from building entrance of the principal use at the time of approval. 
4.  Access to such facility shall be by a paved road and such road shall be either a major arterial or major collector. Traffic shall not be directed through residential subdivisions or on minor residential streets. 
5.  Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum of one space for each four patrons or seats. For those facilities which are not utilized on a regular and frequent basis, parking may be provided on adjacent parcels of land provided further that any parcel so used is located no more than 500 feet from the lot boundary. 
6.  Any lighting provided at such facilities shall be designed so that no direct light falls on adjacent residential property. 
7.  Accessory uses may be permitted in conjunction with the principal use of the property provided that such uses are physically designed as a part of or within the principal structure. Such uses may include food sales, beverage sales, gift or souvenir shops, and similar activities. 
8.  Accessory structures may be permitted which are incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. Such structures may not be located within any required setback or buffer areas. 
(l)  Specific standards for agricultural and extractive activities. A special exception permit shall not be granted for the agricultural and extractive activity specified as follows unless the standards established therein are met as a part of the conditions for issuing such permit in the applicable zone districts: 
(1)  Special conditions for mining and quarrying activities. 
a.  The location of such an activity shall be in an area sparsely developed during the length of time the mining or quarrying activity is anticipated. 
b.  Any permit issued under this subsection (l) shall be based on a site plan or other documents submitted with an application which shall provide for the following: 
1.  Existing contours of the site and up to 100 feet beyond the site boundary. Contour intervals shall be at two-foot intervals. 
2.  Location of the area in which the proposed quarrying activity is to be conducted. 
3.  Location of all proposed buildings, crusher and screening equipment, roadways and other facilities proposed on the site. 
4.  Proposed method of drainage of the quarry area. 
5.  Proposed fencing of the quarry area. Fencing shall be provided around all open excavations. 
6.  Methods proposed for blasting. Open blasting commonly referred to as "pop shots" shall be prohibited. 
7.  Methods proposed to control noise, vibration and other particulate matter. 
8.  Finished contours of the site after the quarrying operation has been terminated. The site shall be graded and/or filled so as to be in substantial conformity with the topography of the surrounding lands. All fill material shall be nontoxic, nonflammable, and noncombustible solids. All areas that are backed-filled shall be left so that adequate drainage is provided. 
c.  Approval for mining and quarrying activity may also include accessory concrete batching plants, asphaltic cement mixing plants and/or rock crushing activities on the same zone lot or adjoining zone lots which may have directly opposing frontages on the same public street. If such accessory activities are included on the quarry site, the total site must meet all the special condition requirements for mining and quarrying activities; however, in conditions of multiple zone lots, the outer perimeter of the site shall be considered the lot line. 
d.  Before issuing a permit the board of zoning appeals shall require the owner of the quarry facility to execute a bond in an amount to be determined by the planning commission per acre of active quarry throughout a five-year period to restore the lands in the manner prescribed in this section, including the removal of all structures and machinery. 
e.  Any permit issued under this subsection (l) shall not be for a period exceeding five years. After the expiration date of such special permit, the board may review and grant an extension of time in the manner and procedure as prescribed for an original application. 
f.  The site plan is first approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (l)(1) as well as any other factors related to the use and operation of such facilities. 
(2)  Special conditions for commercial storage of explosives. 
a.  The location of such an activity is in an area likely to be sparsely developed for reason of topography, lack of existing or planned utilities, accessibility or for similar cause. 
b.  Such facility shall not be located on a site having an area of less than 50 acres. 
c.  All regulations of the state fire marshal relating to the storage of explosives shall be met. 
d.  Any special permit issued under this subsection (l)(2) shall be for a period not exceeding five years. After the expiration date of such special permit, the board of zoning appeals may review and grant an extension of time in the same manner and procedure as prescribed for an original application. 
e.  The site plan is first approved by the planning commission taking into account the conditions of this subsection (l)(2) as well as any other factors related to the use of such facilities. 
(m)  Specific standards for intermediate manufacturing activities. 
(1)  Enumeration. A special exception permit shall not be granted unless the following standards are met: 
a.  The activity takes place in completely enclosed buildings with no outdoor storage of materials or finished products. 
b.  Access for heavy trucks and employees is from a major thoroughfare or industrial access road from a major thoroughfare with residential streets unaffected. 
(2)  Extensive manufacturing activities. A special exception shall not be granted unless the following standards are met: 
a.  No such facility shall be located on a lot unless such lot contains at least one acre. 
b.  Access for heavy trucks and employees is from a major thoroughfare or industrial access road from a major thoroughfare with residential streets unaffected. 
c.  State permits for air pollution standards, groundwater and emissions must be obtained and kept up-to-date. 
d.  The site plan is first approved by the planning commission taking into account factors related to the use and operation of the facility. 
(n)  Specific standards for community campgrounds. A special exception permit shall not be granted, unless the following standards are met: 
(1)  Such campground shall have on-site management. 
(2)  The campground may include convenience commercial establishments such as camp stores, laundry facilities, and personal services, provided that such convenience establishments are subordinate to the recreational character of the campground; are located, designed and intended to serve exclusively the patrons staying in the campground; have signage designed and placed for the benefit of the patrons staying in the campground and not to attract the general public; and such establishments and their parking areas shall not occupy more than ten percent of the parking area or one acre, whichever is smaller. It shall not be considered illegal for non-campsite patrons to frequent on-site commercial amenities. 
(3)  Such campground shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Minimum size: ten acres. 
b.  Maximum density: 15 campsites per gross acre. 
c.  Sanitary facilities, including flush toilets and showers: within 300 feet walking distance of each campsite. 
d.  Dump station for travel trailers. 
e.  Potable water supply: one spigot for each four campsites. 
f.  Trash receptacles shall be provided with convenient access and in view of each campsite. A central dumpster for on-site trash cans counts as a trash receptacle. 
g.  Parking: one space per campsite. 
h.  Picnic table: no less than one picnic table for every two campsites. 
i.  Reserved. 
j.  Administration or safety building: open at all times wherein a portable fire extinguisher in operable condition and first aid kit is available, and a telephone is available for public use. 
(4)  Such campground shall meet the following design requirements: 
a.  Vegetation screen or ornamental fence which will substantially screen the campsites from the view of the public right-of-way and neighboring properties shall be provided around or near the perimeter or that part of the campground containing campsites. Such vegetation or fence shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
b.  Each campground shall reserve at least 25 percent of its total area as natural open space excluding perimeter screening. Such open space may include recreation and water areas, but may not include utility areas, administration building, commercial areas, or similar activities. 
c.  Each campsite shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from any public right-of-way and meet all water quality buffer zone requirements set forth in the storm water ordinance. 
d.  Each separate campsite shall contain a minimum of 2,400 square feet. A campsite shall be considered to consist of trailer or tent space, parking space, picnic table (where applicable), and one-half of the roadway providing access. 
e.  Each campsite shall be directly accessible by an interior road. 
f.  All interior roads shall be a minimum of ten feet wide for one-way traffic and 18 feet wide for two-way traffic. 
g.  All interior roads shall meet the following curve requirements: 
1.  Minimum radius for a 90-degree turn: 40 feet. 
2.  Minimum radius for a 60-degree turn: 50 feet. 
3.  Minimum radius for a 45-degree turn: 68 feet. 
h.  No camping vehicle or camping equipment shall be used or stored in place for human habitation, or intended human habitation, for a period exceeding six consecutive months. Patrons of campsites that stay for the maximum duration shall demonstrate the road worthiness of the camping vehicle or camping equipment by completely vacating the campsite and campgrounds onto a public roadway. Nothing shall preclude the patron from immediately returning to the campsite, provided the equipment is proven roadworthy and is current on all registration, licensing and any other documentation required by all applicable jurisdictions. 
i.  All camping vehicles and camping equipment shall be maintained in road worthy condition. No accessory structures, including decks, hot tubs, storage sheds, carports and similar items may be placed or installed on any campsite. Any such placement or installation shall be construed as permanent in nature and a violation of this section and subsection (n)(4)h of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-708, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 07-524, § 1, 10-16-2007; Ord. No. 11-597, §§ 1-9, 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 16-655, Att. A, 4-4-2016) 
Sec. 90-59. - Amendments to chapter. 
(a)  The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed by the board of commissioners. Any member of the board of commissioners may introduce such legislation, or any official, board, or any other person may present a petition to the board of commissioners requesting an amendment to this chapter. 
(b)  No amendment to this chapter shall become effective unless it is first submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 60 days within which to submit its recommendation to the board of commissioners. If the planning commission disapproves the amendment, it shall require the favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership of the board of commissioners to become effective. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 60-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(c)  No change or departure from the text or maps as certified by the planning commission shall be made, unless such change or departure be first submitted to the planning commission and approved by it, or, if disapproved, received the favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Before finally adopting any such amendment, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of which shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county; and any such amendment shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the city or in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(e)  A fee of $100.00, due and payable at the time of filing of petition, shall be posted with requests to amend a provision or provisions of this chapter. The fee is to be used by the city to defray costs resulting from such petition and any subsequent amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-709, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-60. - Application for rezoning. 
    A proposed change of zoning district boundaries shall be initiated by the filings of an application with the planning commission. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and/or owners of the subject property and the written certification of any authorized agent by all the owners of record of the subject property. 
(2)  Documented consent of the proposed rezoning by all owners of record or documented direct notification of the proposed rezoning to all owners of record of the subject property. For citywide rezoning including repealing and replacing the official zoning map or substantial portions thereof, public notice shall be duly publicized in a newspaper of general circulation no less than 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  A written legal description of the subject property including the county tax plat number and acreage. 
(4)  A description of the proposed zone change, modification or repeal together with written justifications for the requested zone change. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the adjacent property owners including those property owners across streets, roads, highways, and/or railways, and waterways which border the applicant's property. 
(6)  At the option of the city, a map depicting the property requested for rezoning. These maps shall be at a scale of no less than one inch equals 100 feet and no larger than one inch equals 30 feet and show the following information: 
a.  Title, north arrow, graphic scale, date, civil district, and the acreage of the property to be rezoned. 
b.  Dimensions in feet of property to be rezoned. 
c.  All roads and easements within or adjoining property to be rezoned. 
d.  Location, size, type and current use of any building on the property requested for rezoning. 
e.  Location of the adjoining property owners in relation to the property to be rezoned. 
(7)  A fee shall be charged to cover review and processing of each application for rezoning. Fees shall be set by the governing body in the form of a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-709.1, 4-20-1999; Ord. 07-509, § 1, 8-21-2007; Ord. No. 16-655, Att. A, 4-4-2016; Ord. No. 17-687, Exh. A, 11-21-2017) 
Sec. 90-61. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
    Any persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-710, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-62. - Remedies. 
    In case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used, in violation of this chapter, the building inspector or any other appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such violation; or to prevent occupancy of such building, structure, or land. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-711, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-63. - Interpretation of chapter provisions. 
    Whenever the conditions of this chapter are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other regulation, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-713, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-64-90-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-457, § 3, Feb. 28, 2005, repealed the former Div. 2., §§ 90-81-90-87, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 98-322, §§ 11-601, 11-602, 11-602.1, 11-603-11-607, adopted April 20, 1999; and Ord. No. 01-389, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2001. 

Sec. 90-81. - Scope of division. 
    This division is devoted to providing for the necessary exceptions and modifications to the supplementary provisions and the specific zoning district provisions provided within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-457, § 3, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 90-82. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The districts established in this chapter are designed to guide the future use of land in Millersville, Tennessee, by encouraging the development of desirable residential, commercial, and industrial areas with appropriate groupings of compatible, and related uses and thus promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  To carry out such purposes, nonconforming uses which adversely affect the development of such areas must be subject to certain limitations. The provisions governing nonconforming uses set forth in this chapter are therefore established to contain the existing undesirable conditions resulting from such incompatible nonconforming uses, which are detrimental to the achievement of such purposes. While such uses are generally permitted to continue, this division is designed to restrict any expansion of such uses beyond the site which the use occupied upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(3)  In the case of buildings or other structures not complying with the bulk regulations of this chapter, the provisions governing nonconforming buildings or other structures set forth in this chapter are established in order to permit the continued use of such buildings or other structures, but to limit the creation of additional noncompliance or increase in the degree of noncompliance. 
(4)  These provisions are thus designed to preserve the character of the districts established in this chapter in light of their suitability to particular uses, and thus to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all uses which are not permitted within the districts in which they are located. Additionally, buildings and other structures located within the floodway are considered within the regulations of nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Repairs and alterations. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority. 
(2)  Subdividing lots with nonconforming uses. Subdivisions of land always create two or more new lots, all of which are subject to the classifications of the most current zoning ordinance and map. Thus, newly subdivided lots containing a nonconforming use shall not continue that use. 
(3)  Continuation of nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use which existed lawfully at the time of enactment of this ordinance, or becomes nonconforming upon the passage of a subsequent amendment and which remains nonconforming under the provisions contained herein, may be allowed to continue in operation provided that no change in use is undertaken, or in the case of residential dwellings, no expansion takes place outside the parameters of subsection (6) of this section. 
(4)  Change of nonconforming use. 
a.  General provisions. 
1.  For the purpose of this chapter, a change in use is a change to another use either under the same activity type or any other activity type or major class of activity; however, a change in occupancy or ownership shall not, by itself, constitute a change of use. 
2.  The removal, full exchange of, or demolition of a nonconforming building, structure, or dwelling shall be considered a change in use. 
3.  A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use, and the applicable bulk regulations and accessory off-street parking requirements shall apply to such change of use or to alterations made in order to accommodate such conforming use. 
b.  Nonconforming to conforming use. Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use, except under the following circumstances: 
1.  The use of the property in question is returning to residential use. 
2.  The principle residential structure and all accessory structures were originally constructed for single family residential purposes; and 
3.  The original residential structure and that which was last used for residential purposes has not been removed, exchanged or demolished; and 
4.  The original residential structure can be restored to residential use at a cost of not more than 20 percent of the county tax assessor's appraised value of the structure; and 
5.  No additional structures have been placed or built on the parcel for use in conjunction with the change to a conforming use; and 
6.  The parcel has not been rezoned or subdivided since the residential use of the property was discontinued; and 
7.  The conforming use is discontinued in its entirety; and 
8.  The parcel is not part of a designated planned commercial or planned industrial district; and 
9.  The property owner shall provide the city tax clerk an affidavit attesting to the change from a conforming use to the nonconforming residential use and that there is compliance with the stipulations enumerated in this section. 
(5)  Expansion of nonconforming uses. 
a.  General provisions. Any commercial or industrial use which shall become nonconforming upon enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived, or any subsequent amendments thereto, may be allowed to expand operations and construct additional facilities which involve an actual continuance and expansion of the nonconforming use provided that any such expansion shall not violate the provisions as set out below. Rebuilding damaged facilities shall not be considered expansion and is covered in subsection (6) of this chapter [section] below. 
b.  Expansion limited. Any expansion of a nonconforming commercial and industrial uses permitted under the provisions of this section shall take place only upon the zone lot(s) on which said use was operating at the time the use became nonconforming. Nothing within this provision shall be construed so as to permit expansion of any nonconforming use through the acquisition and development of additional land. 
c.  Adequate space for expansion. No expansion of any nonconforming use shall infringe upon, or increase the extent of any infringement existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, upon any open space required by this division. All required yard setbacks for residential, commercial, industrial parcels must be adhered to in any such expansion project. 
d.  Enlargements or conversions of dwellings. In the event the owner of any lot wishes to alter, change, or expand any nonconforming dwelling, structure, building (or portion, accessory use there to, parking lots and the like), the said owner shall apply for a building permit for the same. Provided the building administrator denies the permit, the board of zoning appeals will grant or deny the permit depending [upon] its analysis of the building permit application, based upon the following standards and considerations, and in accordance with the rules, regulations, and procedures of the BZA, as such may be amended from time to time: 
1.  Size, topography, and elevation of the lot; 
2.  Location of the proposed dwelling, structure, building (or portion, mentioned above); 
3.  The height, bulk, and composition of the proposed dwelling, structure, building (or portion thereof as mentioned above); 
4.  The proportionality of the proposed dwelling, structure, building (or portion thereof as mentioned above) to buildings or structures similarly used in the immediate area; 
5.  The visual impact upon adjoining lots, or lots in the immediate vicinity of the nonconforming lot in question; and 
6.  A determination that the renovation and restoration of the building, dwelling, structure (or portion thereof as mentioned above) is in the best interest of, and promotes the public health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the city and of the specific area in which the said restored and renovated resource is located. 
e.  Expansion upon land subject to flood. No expansion of any nonconforming use shall violate the provisions of the pertinent elements of the most recently adopted building code, and its amendments, or the Millersville Floodplain Management Program found in article III, division 5, subdivision III of this chapter. 
f.  Expansion and stormwater pollution. No expansion of any nonconforming use shall violate the provisions of the Millersville Storm Water Management Program found in Chapter 19 of the Millersville Code of Ordinances [section 4-105 of this appendix]. 
(6)  Damage or destruction. 
a.  General Provision. Any nonconforming use which shall continue as a nonconforming use after the enactment of the ordinance from which this subsection was derived, which pertains to damaged or destroyed property, or any subsequent amendments hereto, may be permitted to reconstruct a facility/building for the purpose of continuing the same nonconforming use as before the damage or destruction. A building permit must be granted by the city within one year from the damage or destruction. Failure to secure a building permit within that one-year period results in forfeiture of the nonconforming use and the parcel's development thereafter must meet the most current conforming zoning classification. 
b.  Damage or destruction of nonconforming uses. The reconstruction will not either create a new noncompliance (e.g., a new accessory building equally nonconforming), or increase the degree of noncompliance of a building or structure or parcel or portion thereof (i.e., expanding the building's footprint) without permission expressed in the "Enlargement or conversions of dwellings ((5)d. above). 
c.  Change in use prohibited. No reconstruction of damaged or destroyed facilities may occur which shall act to change the nonconforming use to other than a permitted use, or special exception sanctioned by the Millersville Board of Zoning Appeals. 
d.  Infringement upon open space restricted. No reconstruction of damaged or destroyed facilities utilized by a nonconforming use shall increase the extent of any infringement upon any open space required by this chapter. 
e.  Remediation of damaged property. Damaged properties shall undergo immediate remediation to regain compliance with public safety standards, as determined by the building inspector. 
(7)  Discontinuance. When any nonconforming use of land or the active operation of the nonconforming uses in a building or other structure or tract of land is discontinued for the maximum period allowable under the Tennessee Nonconforming Protection Act (T.C.A. 13-7-208), then the land or building or other structure shall thereafter be used only for conforming use. The city may, among other sources, use business taxation records to establish this timeline. 
a.  The intent to resume operations, whether verbally expressed, or by officially approved plans within that period shall not be considered "active operation." 
b.  The city may extend this time period based upon the submission of compelling documentation that the cause for the discontinued use and subsequent ongoing discontinuance of the use is substantially and convincingly removed from the owner's doing. 
(Ord. No. 05-457, § 3, 2-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-473, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 07-511, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 12-601, 3-20-2012; Ord. No. 14-624, 3-18-2014) 
Sec. 90-83. - Lots of record. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all existing lots of record: 
(1)  Where the owner of a lot consisting of one or more adjacent lots of official record at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the yard or other requirements of this chapter, an application may be submitted to the board of zoning appeals for a variance from the terms of this division. Such lot may be used as a building site; provided, however, that the yard and other requirements of the district are complied with as closely as possible in the opinion of the board of zoning appeals. 
(2)  No lot which is now or hereafter built upon shall be so reduced in area that the yards and open space will be smaller than prescribed by this chapter, and no yard, court, or open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions hereof, shall again be considered as a yard, court, or other open space for another building. 
(3)  Where two or more lots of record with a continuous frontage are under the same ownership, or where a substandard lot of record has continuous frontage with a larger tract under the same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one or more building sites meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 05-457, § 3, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 90-84. - Exceptions to setback requirements. 
(a)  The front setback requirement of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any undeveloped lot where the average depth of existing setbacks of the homes within 100 feet on each side of said lot is less than the minimum required front yard depth of their zoning classification. 
(b)  In such cases, the front yard setback may be less than required, but not less than the average of the existing depth for front yards on developed lots within 100 feet on each side of the lot. In residential districts, however, the setback shall in no case be less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 05-457, § 3, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 90-85. - Absolute minimum lot size. 
    In no case shall the building official or the board of zoning appeals permit any zone lot of record in a residential district to be used as a building site which is less than 4,000 square feet in total area and 30 feet in width at its narrowest point, or has a front setback of no less than 15 feet and a side and rear setback of less than five feet, with the exception of officially approved planned developments. 
(Ord. No. 05-457, § 3, 2-28-2005) 
Secs. 90-86-90-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-121. - Classification. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following zoning districts are hereby established in the city: 
Zoning District District 
Abbreviation (1) Residential districts Large lot residential district R-1 Low-density residential district R-2 Medium-density residential district R-3 Medium/high-density residential district R-4 High-density residential district R-5 Mobile home residential district R-5M (2) Commercial districts General commercial district C-1 Planned commercial center C-2 Interchange and highway commercial C-3 Commercial other C-4 (3) Industrial districts Industrial district I-1 (4) Floodplain district regulations (5 Special overlay district regulations Adult entertainment district C-5 Planned commercial district C-6 Mixed commercial and industrial developments C-I Planned residential developments R-6  
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-501, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-122. - Zoning map. 
    The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this chapter are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled, "Zoning Atlas of Millersville, Tennessee," dated, April 20, 1999. The zoning map and any amendment thereto shall be dated with the effective date of the ordinance that adopts the same. Certified prints of the adopted map and zoning map amendments shall be maintained in the office of the mayor and building inspector and shall be available for inspection by the public at all reasonable times, as long as this chapter remains in effect. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-502, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-339, 11-26-1999) 
Sec. 90-123. - Zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map amendment, the district boundaries are lot lines, centerlines of streets or alleys, as they exist at the time of the enactment of this chapter. Questions concerning the exact locations of district boundaries shall be determined by the board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived takes effect, and the major portion of such lot is in the less restricted district, the regulations relative to that district may extend as well to such portion of such lot as is not more than 100 feet within the more restricted district. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-503, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-124. - Zoning of annexed territory and rezoning. 
(a)  Annexed territory. Prior to the annexation of property, the planning commission shall recommend zoning districts to the board of commissioners, which shall assign the zoning districts by ordinance within 120 days after annexation. 
(b)  Change in zoning district. Any request for a rezoning of a zone district identified on the official zoning map shall first be considered by the planning commission which will make a recommendation to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall hold passage on the rezoning. Should the rezoning pass first reading, a public hearing shall be held on the matter after a minimum of 15 days' notice has been duly publicized in a newspaper of general circulation. No less than 15 days prior to the public hearing, a sign announcing the public hearing on the rezoning of individual parcels shall be placed on the designated property by the city. Such sign shall be removed by the city as soon as it is practical to do so after the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-504, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-339, 11-26-1999; Ord. No. 17-687, Exh. A, 11-21-2017) 
Secs. 90-125-90-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-151. - Goals and purposes. 
    The residential districts established by this chapter are designed to promote and protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and other aspects of the general welfare. These general goals include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for residential development to meet the housing needs of the city's present and expected future population, with due allowance for the need for a choice of sites and building types. 
(2)  To protect residential areas, as far as possible, against heavy traffic and against through traffic of all kinds. 
(3)  To protect residential areas against congestion, by regulating the density of population and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land around them and to one another, and by providing for off-street parking spaces. 
(4)  To require the provision of open space and a maximum conservation of natural sites in residential areas, and to encourage the provision of additional open space by permitting planned development of moderately higher density and intensity coverage with concomitantly higher standards of open space, in order to provide large open areas with greater utility for rest and recreation; and to encourage the development of more attractive and economic and less monotonous building forms, by providing freedom of architectural and site design. 
(5)  To provide for access of light and air to windows and for privacy by controls over the spacing and height of buildings and other structures. 
(6)  To provide appropriate space for those public and private educational, recreational, health, and similar facilities which serve the needs of nearby residents, which generally perform their own activities more effectively in a residential environment, and which do not create objectionable influences. 
(7)  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote stability of residential development, to protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings, and to protect the city's tax revenue. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-505, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-152. - Large lot residential district R-1. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the large lot district R-1 is to set standards for residential development in areas that are severely limited in potential for development due to fragile soils, steep slopes and difficulties in providing infrastructure. 
(b)  District regulations. Within the residential R-1 districts, as shown on the municipal zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in the R-1 district are as follows: 
a.  Single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes. 
b.  Customary home occupations conducted within the principal structure, but only by a person resident of the premises; provided, however, that not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises, is employed. 
c.  Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to residential uses. 
d.  Farming uses, excluding the keeping of chickens and pigs. 
e.  One in-law apartment or accessory apartment contained within the single family residence and connected by means of a functioning interior doorway. 
(2)  Special exceptions. 
a.  One in-law or accessory apartment meeting the following restrictions: 
1.  Permitted occupants are limited to relatives of the homeowner, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or caregivers providing services to the occupants of the principle residence. 
2.  The principal residence must be owner occupied. 
3.  All utilities must share a common meter with the principal residence. 
4.  The apartment must be connected to the principle residence by means of a shared wall, garage or other similar structure, or a breezeway no longer than 20 feet in length between structures. 
5.  The apartment must be contained within the building envelope, as determined by the setback requirements for a principle residential structure. 
6.  The apartment may not be used for rental purposes. 
7.  The apartment must be approved by the city for residential use before it may be occupied. 
8.  Violation of the provisions for an in-law or accessory apartment shall subject the owner to a fine of up to $50.00 per day for each day the violation occurred. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the R-1 district are mobile homes and uses not specifically permitted. 
(4)  Lot area, lot width, yards and building area. The principal structure or accessory structures in the R-1 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, rear and side yards. 
Minimum lot area for dwelling ..... 5 acres Minimum lot width at building line for residences ..... 300 feet Minimum rear yard ..... 50 feet Minimum side yard ..... 50 feet  
b.  Front yards. All principal and accessory structures in the R-1 district shall be set back from the right-of-way of streets the minimum distance shown below, or shall conform with the existing setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal thoroughfare plan: 
Arterial streets ..... 75 feet Collector and connector streets ..... 75 feet Minor streets ..... 75 feet  
c.  Building area. On any tract or lot in the R-1 district, the area occupied by all structures including accessory structures shall not exceed ten percent of the total area. Accessory structures shall not cover more than ten percent of any required rear yard. 
(5)  Height. Height regulations in the R-1 district shall apply to principal structures. 
(6)  Location of accessory structures. Accessory structures in the R-1 district shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Accessory structures shall not be erected in any front yard. 
b.  Accessory structures shall be located at least ten feet from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-505.1, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-348, 12-21-1999; Ord. No. 14-625, §§ 2, 7, 9, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 90-153. - Low density residential district R-2. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the low density residential district R-2 is to provide for very low density residential development generally on tracts of land not considered to be subdivisions; and also, to limit development in lands not suited for development by reason of soil, geologic, infrastructure, topographic, or other limitations. 
(b)  District regulations. Within the residential R-2 districts, as shown on the municipal zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in the R-2 district are as follows: 
a.  Single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes. 
b.  Customary home occupations conducted within the principal structure, but only by a person resident of the premises; provided, however, that not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises is employed. 
c.  One unilluminated temporary large realty sign not exceeding 100 square feet in area, with no dimension exceeding 12 feet, at each major approach to a subdivision advertising the sale of houses or lots. The display of such sign shall be limited to a period of one year; any remaining nonconforming sign may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner. 
d.  One unilluminated temporary on-site sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area, advertising the sale of farm or garden products for the duration of the harvest season. 
e.  Other signs as regulated in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
f.  Farming uses, excluding the keeping of chickens, pigs, or cattle. 
g.  Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to the permitted uses of this subsection (b)(1). 
h.  One in-law apartment or accessory apartment contained within the single family residence and connected by means of a functioning interior doorway. 
(2)  Special exceptions. 
a.  One in-law or accessory apartment meeting the following restrictions: 
1.  Permitted occupants are limited to relatives of the homeowner, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or caregivers providing services to the occupants of the principle residence. 
2.  The principal residence must be owner occupied. 
3.  All utilities must share a common meter with the principal residence. 
4.  The apartment must be connected to the principle residence by means of a shared wall, garage or other similar structure, or a breezeway no longer than 20 feet in length. 
5.  The apartment must be contained within the building envelope, as determined by the setback requirements for a principle residential structure. 
6.  The apartment may not be used for rental purposes. 
7.  The apartment must be approved by the city for residential use before it may be occupied. 
8.  Violation of the provisions for an in-law or accessory apartment shall subject the owner to a fine of up to $50.00 per day for each day the violation occurred. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the R-2 district are mobile homes and uses not specifically permitted or permitted as special exceptions. 
(4)  Lot area, width, yards, and building area. The principal structure or accessory structures in the R-2 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, rear and side yards. 
Minimum lot area for dwelling ..... 21/2 acres Minimum lot width at building line for residences ..... 250 feet Minimum rear yard ..... 30 feet Minimum side yard ..... 25 feet  
b.  Front yards. All principal and accessory structures in the R-2 district shall be set back from the right-of-way lines of streets the minimum distance shown as follows, or shall conform with the exiting setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal thoroughfare plan: 
Arterial streets ..... 50 feet Collector and connector streets ..... 50 feet Minor streets ..... 50 feet  
c.  Building area. On any lot or tract in the R-2 district, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory structures, shall not exceed ten percent of the total area. Accessory structures shall not cover more than 20 percent of any required rear yard. 
(5)  Height. Principal structures in the R-2 district shall not exceed three stories nor 35 feet in height, unless each side yard is increased over the required minimum by five feet for every five feet or fraction thereof of additional height. No accessory structure shall exceed two stories in height. 
(6)  Location of accessory structures. Accessory structures in the R-2 district shall be located as follows: 
a.  With the exception of signs, accessory structures shall not be erected in any required front yard. 
b.  Accessory structures shall be located at least ten feet from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-505.2, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-348, 12-21-1999; Ord. 06-487, § 3, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 14-625, §§ 3, 10, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 90-154. - Medium density residential district R-3. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the medium density residential district R-3 is to provide a low density residential environment having good access to public water, schools, and other community facilities, but well separated from heavy traffic and other incompatible activities. 
(b)  District regulations. Within the residential R-3 districts, as shown on the municipal zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in the R-3 district are as follows: 
a.  Single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes. 
b.  The taking of boarders or the renting or leasing of rooms by the family resident on the premises; provided, however, that not over 50 percent of the total floor area is used for such purpose. 
c.  Customary home occupations conducted within the principal structure, but only by a person resident of the premises; provided, however, that not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises, is employed. 
d.  One unilluminated temporary large realty sign not exceeding 100 square feet in area, with no dimension exceeding 12 feet, at each major approach to a subdivision advertising the sale of houses or lots. The display of such sign shall be limited to a period of one year; any remaining nonconforming sign may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner. 
e.  One unilluminated temporary on-site sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area, advertising the sale of farm or garden products for the duration of the harvest season. 
f.  Other signs as regulated in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
g.  Farming uses, excluding the keeping of chickens, pigs, and cattle. 
h.  Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to the permitted uses of this subsection (b)(1). 
i.  One in-law apartment or accessory apartment contained within the single family residence and connected by means of a functioning interior doorway. 
(2)  Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to the permitted uses. Within the residential R-3 district, the following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance with section 90-58: 
a.  Duplex. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings in accordance with additional regulations in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
c.  Planned developments in accordance with additional regulations in section 90-311. 
d.  Municipal, county, state, or federal uses, except storage facilities. 
e.  Similar uses or structures subject to such conditions as the board of zoning appeals may require in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the use is to be located. 
f.  One in-law or accessory apartment meeting the following restrictions: 
1.  Permitted occupants are limited to relatives of the homeowner, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or caregivers providing services to the occupants of the principle residence. 
2.  The principal residence must be owner occupied. 
3.  All utilities must share a common meter with the principal residence. 
4.  The apartment must be connected to the principle residence by means of a shared wall, garage or other similar covered structure, or by a breezeway no longer than 20 feet in length between structures. 
5.  The apartment must be contained within the building envelope, as determined by the setback requirements for a principle residential structure. 
6.  The apartment may not be used for rental purposes. 
7.  The apartment must be approved by the city for residential use before it may be occupied. 
8.  Violation of the provisions for an in-law or accessory apartment shall subject the owner to a fine of up to $50.00 per day for each day the violation occurred. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the R-3 district are mobile homes and uses not specifically permitted or permitted as special exceptions. 
(4)  Lot area, lot width, yards, and building area. The principal structures in the R-3 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, rear and side yards. 
Minimum lot area for dwelling; square feet ..... 40,000 Minimum lot area for each additional dwelling unit; square feet ..... 10,000 Minimum lot width at building line  For residences ..... 100 feet  Institutional uses ..... 250 feet  Other permitted uses ..... 150 feet Setbacks:  Front yard   Arterial street ..... 50 feet   Collector street ..... 40 feet   Minor residential street ..... 40 feet  Rear yard ..... 30 feet  Side yard ..... 20 feet  
b.  Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall be located at least five feet from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
c.  Front yards. All principal and accessory structures in the R-3 district shall be set back from the right-of-way lines of streets the minimum distance shown below, or shall conform with the existing setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal-regional thoroughfare plan: 
Arterial streets ..... 50 feet Collector and connector streets ..... 50 feet Minor streets ..... 30 feet  
d.  Building area. On any lot or tract in the R-3 district, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory structures, shall not exceed 45 percent of the total area. Accessory structures shall not cover more than 30 percent of any required rear yard. 
(5)  Height. Principal structures in the R-3 district shall not exceed three stories nor 35 feet in height, unless each side yard is increased over the required minimum by five feet for every five feet or fraction thereof of additional height. No accessory structures shall exceed two stories in height. 
(6)  Location of accessory structures. Location of accessory structures in the R-3 district shall be as follows: 
a.  With the exception of signs, accessory structures shall not be erected in any required front or side yards. 
b.  Accessory structures shall be located at least five feet from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-505.3, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 01-375, § 1(1), (2), 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-403, § 2, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 06-487, § 4, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 14-625, §§ 4, 8, 11, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 90-155. - Medium/high-density residential district R-4. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the medium/high-density residential district R-4 is to provide a medium density residential environment having good access to pubic water, sewer, schools, and other community facilities, but well separated from heavy traffic and other incompatible activities. 
(b)  District regulations. Within the residential R-4 districts, as shown on the municipal zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in the R-4 district are as follows: 
a.  Single-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes. 
b.  The taking of boarders or the renting or leasing of rooms by the family resident on the premises; provided, however, that not over 50 percent of the total floor area is used for such purpose. 
c.  Customary home occupations conducted within the principal structure, but only by a person resident of the premises; provided, however, that not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises is employed. 
d.  One unilluminated temporary large realty sign not exceeding 100 square feet in area, with no dimension exceeding 12 feet, at each major approach to a subdivision advertising the sale of houses or lots. The display of such sign shall be limited to a period of one year; any remaining nonconforming sign may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner. 
e.  One unilluminated temporary on-site sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area, advertising the sale of farm or garden products for the duration of the harvest season. 
f.  Other signs as regulated in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
g.  Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to the permitted uses of this subsection (b)(1). 
h.  One in-law apartment or accessory apartment contained within the single family residence and connected by means of a functioning interior doorway. 
(2)  Special exceptions. Within the residential R-4 district, the following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance with section 90-58: 
a.  Duplex. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings in accordance with any additional regulations in section 90-435. 
c.  Planned developments in accordance with additional regulations in division 9 of this article. 
d.  Public and private schools offering general education courses. 
e.  Similar uses or structures subject to such conditions as the board of zoning appeals may require in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the use is to be located. 
f.  One in-law or accessory apartment meeting the following restrictions: 
1.  Permitted occupants are limited to relatives of the homeowner, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or caregivers providing services to the occupants of the principle residence. 
2.  The principal residence must be owner occupied. 
3.  All utilities must share a common meter with the principal residence. 
4.  The apartment must be connected to the principle residence by means of a shared wall or an enclosed breezeway no longer than 20 feet in length between structures. 
5.  The apartment must be contained within the building envelope, as determined by the setback requirements for a principle residential structure. 
6.  The apartment may not be used for rental purposes. 
7.  The apartment must be approved by the city for residential use before it may be occupied. 
8.  Violation of the provisions for an in-law or accessory apartment shall subject the owner to a fine of up to $50.00 per day for each day the violation occurred. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the R-4 district are mobile homes and uses not specifically permitted or permitted as special exceptions. 
(4)  Lot area, lot widths, yards, and building area. The principal structures in the R-4 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, rear and side yards. 
Minimum lot area dwelling; square feet ..... 20,000 Minimum lot area for each additional dwelling unit; square feet ..... 10,000 Minimum lot width at building line  For residences ..... 75 feet  Institutional uses ..... 150 feet  Other permitted uses ..... 100 feet Setbacks:  Front yard   Arterial street ..... 40 feet   Collector street ..... 30 feet   Minor residential street ..... 30 feet  Rear yard ..... 20 feet  Side yard ..... 15 feet  
b.  Front yard. All principal and accessory structures in the R-4 district shall be set back from the right-of-way lines of streets the minimum distance shown as follows, or shall conform in the existing setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal thoroughfare plan: 
Arterial streets ..... 40 feet Collector and connector streets ..... 25 feet Minor streets ..... 25 feet  
c.  Building area. On any lot or tract in the R-4 district, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory structures, shall not exceed 45 percent of the total area. Accessory structures shall not cover more than 30 percent of any required rear yard. 
(5)  Height. Principal structures in the R-4 district shall not exceed three stories nor 35 feet in height, unless each side yard is increased over the required minimum of five feet for every five feet or fraction thereof of additional height. No accessory structure shall exceed two stories in height. 
(6)  Location of accessory structures. Location of accessory structures in the R-4 district shall be as follows: 
a.  With the exception of signs, accessory structures shall not be erected in any required front or side yards. 
b.  Accessory structures shall be located at least five feet from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-505.4, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 01-375, § 2(1), 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 02-403, § 3, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 06-487, § 5, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 14-625, §§ 5, 12, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 16-650, Exh. A, 2-16-2016; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 90-156. - High density residential district R-5. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the high density residential district R-5 is to provide a high density residential environment having good access to public water, sewer, schools, and other community facilities, but well separated from heavy traffic and other incompatible activities. 
(b)  District regulations. Within the residential R-5 districts, as shown on the municipal zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in the R-5 district are as follows: 
a.  Single-family prefabricated, modular and site built dwellings. 
b.  Customary home occupations conducted within the principal structure, but only by a person resident of the premises; provided, however, that not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises is employed. 
c.  Signs as regulated in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
d.  Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to the permitted uses of this subsection (b)(1). 
e.  One in-law apartment or accessory apartment contained within the single family residence and connected by means of a functioning interior doorway. 
(2)  Special exceptions. Within the residential R-5 districts, the following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance with section 90-58: 
a.  Duplex. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings in accordance with additional regulations in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
c.  Planned developments in accordance with additional regulations in section 90-311. 
d.  Similar uses or structures subject to such conditions as the board of zoning appeals may require in order to preserve and protect the character of the district in which the use is to be located. 
e.  One in-law or accessory apartment meeting the following restrictions: 
1.  Permitted occupants are limited to relatives of the homeowner, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or caregivers providing services to the occupants of the principle residence. 
2.  The principal residence must be owner occupied. 
3.  All utilities must share a common meter with the principal residence. 
4.  The apartment must be connected to the principle residence by means of a shared wall or an enclosed breezeway no longer than 20 feet in length between structures. 
5.  The apartment must be contained within the building envelope, as determined by the setback requirements for a principle residential structure. 
6.  The apartment may not be used for rental purposes. 
7.  The apartment must be approved by the city for residential use before it may be occupied. 
8.  Violation of the provisions for an in-law or accessory apartment shall subject the owner to a fine of up to $50.00 per day for each day the violation occurred. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the R-5 district are uses not specifically permitted or permitted as special exceptions. 
(4)  Lot area, lot width, yards, and building area. The municipal structures in the R-5 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, rear and side yards. 
Minimum lot area for dwelling; square feet ..... 10,000 Minimum lot width at building line (all permitted uses) ..... 75 feet Setbacks:  Front yard   Arterial street ..... 30 feet   Collector street ..... 25 feet   Minor residential street ..... 25 feet  Rear yard ..... 20 feet  Side yard ..... 12 feet  
b.  Front yards. All principal and accessory structures in the R-5 district shall be set back from the right-of-way lines of streets the minimum distance shown as follows, or shall conform with the existing setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal thoroughfare plan: 
Arterial streets ..... 30 feet Collector and connector streets ..... 25 feet Minor streets ..... 25 feet  
c.  Building uses. On any lot or tract in the R-5 district, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory structures, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area. Accessory structures shall not cover more than ten percent of any required rear yard. 
(5)  Height. Principal structures in the R-5 district shall not exceed two stories nor 25 feet in height, unless each side yard is increased over the required minimum of five feet for every five feet or fraction thereof of additional height. No accessory structure shall exceed two stories in height. 
(6)  Location of accessory structures. Location of accessory structures in the R-5 district shall be as follows: 
a.  With the exception of signs, accessory structures shall not be erected in any required front or side yard. 
b.  Accessory structures shall be located at least five feet from all lot lines and from any building on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-505.5, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-339, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 01-375, § 3(1), 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 06-487, § 6, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 14-625, §§ 6, 13, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 16-650, Exh. A, 2-16-2016; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 90-157. - Mobile home residential district R-5M. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the mobile home residential district R-5M is to provide a medium density residential environment having good access to public water, sewer, schools, and other community facilities, but well separated from heavy traffic and other incompatible activities. 
(b)  District regulations. Within in the residential R-5M districts, and locations in the city not zoned as such but subject to nonconforming expansion, as allowed by law, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. There are no permitted uses by right in the R-5M district. 
(2)  Special exceptions. Within the residential R-5M district, the following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance with section 90-58: 
a.  Single mobile homes, prefabricated, and modular homes all developed with lots for sale as in a standard major subdivision of land. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings in accordance with additional regulations in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter, and the residential design review ordinance [article III, division 2, subdivision II, of this chapter]; 
c.  Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to the permitted uses of this subsection are permitted when erected or constructed to the residential design review ordinance. 
d.  Customary home occupations conducted entirely within the principal structure on lots greater than 10,000 square feet (the incorporation of accessory structures supporting such business is strictly prohibited), and only by a resident of the premises; provided, however, that not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises is employed in the occupation. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the R-5M district are uses not specifically permitted by right, or permitted special exception. 
(4)  Bulk regulations, lot area, lot width, yards, and building area. The municipal structures in the R-5M district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, front, rear and side yards 
1.  Minimum lot area for dwelling ..... 20,000 sq. ft. 
2.  Minimum lot width at building line (all permitted uses) ..... 150 feet 
3.  Setbacks: 
i.  Front yards. All principal and accessory structures in the R-5M district shall be set back from the right-of-way lines of streets the minimum distance shown as follows, or shall conform with the existing setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal thoroughfare plan. When this plan is lacking the specified data, city staff shall set the classification. 
Arterial streets ..... 60 feet 
Collector and connector streets ..... 50 feet 
Minor Streets ..... 50 feet 
ii.  Rear yard ..... 20 feet 
iii.  Side yard ..... 24 feet 
4.  Buffer and screening. A landscape buffer shall be provided along the perimeter of the site boundaries not less than 15 feet in width, except that a minimum buffer area from any public street shall be no less than 20 feet. Within the landscaped buffer, a continuous fence six to eight feet high shall be provided. Such fence shall be opaque in nature and decorative in design. The landscaped buffer shall be split evenly between this fence, and shall be incorporated with year-round evergreen trees at least four feet wide and four feet high at the time of its original planting. These plants are expected to achieve a height of six feet within in three years. No landscaped screen or fence shall be provided within 15 feet of any vehicle entrance and/or exit to the park. 
5.  Mobile home park paved parking area for recreation vehicles. 150 square feet for every three units. 
6.  Off-street parking for mobile home parks. Paved off-street parking may be grouped in bays either adjacent to streets, or in the interior of blocks, or on the mobile home lot. Such parking areas shall generally be located in close proximity to the dwelling units they are designed to serve. At least one parking space per dwelling unit shall be located so as to provide a maximum walking distance of 50 feet from the nearest entrance of the dwelling unit the space to serve. Further parking standards of subdivision II of division 11 of the article also apply. 
b.  Building uses. On any lot or tract in the R-5M district, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory structures, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area. Accessory structures shall not cover more than ten percent of any required rear yard. 
(5)  Height. Principal structures in the R-5M district shall not exceed two stories, nor 25 feet in height unless each side yard is increased over the minimum of five feet for every five feet, or fraction thereof, of additional height. No accessory structure shall exceed one story in height. 
(6)  Location of accessory structures. Location of accessory structures in the R-5M district shall be as follows: 
a.  With the exception of signs, accessory structures shall not be erected in any required front or side yard. 
b.  Accessory structures shall be located at least five feet from all lot lines from any building on the same lot, and be located solely in the rear yard. 
c.  All accessory structures are subject to the pertinent elements of the residential design review regulations. 
(7)  Other provisions. Special provisions for residential units in the R-5M district are as follows: 
a.  All R-5M developments are required to install and maintain underground utilities as per section 4-113 of the subdivision regulations [Appendix A]. 
b.  All R-5M developments are required to build and maintain sidewalks on both sides of the street, built to the amended standards of the pedestrian ways provisions of the subdivision regulations (App. A, section 4-108, amended November 10, 2003). 
1.  All residential units shall have walkway between the mobile home space and driveway. The walkway may consist of concrete, or separate stepping stones. 
c.  All residential units permitted under this section shall be set upon a foundation constructed with concrete and/or veneered with stone, brick, or stucco. The underside shall be completely enclosed. In either case, a concrete stand with provisions for anchor points shall be utilized. 
d.  Garbage cans, supplied by the city or otherwise, with tightfitting covers and tip-proof shall be maintained in good condition in quantities of no more than two cans per residential unit and be located within three feet from the residential unit, when not placed out for collection. 
e.  Landscape treatment appropriate for use and location shall be required to the extent needed to provide a suitable setting for residential units. Twenty percent of the entire mobile home development must be landscaped with flora; gravel, rip-rap, and vacant mulch patches, do not towards this percentage. This landscaping is expected to be maintained as to thrive for the life of the park. 
f.  As per Goal 6.2.4 of the Summer County Hazard Mitigation Plan, to which the city is a signatory, all new mobile home parks are required to "provide in-ground storm shelters at 36 square feet per mobile home space" and not located in a floodplain. These faciities must be constructed of concrete and built to protect those inside from inundation of water, pests, and vermin. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-505.6, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-339, 11-26-1999; Ord. No. 01-375, § 4(1), 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 05-460, § 1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 06-487, § 7, 12-19-2006) 
Secs. 90-158-90-170. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Residential Design Review Standards 

Sec. 90-171. - Intent. 
    The purpose of design review for residential dwellings, and their accessory structures, is to give tangible guidelines to the many prominent, but sometimes vague standards of development expressed in Millersville's chief urban planning documents. Consider, for example, the city's zoning ordinance [this chapter] as describe its very purpose as "enhancing the character and stability of residential ... areas, and promoting the orderly and beneficial development of such areas." 1 Additionally, the ordinance asserts another purpose as "Conserving the value of land and buildings." 2 The community's subdivision regulations [appendix A] claims one of it's purposes is to "enhance the character and social and economic stability" in Millersville, and "To conserve the value of land, buildings, and improvements throughout the jurisdictional area and to minimize detrimental conflicts among the uses of land and structures." 3 Last, but certainly not least, the Millersville Vision Statement as adopted by the planning commission in 2002 states that their "emphasis is on the creation of a residentially-oriented community that is, above all else, clean, beautified, and safe." These provisions, and others, constitute the basis and intention behind this amendment to the zoning ordinance. 
1 Millersville Zoning Ordinance, section 90-3(1). 
2 Millersville Zoning Ordinance, section 90-3(3). 
3 Millersville Subdivision Regulations, appendix A, section 1-104(4) and (5), respectively. 
(Ord. No. 03-434, 10-21-2003) 
Sec. 90-172. - Residential dwellings subject to design review. 
    [The following residential dwellings are subject to design review:] 
(1)  All newly constructed single-family residential dwellings located in a proposed subdivision or in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5. 
(2)  All existing single-family residential dwellings located in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 renovated or modified externally where the estimated costs of the new improvements exceeds 50 percent of the total appraised value of the structure listed in the most current Sumner and Robertson County taxation records. Or where the combined square footage with an addition exceeds 150 percent of the square footage of the previously unimproved home. This provision will be cumulatively effective for a period of renovation not to exceed three years from the date of issuance of the first building permit, or when it should have been issued (and was not because of applicant' error) under the confines of the building code adopted by the City of Millersville. 
(Ord. No. 03-434, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 16-650, Exh. A, 2-16-2016) 
Sec. 90-173. - Variance conditions. 
    The intention of this design review amendment concerning residential dwellings, and their accessory buildings, does not include the desire to create a monotone and unimaginative residential community. Consequently, a variance from the standards herein may be applied for from the board of zoning appeals in a regular meeting with input from citizens in attendance. In the event of an appeal from the residential design review standards, the board shall consider allowances for the aforementioned creativity on the part of the homeowner, all in accordance with the following stipulations: 
(1)  The effect of granting an applicant's variance request shall not evade the expressed intention (section 90-171) of the design review ordinance. 
(2)  The effect of the variance request shall not present a danger to the public safety, welfare, or morals. 
(3)  A variance request shall be accompanied by a written correspondence explaining the specifics of the appeal, and the desire behind it. 
(4)  A variance request shall be accompanied by detailed information to provide a comprehensive understanding of the nature of the request. At a minimum this information must include clearly discernable and reliable drawings, illustrations, or pictures of what the development will look like if the appeal is granted. 
(Ord. No. 03-434, 10-21-2003) 
Sec. 90-174. - Design review standards. 
(a)  All applicable dwellings subject to residential design review shall: 
(1)  Maintain a foundation constructed and/or veneered with stone, brick, or stucco in R-4 and R-5 Zoning. 
(2)  Incorporate all attached structures and home-additions, including those affixed with a breezeway, with similar exterior construction materials as the pre-existing residence. 
(3)  On property zoned R-3, R-4, and R-5, fences placed in the front yard shall not be constructed principally of wire, including chain link, barbed wire, razor wire, and electrified wire. Underground wire fences, such as invisible pet fences, are permitted. 
(b)  Design review standards for residential accessory buildings: 
(1)  All accessory buildings in Millersville, on a permanent foundation and/or possessing a footprint in excess of 120 square feet, shall: 
a.  Be located in the rear yard. Recreational and farm-type structures are permitted in the front yards of all R-1 and R-2 lots. Detached garages and carports, however, may be located in the side yards (not further than the plane of the home's furthermost front façade) of all residentially zoned parcels provided that: 
1.  The garage or carport is constructed of similar exterior materials, on all sides. 
2.  The garage or carport is entirely constructed within the residential zone's building envelope established by the pertinent residential zone's setback lines. 
b.  Not exceed the principal structure's uppermost height; 
c.  Be constructed with exterior materials that match or blend with the materials of the principle structure. In cases where materials cannot be matched easily, then other designs using exterior materials of vinyl, stucco, cement-fiber, or wooden clapboard may be substituted. 
d.  Farm-type structures located in the Residential One (R-1) may be constructed with exteriors of vinyl, wood, metal or other materials approved by the planning commission. 
e.  Free standing metal framed car ports shall not be allowed in any zone. 
(2)  Without BZA approval, an accessory building's footprint, solely or in conjunction with the sum of other accessory buildings' footprints, shall not exceed the square footage of either one of the formulas presented below in subsections a. and b., with the city permitting the larger allowance of the two, or in the case of farm-type structures, meeting the criteria of subsection c.: 
a.  Accessory structure(s) size based off of the principle dwelling's footprint: 
1.  Residential One (R-1), 100 percent of the principal residence's footprint; lots ten acres or greater, 150 percent of the principal residence's footprint. 
2.  Residential Two (R-2), 75 percent of the principal residence's footprint. 
3.  Residential Three, Four, Five, and Five-Mobile Home (R-3, R-4, R-5, R-5M), 50 percent of the principal residence's footprint. 
b.  Accessory structure(s) size based off of lot size. 
1.  A coefficient of two percent shall be multiplied against the square footage of the entire lot. 
c.  Farm-type structures located in Residential One (R-1), (i.e. barns, farm equipment storage sheds, etc.) shall be allowed up to 5,000 square feet provided that: 
1.  The height does not exceed 30 feet. 
2.  The footprint is no larger than 5,000 square feet. 
3.  The structure is a minimum of 250 feet from any lot line and a minimum of 500 feet from any road, street or other public passage way. 
(Ord. No. 03-434, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 05-474, §§ 1-4, 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 05-514, amds. 1-3, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 08-534, §§ 1-3, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 09-553, 7-21-2009; Ord. No. 14-626, §§ 3-6, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 16-650, Exh. A, 2-16-2016) 
Secs. 90-175-90-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 90-181. - Goals and purposes. 
    The commercial districts established by this chapter are designed to promote and protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and other aspects of the general welfare. These goals include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations in proximity to established residential areas, for local retail and service trades catering specifically to the recurring shopping needs of the occupants of nearby residences. 
(2)  To protect both retail and service developments and nearby residences against fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and against offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, and their objectionable influences. 
(3)  To protect both retail and service developments and nearby residences against congestion, by regulating the intensity of retail and service developments consistent with their marketing functions, by restricting those types of establishments which generate heavy traffic, and providing for off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(4)  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for commercial districts to satisfy functional needs of the city, and in particular the need for medical services, and the needs of the general public traveling along major highways. 
(5)  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for the mixture of compatible high density residential and restricted commercial developments where standards for development will provide protection for the environmental essentials of either. 
(6)  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for all types of commercial and miscellaneous service activities. 
(7)  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote stability of commercial development, to protect and strengthen the economic base of the city to protect the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-506, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-182. - General commercial district C-1. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the general commercial district C-1 is to provide for major retail and service areas at locations of superior accessibility on thoroughfares of width and design capable of safely handling the large volumes and turning movements of traffic associated with these commercial facilities. 
(b)  Buffer strips. Buffer strips, a minimum of 25 feet, are required when commercial zoned lots abut residentially zoned lots. In addition, side buffers of planted material are required between adjacent properties on either side. Any fencing used for buffering shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Fences provided in buffer zones may only be constructed of natural wood or other decorative fencing. 
(2)  Sheet plastic, sheet metal, corrugated metal, chain link, and plywood fencing shall not be allowed. 
(3)  The finished side of fences shall face the lower intensity use. 
(c)  District regulations. Automobile and other vehicular service establishments, transient sleeping accommodations, and eating and drinking establishments primarily characterize this C-1 district. Additionally, commercial trade and service uses are permitted if necessary to serve the recurring needs of persons frequenting these C-1 districts. Community facilities and utilities necessary to serve these C-1 districts, or necessary for the general community welfare are also permitted. Bulk limitations required of uses in these C-1 districts, in part, are designed to maximize compatibility with lesser intense use of land or building in proximate residential districts. Approximate locations for this district is along major traffic arteries. Within commercial C-1 districts, as shown on the municipal zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. In the general commercial district C-1, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted: 
a.  Retail trade: 
1.  Convenience goods; 
2.  Building materials, hardware, and farm equipment; 
3.  General merchandise; 
4.  Business and personal service establishments; 
5.  Food, eating and drinking; 
6.  Commercial entertainment and recreation; 
7.  Apparel and accessories; 
8.  Public and semipublic uses; 
9.  Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment; 
10.  Drug, antiques, books, sporting goods, garden supplies, jewelry, fuel and ice; 
11.  Hotels, motels, and tourist courts; 
12.  Professional services; 
13.  Gasoline service stations; 
14.  Accessory business signs as regulated in section 90-18; 
15.  Finance, insurance and real estate services; 
16.  Consumer repair services; 
17.  Printing and publishing establishments; 
18.  Manufacturing incidental to retail and wholesale business or service establishments where products are sold on the premises by producers; 
19.  Transportation, communication and utility services; 
20.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses in this subsection (b)(1). 
(2)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions in the C-1 district are planned developments as regulated in section 90-311, including the following: 
After public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of zoning appeals may permit, as special exceptions: 
1.  New and used motor vehicle sales, rental, leasing and repair, when meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Application for a motor vehicle sales special exception shall include a professionally prepared site plan, drawn to scale, indicating all features pertinent to the requirements set forth below and features required in the C-1 district in general. 
b.  Motor vehicle sales shall be located at a distance of 1,000 feet from any other motor vehicle sales establishment. 
c.  If the commercial lot in question abuts a residentially used or zoned lot on its rear property line, then a buffer strip must be used on the rear of the commercial lot. 
d.  No public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way shall be used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles in connection with the activities of such establishments. 
e.  No required landscape area or buffer yard shall be used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles in connection with the activities of such establishments. 
f.  No operation in connection with such establishments shall be carried on in such a manner that impedes free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in normal courses on public ways. 
g.  Motor vehicle sales and repair establishments shall be compliant with all local and state regulations, permits and licensing requirements. 
h.  Motor vehicle repair establishments shall not engage in the sale of vehicles. 
i.  Repair of motor vehicles at new and/or used motor vehicle sales establishments shall be incidental to the principle business. 
j.  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of accessories, tires, parts, or other merchandise. 
k.  All sales/display areas and customer parking areas shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt and shall be constructed to provide for adequate drainage. 
l.  No repair of motor vehicles or parts thereof shall be made outside of garages, service stations, body shops, or other buildings used for such purposes. 
m.  All motor vehicles being handled or stored in an area visible from a public street or way shall be maintained in such condition that they can be moved under their own power and shall not be disassembled in any fashion. 
n.  Repair facilities shall be constructed with provisions to contain hazardous and toxic fluids and waste and such materials must be reclaimed/held and ultimately removed from the site commensurate with all city, state, and federal guidelines. 
o.  Without exception, dumpsters and waste storage areas shall be to the rear of the property and screened from public view. 
p.  Motor vehicles unable to be moved under their own power may be temporarily stored (ten days or less) in completely enclosed storage yards. The following standards shall apply for all motor vehicles storage yards: 
1.  Shall be screened within a well-maintained enclosure and in such a manner that no vehicle or portion thereof is visible from any street or public way, or from ground level of any adjacent property. Enclosures shall not be constructed of chain link fencing or utilize barbed or razor wire. 
2.  Shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt and shall be constructed to provide for adequate drainage and to contain hazardous and toxic fluids and waste. 
3.  Shall be located on the same premises as the motor vehicle repair or service establishment. 
4.  The maximum number of vehicles allowed in any storage yard is ten. 
5.  All vehicles shall have a current license plate and registration. 
6.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of any motor vehicle repair or service establishment to keep accurate and verifiable records as to the date any vehicle being stored in a storage yard is placed on said yard. Failure to keep such records will create the presumption that the vehicle or vehicles stored on the yard have been there in excess of ten days and are in violation of the Code. 
q.  For the purposes of this section, motor vehicles shall include automobiles, trucks, vans, semis, buses, motorcycles, tractors, all terrain vehicles, boats, jet skis, motor homes, motorized construction vehicles and equipment, and similar vehicles and equipment. 
r.  Shall conform to the requirements of section 18-2 and all current standards of the commercial design review criteria. 
2.  Multifamily dwellings in accordance with any additional regulations in section 90-435. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the C-1 district are as follows: Industrial uses, warehousing and storage uses, except those which are located within completely enclosed buildings and are incidental to the permitted use; truck terminals; junkyards, including automobile wrecking and salvage; gasoline, oil or alcohol storage above the ground in excess of 700 gallons; uses not specifically permitted or uses not permitted upon approval as a special exception. 
(4)  Lot area, lot width, yards, and building area. The principal structures in the C-1 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, rear, and side yards. 
Minimum lot area ..... 10,000 square feet Minimum lot width, at building lot line ..... 75 feet Minimum side yard ..... 10 feet Minimum rear yard ..... 20 feet  
b.  Front yards. All principal and accessory structures in the C-1 district shall be set back from the right-of-way lines of streets the minimum distance shown as follows, or shall conform with the existing setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal thoroughfare plan: 
Arterial streets ..... 40 feet Collector and connector streets ..... 40 feet Minor streets ..... 40 feet  
c.  Building area. On any lot or tract in the C-1 district, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory structures, shall not exceed 50 percent of the total area. 
(5)  Height. Principal structures in the C-1 district shall not exceed three stories nor 35 feet in height. 
(6)  Location of accessory structures. With the exception of signs, accessory structures in the C-1 district shall not be erected in any required front yard. 
(7)  Parking provisions. Parking provisions in the C-1 district shall be as regulated in subdivision II, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
(8)  Other provisions. Other provisions which apply in the C-1 district are as follows: 
a.  On corner lots all principal and accessory structures shall conform to the setback requirements for the adjoining street with the height classification. 
b.  The minimum yards adjoining a residential district shall conform to the respective yard requirements for the residential district. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-506.1, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 00-352, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 06-487, § 8, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 06-491, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 07-520, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-2007; Ord. No. 11-588, § 1, 6-27-2011; Ord. No. 15-641, § 2, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 90-183. - Planned commercial district C-2. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the planned commercial district C-2 is to provide for a unified development, in one or more buildings, of retail shops, stores, and offices that provide for the regular needs and convenience of the people residing in the market area of the center. Such center shall be designed as a unit with adequate off-street parking and appropriate landscaping, screening, and architectural integrity. 
(b)  District regulations. Within all commercial C-2 districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. In the commercial C-2 district, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted: 
a.  General retail sales and service, business and personal service, and convenience sales. 
b.  Professional and general offices. 
c.  Gasoline sales only in conjunction with convenience stores. 
d.  Entertainment and recreational services. 
e.  Restaurants. 
f.  Copy and quick printing outlets for the general public. 
g.  Any other use which in the opinion of the board of zoning appeals meets the criteria set forth in section 90-56. 
(2)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the C-2 district are as follows: 
a.  Automotive repair or body work, car washes and similar establishments. 
b.  Building materials; plumbing, heating, or air conditioner sales and service. 
c.  Printing and publishing businesses. 
d.  Any other uses not specifically permitted or permitted by implication. 
(3)  Area regulations. Area regulations in the C-2 district are as follows: 
a.  The parcel of land on which a planned commercial center is to be located shall not be less than 15,000 square feet. 
b.  There shall be minimum permanent open space along the front, side, and rear of the planned commercial center of 20 feet in width which shall not be paved or built upon. 
c.  The building setback line from a public street shall be 50 feet. 
(4)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the C-2 district are as follows: 
a.  The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall be 40 percent of the total site area. 
b.  The maximum height of buildings shall be three stories or 35 feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking and loading requirements. The following parking requirements pertain to developments in commercial C-2 districts: 
a.  Off-street parking shall be provided at a standard of 51/2 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area. 
b.  Off-street loading space shall be provided at a standard of one space for each 25,000 square feet of aggregate gross floor space. 
c.  Parking areas shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, topography, amenity of view, ease of access, and as an integral part of overall site design. It is desirable that parking areas be level or on terraces formed with the slope of the land. Changes in levels between terraces should be formed by retaining walls or landscaped banks with concrete curbs. Ten percent of all parking areas shall be devoted to landscaping as approved by the planning commission. All parking areas shall be paved and lined. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet in size. The maximum width of driveway openings to the public street shall be 35 feet. The minimum distance between driveways shall be 50 feet. The minimum distance between driveways and street intersections shall be 25 feet and from an adjoining property line shall be 20 feet. The minimum width of driveways providing maneuvering space within a parking lot for parking stalls shall be as follows: 
1. 90-degree parking ..... 25 feet 2. 60-degree parking ..... 20 feet 3. 45-degree parking ..... 20 feet 4. 30-degree parking ..... 12 feet  
(6)  Master plan required. No application for C-2 district zoning under this chapter shall be considered unless a master plan meeting the requirements as described in this section is submitted therewith. If the board of commissioners amends the zoning map so as to zone any land area under this chapter, then no building permit shall be issued until a master plan meeting the requirements for preliminary and final approval has been approved by the planning commission. 
(7)  Staging period. The planning commission may permit the C-2 district development to be constructed in stages, if appropriate to the type of development, so that completion is achieved in a logical and timely manner. 
(8)  Administrative procedure. The provisions of this section govern the procedure for C-2 district approval as follows: 
a.  Preliminary approval. Application for preliminary approval shall be made by the landowner of the affected property or his authorized agent to the planning commission in accordance with such written general rules regarding general procedure, form of application, and required information as the planning commission may determine, provided that they are not inconsistent herewith. The application for preliminary approval shall be accompanied by: 
1.  The preliminary master plan for the proposed development shall be a general concept plan which shall include such items as the planning commission by general rule shall specify in order to disclose: 
i.  The location and size of the area involved; 
ii.  Transportation routes including streets, driveways, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways, and off-street parking and loading areas; 
iii.  Location and approximate dimensions of structures including approximate height and bulk and the utilization of structures; 
iv.  Other major landscaping features; and 
v.  The general means of the disposition of sanitary wastes and stormwaters. 
2.  A tabulation of the land to be devoted to various uses and activities. 
3.  The nature of the landowner's interest in the land proposed to be developed and a written statement or concurrence from all parties having a beneficial interest in the affected property. 
4.  The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures including proposed easements for public utilities. 
5.  A stage development schedule, setting forth when the landowner intends to commence construction and a completion period. 
6.  When it is proposed that the final master development plan will be submitted in stages, a schedule of submission thereof. 
(9)  Board of commissioners action. After the planning commission has approved the preliminary plan, a recommendation for zoning to commercial C-2, shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall act upon the recommendation in the same manner as other zoning amendments. 
(10)  Application for final approval. Within one year of the preliminary approval of the master plan for C-2 district development, the developer or landowner may make application to the planning commission for approval of a final master development plan. The application shall include all aspects of the preliminary application, the proposed final master development plan, other required drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, and conditions and forms of bonds as were set forth by the planning commission resolution of preliminary approval. Copies of all legal documents required for dedication or reservation of group or common open space and/or for the creation of a nonprofit association shall also be submitted. When appropriate, this application shall contain the stage development schedule. 
(11)  Final approval of stages. The application for final approval and the final approval by the planning commission for C-2 district development may be limited to each stage as appropriate in a large planned commercial development. 
(12)  Final master development plan. The final master plan of a planned C-2 commercial center for the entire development, or as submitted in stages if authorized, shall be substantially consistent with the approved preliminary master development plan receiving preliminary approval, plus the following: the location of water, sewerage, and drainage facilities; detailed building and landscaping plans and architectural elevations; character and locations of signs; plans for street improvements, access, parking and circulation layout; and grading and earth moving plans showing existing and proposed topography in two-foot intervals. The final master development plan shall be sufficiently detailed to indicate fully the ultimate operation and appearance of the development. Developers shall pay a plan review fee of $0.10 per square foot of building area and $0.02 per square foot of lot area to be used by the county for master development plan review. 
(13)  Amendments to the master plan. The terms, conditions, and the final master plan for C-2 district development may be changed from time to time by official action of the planning commission. Any such amendments must remain in compliance with the appropriate zoning regulations and comply with the following. The landowner or developer may apply to the planning commission for an amendment to the master plan. The planning commission may approve such amendment so long as the original intent is not abrogated and the change does not in any way damage any part of the plan or any adjoining properties. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings may be authorized by the planning commission if required by engineering or other circumstances of the location not foreseen at the time of final approval. Other changes in use, rearrangement of lots, blocks, or building tracts, provisions for open space, or any other desired change must be justified by changes in conditions or markets since the final plat was approved. All buildings to be located within a commercial C-2 district shall be of compatible construction composed of brick, stone or better materials. 
(14)  Other requirements. Other requirements for C-2 district development are as follows: 
a.  Landscaping and screening. The planned commercial center in a C-2 district shall be permanently screened from adjoining residentially zoned areas by either an evergreen screen, a fence with an evergreen screen, a berm with an evergreen screen or other suitable enclosure as approved by the planning commission. This permanent screen shall be located within the 20-foot open space perimeter requirement. The evergreen screen shall be of suitable plant materials as approved by the planning commission and shall be a minimum of four feet in height at the time of planting. Any required fence shall be a minimum of seven feet in height. Any required berm shall be a minimum of three feet in height. All such materials shall be permanently maintained. Such screening as is required in this subsection (b)(14)a shall in all cases serve to ameliorate the visible effect of 
the project or development on adjacent and nearby properties. A landscaped area 20 feet in depth and extending along the entire frontage on the street located between the street right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto shall be provided. Small rocks, such as river rocks or pea gravel will not be permitted in the landscaped areas. 
b.  Permitted signs. The signs permitted in C-2 planned commercial centers shall be governed by the following regulations: 
1.  A commercial center shall be permitted one identification sign for each 200 feet of road frontage. Such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in size. In lieu of an identification, sign, a commercial center may substitute an index sign listing names of businesses therein. Such sign shall not exceed 36 square feet in size. 
2.  Individual businesses shall be permitted one additional sign identifying the business. Such signage shall be integrated into the design of the building and shall be flat against the building and shall not exceed 50 square feet in size. Other signage may be painted on glass. All signs must be at least six feet above ground level. 
3.  Convenience gasoline sales operations may additionally have one changeable copy sign advertising prices not to exceed 25 square feet in size and signs required by federal and state authorities as well as self-service or full-service signs on pump islands. 
4.  All other types of signs, including those with flashing or intermittently lights are specifically prohibited. All signs not referring to the name of the existing enterprise or to persons employed on the site are also prohibited. Lights shall be directed so as not to illuminate adjacent or nearby residential properties. 
c.  Exterior storage. The exterior storage of materials, goods, or chattel of any kind in the C-2 district shall be prohibited. Garbage containers for commercial and other uses shall be screened from view by an appropriate fence, wall or screen, a sketch of which shall be included in the master plan. The planning commission may determine the placement of dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be located on a pad consisting of 12 inches of steel reinforced concrete measuring the length of the dumpster and the pickup service truck. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-506.2, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-184. - Interchange and highway commercial district C-3. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the interchange and highway commercial district C-3 is to provide for adequate space in appropriate locations for uses which serve, primarily, the needs of the motoring public, and to protect these uses from encroachment by uses which would be detrimental to the area. Appropriate locations for these districts are along, adjacent to, or within easy access to interstate highway interchanges and other major highways. 
(b)  District regulations. Within all commercial C-3 districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in the C-3 district are as follows: 
a.  Hotels and motels. 
b.  Restaurants and taverns. 
c.  Drive-in restaurants and fast food restaurants. 
d.  Convenience commercial, including barbershops and beauty shops, drugstores and grocery stores, hardware stores and other similar uses. 
e.  Essential services for utility substations, distribution and collection lines, pumping facilities, and public rights-of-way. 
f.  Any other uses which, in the opinion of the board of zoning appeals, meets the criteria set forth in section 90-56. 
(2)  Uses permitted as special exceptions. Uses permitted as special exceptions in the C-3 district are as follows: 
a.  Automotive fuel service centers, in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Application for an automotive fuel service center special exception shall include a professionally prepared site plan, drawn to scale, indicating all features pertinent to the requirements set forth below and features required in the C-3 district in general. 
2.  Shall not be located adjacent to any residentially zoned district or residentially used lot unless separated by a public street. 
3.  No public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way shall be used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles in connection with the activities of such establishments. 
4.  No required landscape area or buffer yard shall be used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles in connection with the activities of such establishments. 
5.  No business activities shall impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in normal courses on public ways, including clearly defined ingress and egress. 
6.  Automotive fuel service centers shall be compliant with all local and state regulations, permits and licensing requirements. 
7.  Automotive fuel service centers shall not engage in the sale of vehicles. 
8.  Without exception, dumpsters and waste storage areas shall be to the rear of the property and screened from public view. 
9.  Automotive fuel service centers shall be constructed with provisions to contain hazardous and toxic fluids and waste and such materials must be reclaimed/held and ultimately removed from the site commensurate with all city, state, and federal guidelines. 
10.  Minor passenger vehicle repair shall be permitted as incidental to a fuel service center, provided such repair is conducted within the facility. 
11.  Vehicles in need of repair shall not be left outside overnight. 
12.  For the purposes of this section, passenger vehicle shall mean automobile and light truck. 
13.  A minimum of ten percent of the lot is to be landscaped, specifically illustrated in the site plan. 
14.  Shall conform to the requirements of section 18-2 and all current standards of the commercial design review criteria. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings in accordance with any additional regulations in section 90-435. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the C-3 district are as follows: 
a.  Building materials, plumbing, heating, or air conditioning sales and service. 
b.  Printing and publishing businesses. 
c.  Any other use not specifically permitted or permitted by implication. 
(4)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures in the C-3 district are regulated as follows: 
a.  Signs in compliance with regulations set forth in subdivision III, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
b.  Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities as required in subdivision II, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
c.  Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses, provided that such accessory structures and uses are carried out on the same lot and are not otherwise prohibited. 
(5)  Dimensional regulations. All uses permitted in the commercial C-3 district, shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size. 
Minimum lot area ..... 40,000 square feet Lot width at building setback ..... 150 feet  
b.  Minimum yard requirements. 
Front yard setback ..... 50 feet Side ..... 20 feet Except where the side yard abuts or is adjacent to a residential district, in which case the minimum setback shall be ..... 40 feet Rear ..... 20 feet Except where the rear yard abuts or is adjacent to a residential district, in which case the minimum setback shall be ..... 40 feet  
c.  Maximum lot coverage. On any lot or tract containing one or more structures in the C-3 district, the area occupied by all structures, including accessory structures shall not exceed 30 percent of the total area. 
d.  Height requirements. No principal structure in the C-3 district shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
e.  Parking space requirement. Parking space requirements shall be as required in subdivision II, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
f.  Accessory structures. Accessory structures in the C-3 district shall be located at least five feet from any side lot line, and from any building on the same lot. 
g.  Landscaping requirements. The planned commercial center C-3 district shall be permanently screened from adjoining residentially zoned areas by either an evergreen screen, a fence with an evergreen screen, a berm with an evergreen screen or other suitable enclosure as approved by the planning commission. This permanent screen shall be located within the 20-foot open space perimeter requirement. The evergreen screen shall be of suitable plant materials as approved by the planning commission and shall be a minimum of four feet in height at the time of planting. Any required fence shall be a minimum of seven feet in height. Any required berm shall be a minimum of three feet in height. All such materials shall be permanently maintained. Such screening as is required in this subsection (b)(5)g shall in all cases serve to ameliorate the visible effect of the project or development on adjacent and nearby properties. A landscaped area 20 feet in depth and extending along the entire frontage on the street located between the street right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto shall be provided. Small rocks, such as river rocks or pea gravel will not be permitted in the landscaped areas. 
h.  Exterior storage. The exterior storage of materials, goods, or chattel of any kind in the C-3 district shall be prohibited. Garbage containers for commercial and other uses shall be screened from view by an appropriate fence, wall or screen, a sketch of which shall be included in the master plan. The planning commission may determine the placement of dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be located on a pad consisting of 12 inches of steel reinforced concrete measuring the length of the dumpster and the pickup service truck. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-506.3, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 07-529, §§ 1, 2, 1-15-2008; Ord. No. 17-672, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 90-185. - Commercial other district C-4. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the commercial other district C-4 is to provide adequate space in appropriate locations for uses which serve, primarily the needs of the general public, by providing an area convenient to people residing in the market area and to people within a surrounding area as would need such services. This needs to be accomplished while keeping prime retail locations available for the development of retail business. 
(b)  District regulations. Within all commercial C-4 districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. In the commercial C-4 district, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted: 
a.  Miniwarehouses/self-storage. 
b.  Household goods storage. 
(2)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the C-4 district are any other uses not specifically permitted or permitted by implication. 
(3)  Lot area, lot width, and building area. The principal structures in the C-4 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, rear and side yards. 
Minimum lot area ..... 40,000 square feet Minimum lot width, at building lot line ..... 75 feet Minimum side yard ..... 10 feet Minimum rear yard ..... 20 feet  
b.  Front yards. All principal and accessory structures in the C-4 district shall be set back from the right-of-way lines of streets the minimum distance shown as follows, or shall conform with the existing setback lines, according to their classifications as indicated on the latest municipal thoroughfare plan: 
Arterial streets ..... 40 feet Collector and connector streets ..... 40 feet Minor streets ..... 40 feet  
c.  Building area. On any lot or tract in the C-4 district, the area occupied by all structures, shall not exceed 50 percent of the total area. 
(4)  Height. Principal structures in the C-4 district shall not exceed two stories nor 23 feet in height. 
(5)  Location of accessory structures. With the exception of signs, accessory structures in the C-4 district shall not be erected in any required front yard. 
(6)  Parking provisions. Parking provisions in the C-4 district are as regulated in subdivision II, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
(7)  Other provisions. Other provisions in the C-4 district are as follows: 
a.  On corner lots all principal and accessory structures shall conform to the setback requirements for the adjoining street with the height classification. 
b.  The minimum yards adjoining a residential district shall conform to the respective yard requirements for the residential district. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-506.4, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-348, 12-21-1999; Ord. No. 16-650, Exh. A, 2-16-2016) 
Secs. 90-186-90-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 90-211. - Goals and purposes. 
    The industrial districts established by this chapter are designed to promote and protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and other aspects of the general welfare. These goals include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the area of the city's expected economic expansion for all types of distributive, industrial and related activities, with due allowance for the need for choice of suitable sites. 
(2)  To protect distributive, industrial and related activities, as well as residential and related activities, by providing for the separation of these uses, and, as far as possible, provide that appropriate space needs for distributive and industrial activities are available by prohibiting the use of such space for residential purposes. 
(3)  To encourage industrial development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare, and other objectionable influences, by permitting such development areas where this chapter restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard to the industrial products and processes involved. 
(4)  To protect adjacent residential and commercial areas, and to protect the labor force in other establishments engaged in less offensive types of industrial and related activities, by restricting those industrial activities which involve danger of fire, explosions, toxic or noxious matter, radiation, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, and other hazards, or create offensive noise, vibration, heat, humidity, glare, and other objectionable influences, by permitting such development in areas where this chapter restricts the emission of such nuisances, without regard to the industrial products or processes involved. 
(5)  To protect industrial activities and related developments against congestion, as far as is possible and appropriate in each area, by limiting the bulk of buildings in relation to the land around them and to one another, and by requiring space off public ways for parking and loading facilities associated with such activities. 
(6)  To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development, to promote stability of industrial and related development, to strengthen the economic base of the city area, to protect the character of these districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and buildings, and to protect the city's tax revenues. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-507, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-212. - Light industrial and general offices district LI-1. 
(a)  Intent. This is a mixed use general office and light manufacturing district to be located serving the entire community and surrounding trade territory commercially, and as a center of employment. As an industrial district it is intended primarily for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication and for warehousing, wholesale and services uses. The planning commission and board of zoning appeals shall keep in mind that these uses demand proper and safe accessibility to street transportation routes for distribution trucks and employees. Retail uses located entirely within the office or industrial building for the benefit of the employees and customers of the industry or office may be permitted. 
(1)  All uses permitted under this section shall not emit any dust, smoke, or noxious odor and fumes outside the building housing the operation. 
(2)  No sound, associated with the uses below, shall have objectionable intermittence, volume, beat frequency or shrillness that is transmitted beyond their property lines greater than 70 decibels. 
(3)  Any outside storage, incidental to the primary operation, shall be so screened by ornamental walls and fences so that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on the ground level. 
(4)  All buildings in this district must comply with the most current version of the commercial, industrial, and multifamily design review criteria. 
(5)  At no time shall the planning commission or board of zoning appeals approve an industry, or application thereto, that produces any toxic or caustic material as result of it operation. 
(b)  District regulations. Within all LI-1 districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Permitted uses. Within the LI-1 districts, the following uses are permitted, along with buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to said uses: 
a.  Office space: 
1.  All professional, government and administrative offices. 
2.  Any office buildings in conjunction with industrial uses. 
3.  Banks, financial institutions and insurance. 
4.  Computer and data processing services. 
5.  Research and development offices; laboratories including testing on nontoxic or noncaustic materials. 
6.  Business college. 
7.  Conference center. 
8.  Fitness center or health club. 
9.  Trade schools or schools for vocational training. 
10.  Publishing companies. 
11.  Food service and dining area within an office building or support activities for the benefit of employees including the leasing of space within a building to provide such employee benefits. 
12.  Administrative offices and/or recreational facilities of non-profit business. 
b.  Retail trade: 
1.  Convenience stores with or without fuel sales. 
2.  Business service establishments. 
3.  Transportation, communication, and utility services. 
4.  Retail services (showrooms, and the like) incidental to the manufacturing uses listed in the special exceptions below. 
(2)  Uses permitted by special exception. Within the LI-1 districts, the following uses are permitted as special exceptions after review and approval in accordance with section 90-58, along with buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to said uses: 
a.  Building material sales yard and lumberyard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but not including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant. 
b.  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental or equipment commonly used by contractors. 
c.  Freighting or trucking yard or terminal in conjunction with a wholesale industry or permissible manufacturing industry. 
d.  Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station. 
e.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, drugs, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries, when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
f.  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas, when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
g.  The manufacture and maintenance of commercial signage that does not involve intensive metal manufacturing, when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
h.  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, and novelties conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
i.  Warehouses, non-profit and otherwise. 
1.  The planning commission may require warehouses to be constructed with voids that make it appear to be a standard office building, only when such a building is in excess of 2,500 square feet. Adaptive re-use is encouraged in the architecture and construction of warehouses in the LI-1 district. 
2.  The planning commission may grant relief from the design standards of part 1. of this subsection, provided that an alternate warehouse design would not have an adverse impact on neighboring property. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the LI-1 district are uses not specifically permitted or uses permitted by special exception. 
(4)  Lot area, lot width, yards and building area. The principal structures in the LI-1 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Lot area, lot width, and side yard setbacks. 
Minimum lot area ..... 1 acre 
Minimum lot width and building lot line ..... 75 feet 
Minimum front yard setback ..... 50 feet 
Minimum side yard setback ..... 20 feet 
Minimum rear yard setback ..... 30 feet 
Corner lots shall be considered to possess two front yards. 
(5)  Building area. No more than 50 percent of any LI-1 lot shall be covered or occupied by the total area by the combined square footage of all buildings on the lot. 
(6)  Height. All structures in the LI-1 lot shall have their heights limited to two stories, or to the current capacities of the Millersville Fire Department as determined by the planning commission. 
(7)  Location of accessory structures. With the exception of signs, accessory structures in the LI-1 district shall not be erected in any required front yard, and shall be located at least ten feet from any lot line from any building on the same lot, and be constructed with the approved materials detailed in the commercial, industrial, and multifamily design review criteria. 
(8)  Parking space provisions. Parking space provisions in the LI-1 district are as regulated in the industrial zoning section located in subdivision II, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
(9)  Landscaping. All LI-1 lots must be landscaped to 15 percent of the total lot. That total must include a well-maintained landscaped strip at least ten feet wide along all public rights-of-way. 
When abutting commercial or residential districts, the most strict yard setbacks, between the two, shall apply to the most recent neighbor, or building. Additionally, a buffer strip, planted to the standards of the zoning ordinance definition, must be installed by the latest neighbor, or building. The buffer strip shall be in addition to the required landscaping percentage. 
(10)  Fencing. All fencing shall be opaque, ornamental, and not permissible in the front of any principal building. 
(11)  Dumpsters. All efforts shall be made to locate dumpsters and compactors out of view from public rights-of-way, and be entirely screened by architectural masonry, or solid wooden (including gate) at least six feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-507.1, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 99-348, 12-21-1999; Ord. No. 05-478, § 1, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 06-487, § 9, 12-19-2006) 
Sec. 90-213. - Intermediate industrial district I-2. 
(a)  Intent. This district is intended for industrial uses that create a center for employment, but also possess a limited impact on the community or environment as a function of their business operation. 
No sound, associated with the uses below, shall have objectionable intermittence, volume, beat frequency or shrillness that is transmitted beyond their property lines greater than 80 decibels. 
Any outside storage, incidental to the primary operation, shall be so screened by ornamental walls and fences so that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on the ground level. 
All buildings in this district must comply with the most current version of the Commercial, Industrial, and Multi-family Design Review Criteria. 
(b)  District regulations. Within all I-2 districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Permitted uses 
a.  All the uses permitted by right in the light industrial district LI-1. 
b.  Amusement, athletic, or similarly related recreational enterprises. 
c.  Automobile service stations and vehicle repair facilities. 
d.  Bus terminals and other public transportation facilities compliant with the storm water ordinance complete with storm water filtration devices. 
e.  Manufacture, processing, repair, compounding, packaging, assembly, or treatment plants or facilities for equipment, materials, or products-excluding those expressly prohibited below. The processing element of such facilities must be in a fully enclosed building. Accessory and storage uses must fully enclosed or fully concealed from public view. 
f.  Public utility buildings and services, electric transportation and distribution substations and public utility service centers. 
g.  Recycling centers with fully enclosed operations. 
(2)  Uses permitted by special exception. 
a.  Group assembly. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. All uses of land and space that are not permitted by right or special exception. Additionally the following uses are expressly prohibited in the intermediate industrial district (I-2). 
a.  Blast furnaces. 
b.  Chemical manufacturing of all types and kinds. 
c.  Distillation or manufacture of bones, coal, wood, tar or their products. 
d.  Drop forges for all metallurgy. 
e.  Excavation and mining uses. 
f.  Fat, grease, lard or tallow manufacturing or processing. 
g.  Manufacturing, processing, or storage of explosives or fireworks. 
h.  Nuclear processing of type or kind. 
i.  Production or refining of petroleum or other inflammable liquids and the storage of raw hides or skins. 
j.  Slaughtering or eviscerating plants or stockyards. 
k.  Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins. 
l.  Waste processing and/or incineration operations except by the city or its agents. 
(4)  Lot area, lot width, yards and building area. The principal structures in the I-2 district shall be located to comply with the following requirements: 
Lot area, lot width, and side yard setbacks: 
Minimum lot area ..... 2 acres 
Minimum lot width and building lot line ..... 100 feet 
Minimum front yard setback ..... 65 feet 
Minimum side yard setback ..... 25 feet 
Minimum rear yard setback ..... 35 feet 
Corner lots shall be considered to possess two front yards. 
(5)  Building area. No more than 50 percent of any I-2 lot shall be covered or occupied by the total area of the combined square footage of all buildings on the lot. 
(6)  Height. All structures in the I-2 lot shall have their heights limited to two stories, or to the current capacities of the Millersville Fire Department as determined by the planning commission. 
(7)  Location of accessory structures. With the exception of signs, accessory structures in the I-2 district shall not be erected in any required front yard, and shall be located at least ten feet from any lot line from any building on the same lot, and be constructed with the approved materials detailed in the commercial, industrial, and multifamily design review criteria. 
(8)  Parking space provisions. Parking space provisions in the I-2 district are as regulated in the industrial zoning section located in article III, division 11, subdivision II of this chapter. 
(9)  Landscaping. All I-2 lots must be landscaped to 15 percent of the total lot. That total must include a well-maintained landscaped strip at least ten feet wide along all public rights-of-way. 
When abutting commercial or residential districts, the most strict yard setbacks, between the two, shall apply to the most recent neighbor, or building. Additionally, a buffer strip, planted to the standards of the zoning chapter definition, must be installed by the latest neighbor, or building. The buffer strip shall be in addition to the required landscaping percentage. 
(10)  Fencing. All fencing shall be opaque, ornamental, and not permissible in the front of any principal building. 
(11)  Dumpsters. All efforts shall be made to locate dumpsters and compactors out of view from public rights-of-way, and be entirely screened by architectural masonry, or solid wooden (including gate) at least six feet in height. 
(12)  Monument ground signs, lit by exterior lighting only, are the only permissible signage allowable in the I-2. The maximum height is seven feet (from grade), the maximum length is 11 feet. If the sign is less than the maximums then the required ratio of length to height is 11:7. 
(Ord. No. 06-501, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 17-681, Exh. A, 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 90-214-90-215. - Reserved. 
Sec. 90-216. - Non-profit/government/religious land use overlay district NP-1. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the NP-1 district is to provide allowances for non-profit, charitable, governmental, and philanthropic land uses. 
(b)  District regulations. Within the NP-1 district the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Permitted use with their accessory uses: 
a.  Designated houses of worship and all other federally recognized religious land uses or institutionalized persons, permitted in all zoning districts with review by the planning commission; 
b.  Municipal, county, state, or federal buildings to be located only upon commercially or industrially zoned lots with review by the planning commission. 
c.  Non-profit associations and corporations as per the definition to be located only upon commercially or industrially zoned lots with a review by the planning commission. 
d.  Non-profit cemeteries, mortuaries, and crematoriums on all lots, except for the approximately 60 lots expressed in subsection 90-216(c). These require a review by the planning commission. 
e.  Schools, colleges, libraries, and other educational institutions to be located only upon commercially or industrially zoned lots with a review by the Planning Commission. 
f.  Nursing homes and health care services when requested on residentially zoned property to be located only upon commercially or industrially zoned lots with a review by the planning commission. 
g.  Other philanthropic institutions and related private organizations as per the definition found under Non Profit Associations and Corporations to be located only upon commercially or industrially zoned lots with a review by the planning commission. 
(2)  Special exceptions. 
a.  Religious land uses or institutionalized persons are permitted uses in all zones, except on the lots expressly specified now, or further subdivided in the future, in subsection 90-216(c). 
b.  Schools, colleges, libraries, and other educational institutions when requested on residentially zoned property. 
c.  Nursing homes and health care services when requested on residentially zoned property; 
d.  Other philanthropic institutions and related private organizations as per the definition found under non-profit associations and corporations when requested on residentially zoned property; 
A board of zoning appeals review is required when non-profit organizations described below request location on residentially zoned lots. The BZA shall consider the impacts of traffic, aesthetics, property values, lighting, noise, and complimentary utility of surrounding land uses in their deliberations. 
(3)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the NP-1 district are those uses which are not permitted by right, or by special exception. 
(4)  Lot area, lot width, and setbacks. The bulk and dimensional requirements will match those of the underlying land-use classification. 
(1)  All property zoned with the interchange and highway commercial district (C-3) classification. This includes all C-3 lots, and C-3 zoned in the future. 
(2)  All property zoned with any industrial classification (intermediate impact industrial district II-2, heavy impact industrial district HI-3). This includes all newly rezoned II-2 and HI-3 lots in the future. 
(3)  The intersection area of Highway 31W and Pole Hill Road-Control Map 083121 (Sumner County). The following lots are exempt from the NP-1 overlay zone: 68, 69 (the commercially zoned portion), 69.01, 14.40, 14.301, 91, 91.01. 
(4)  The intersection area of Highway 31W and Bethel Road-Control Map 083121 (Summer County). The following lots are exempt from the NP-1 overlay zone: 22, 22.01, 23, 24, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. 
(5)  The intersection area of Highway 31W and Slater's Creek Road-Control Map 083118 (Sumner County. The following lots are exempt from the NP-1 overlay zone: 59, 60, 157, 158, 186. 
(Ord. No. 06-487, §§ 2, 10, 12-19-2006) 
Secs. 90-217-90-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, adopted Apr. 17, 2012, repealed former Division 5, §§ 90-231-90-289, and enacted a new Division 5 as set out herein. The former division pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-322, §§ 11-508.1(A)-11-508.1(D), 11-508.2, 11-508.3(A)-11-508.3(H), 11-508.4(A)-11-508.4(C), 11-508.5(A)-11-508.5(H), 11-508.6, 4-20-1999. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; subdivision regulations, app. A. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-231. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Tennessee has in Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210, Tennessee Code Annotated delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Millersville, Tennessee, mayor and city commission do ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-232. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The City of Millersville, Tennessee, mayor and its legislative body wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and in order to do so must meet the NFIP regulations found in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Ch. 1, Section 60.3. 
(b)  Areas of the City of Millersville, Tennessee are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, causing increases in flood heights and velocities; by uses in flood hazard areas which are vulnerable to floods; or construction which is inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-233. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. This division is designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are vulnerable to flooding or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including community facilities, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-234. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life, health, safety and property; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public funds for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood-prone areas; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas to minimize blight in flood areas; 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood-prone area; 
(8)  To maintain eligibility for participation in the NFIP. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-235. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this division shall be interpreted as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this division its most reasonable application given its stated purpose and objectives. 
    Accessory structure means a subordinate structure to the principal structure on the same lot and, for the purpose of this division, shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall only be used for parking of vehicles and storage. 
(2)  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. 
(3)  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
(4)  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, which otherwise may result in damage to other structures. 
(5)  Utilities and service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or otherwise protected from intrusion of floodwaters. 
    Act means the statutes authorizing the National Flood Insurance Program that are incorporated in 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
    Anchor(ed) means secured, or tied down down to earth, and certified to resist buoyancy and hydrostatic flow by an engineer registered to practice in Tennessee. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the local enforcement officer's interpretation of any provision of this division or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood-related erosion hazard is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined. 
    Area of special flood hazard . See "Special flood hazard area." 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This term is also referred to as the 100-year flood or the one percent annual chance flood. 
    Basement means any portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Building . See "Structure." 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwater, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Emergency flood insurance program or emergency program means the program as implemented on an emergency basis in accordance with Section 1336 of the Act. It is intended as a program to provide a first layer amount of insurance on all insurable structures before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Erosion means the process of the gradual wearing away of land masses. This peril is not "per se" covered under the program. 
    Exception means a waiver from the provisions of this division which relieves the applicant from the requirements of a rule, regulation, order or other determination made or issued pursuant to this division. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the initial floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the NFIP. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the NFIP. 
    Existing structures . See "Existing construction." 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study is the official report provided by FEMA, evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "Flood" or "Flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities and structures and their contents. 
    Flood-related erosion means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood-related erosion area or flood-related erosion prone area means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
    Flood-related erosion area management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on the Tennessee inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on the City of Millersville, Tennessee inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By the approved Tennessee program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this division. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by FEMA. 
    Mean-sea-level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For the purposes of this division, the term is synonymous with the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means, as corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division was derived or the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means, as corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    100-year flood . See "Base flood." 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed structures. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99. 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; not does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State coordinating agency . The Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development's Local Planning Assistance Office, as designated by the Governor of the State of Tennessee at the request of FEMA to assist in the implementation of the NFIP for the state. 
    Structure for purposes of this division means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. FEMA's substantial damage estimator program (latest available version) shall be the method used to calculate the "market value" unless a more individualized assessment is offered, such as a professionally prepared appraisal. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other improvement of a structure in which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the initial improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial improvement, or (2) in the case of substantial damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
    The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been pre-identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project or; (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this division. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this division is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-236. - Application. 
    This article shall apply to all areas within the incorporated area of the City of Millersville, Tennessee. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-237. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified on the City of Millersville, Tennessee, as identified by FEMA, and in its flood insurance study (FIS) and flood insurance rate map (FIRM), Community Panel Numbers 47165CIND0D, 47165C0245G, (...263G), (...264G), (...270G), (...376G), and (...377G), dated, April 17, 2012, along with all supporting technical data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this division. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-238. - Requirement for development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformity with this division prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-239. - Compliance. 
    No land, structure or use shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-240. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this division conflicts or overlaps with another regulatory instrument, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-241. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under Tennessee statutes. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-242. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division shall not create liability on the part of the City of Millersville, Tennessee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-243. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this division or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. Any person who violates this division or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon adjudication therefore, be fined as prescribed by Tennessee statutes, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Millersville, Tennessee from taking such other lawful actions to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Secs. 90-244-90-260. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration 

Sec. 90-261. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
    The city planner is hereby appointed as the administrator to implement the provisions of this division. In the absence of a city planner, the codes enforcement administrator is appointed to implement the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-262. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but is not limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean-sea-level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings where base flood elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this division. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean-sea-level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed where base flood elevations are available, or to certain height above the highest adjacent grade when applicable under this division. 
c.  A FEMA floodproofing certificate from a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect that the proposed nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in sections 90-281 and 90-282. 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. Within AE Zones, where base flood elevation data is available, any lowest floor certification made relative to mean-sea-level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered land surveyor and certified by same. The administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevation data is not available, the elevation of the lowest floor shall be determined as the measurement of the lowest floor of the building relative to the highest adjacent grade. The administrator shall record the elevation of the lowest floor on the development permit. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential building, said certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level upon the completion of the lowest floor or floodproofing. 
    Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-263. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this division have been satisfied, and that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities appropriate governmental agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(4)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community FIRM's through the letter of map revision process. 
(5)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(6)  Record the elevation, in relation to mean-sea-level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 90-262. 
(7)  Record the actual elevation, in relation to mean-sea-level or the highest adjacent grade, where applicable to which the new and substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 90-262. 
(8)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 90-262. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this division. 
(10)  When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been provided by FEMA, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A, on the City of Millersville, Tennessee FIRM meet the requirements of this division. 
(11)  Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this division in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. Permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be maintained in a separate file or marked for expedited retrieval within combined files. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Secs. 90-264-90-280. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 

Sec. 90-281. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. They must be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State of Tennessee and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this division, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this division. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provision of this division, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further extended or replaced. 
(11)  All new construction and substantial improvement proposals shall provide copies of all necessary federal and state permits, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
(12)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development proposals shall meet the standards of section 90-281. 
(13)  When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are partially located in an area of special flood hazard, the entire structure shall meet the standards for new construction. 
(14)  When proposed new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple flood hazard risk zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the entire structure shall meet the standards for the most hazardous flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation. 
a.  Bridges and culverts in flood hazard risk zones must be constructed to reduce freeboard (see definitions). Bridges shall be raised substantially above municipally recognized creek and stream beds, anchored with piers that are not in the immediate pathway of the water. Under no circumstances shall culverts be used to build bridges over municipally recognized streams. The city shall set the minimum height of the bridge, which cannot be lower than the recommended minimum established by the Army Corps of Engineers, or other pertinent, regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-282. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in section 90-281, are required: 
(1)  Residential structures. In AE Zones, where base flood elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, then openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures." 
    Within approximate A Zones where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, the administrator shall require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated to a level of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 90-235). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures." 
(2)  Nonresidential structures. In AE Zones, where base flood elevation data is available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, then openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures." 
    In approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where alternative data is not available, new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to no lower than three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 90-235). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, then openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of this section: "Enclosures." 
    Nonresidential buildings located in all A Zones may be floodproofed, in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and are built with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the administrator as set forth in section 90-262. 
(3)  Enclosures . All new construction and substantial improvements that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a Tennessee professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria. 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the finished grade; 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  The enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles, storage or building access. 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms in such a way as to impede the movement of floodwaters and all such partitions shall comply with the provisions of section 90-282. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (3) in new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements of new construction. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that either: 
i.  In AE Zones, with base flood elevations, the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on a permanent foundation to no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
ii.  In approximate A Zones, without base flood elevations, the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength) that are at least three feet in height above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 90-235). 
c.  Any manufactured home, which has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must meet the standards of sections 90-281 and 90-282. 
d.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
e.  All recreational vehicles placed in an identified special flood hazard area must be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and: 
i.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions). 
(5)  Standards for subdivisions and other proposed new development proposals. Subdivisions and other proposed new developments, including manufactured home parks, shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
a.  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision and other proposed new development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  In all approximate A Zones require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data (See section 90-285). 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-283. - Standards for special flood hazard areas with established base flood elevations and with floodways designated. 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 90-237 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights and velocities. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill material, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the cumulative effect of the proposed encroachments or new development shall not result in any increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood elevation, velocities, or floodway widths during the occurrence of a base flood discharge at any point within the community. A Tennessee registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data, using the same methodologies as in the effective flood insurance study for the City of Millersville, Tennessee and certification, thereof. Additionally, the city may require that the developer submitting the request pay the review fee of the city engineer to review their engineer's application. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 90-281 and 90-282. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-284. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard zones AE with established base flood elevations but without floodways designated. 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 90-237, where streams exist with base flood data provided but where no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new construction and substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 90-281 and 90-282. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-285. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodways (A Zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 90-237, where streams exist, but no base flood data has been provided and where a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from any federal, state, or other sources, including data developed as a result of these regulations (see subsection (2) below), as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in approximate A Zones meet the requirements of sections 90-281 and 90-282. 
(2)  Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(3)  Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, require the lowest floor of a building to be elevated or floodproofed to a level of at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade (as defined in section 90-235). All applicable data including elevations or floodproofing certifications shall be recorded as set forth in section 90-262. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 90-282. 
(4)  Within approximate A Zones, where base flood elevations have not been established and where such data is not available from other sources, no encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Millersville, Tennessee. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(5)  New construction and substantial improvements of buildings, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 90-281 and 90-282. Within approximate A Zones, require that those subsections of section 90-282, dealing with the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, assuring watercourse carrying capacities are maintained and manufactured homes provisions are complied with as required. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-286. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 90-237, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in sections 90-281 and 90-282, apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above as many feet as the depth number specified on the FIRM's, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified on the FIRM, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated to at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 90-282. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities must be floodproofed and designed watertight to be completely floodproofed to at least one foot above the flood depth number specified on the FIRM, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If no depth number is specified on the FIRM, the structure shall be floodproofed to at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. A Tennessee registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this division and shall provide such certification to the administrator as set forth above and as required in accordance with section 90-262. 
(3)  Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-287. - Standards for areas protected by flood protection system (A-99 Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 90-237, are areas of the 100-year floodplain protected by a flood protection system but where base flood elevations have not been determined. Within these areas (A-99 Zones), all provisions of subdivisions II and III shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-288. - Standards for unmapped streams. 
    Located within the City of Millersville, Tennessee, are unmapped streams where areas of special flood hazard are neither indicated nor identified. Adjacent to such streams, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments including fill material or other development including structures shall be located within an area of at least equal to twice the width of the stream, measured from the top of each stream bank, unless certification by a Tennessee registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the locality. 
(2)  When a new flood hazard risk zone, and base flood elevation and floodway data is available, new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the standards established in accordance with subdivisions II and III. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 90-289. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  Municipal board of zoning appeals. 
(1)  Authority . The City of Millersville, Tennessee Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this division. 
(2)  Procedure . Meetings of the municipal board of zoning appeals shall be held at such times as the board shall determine. All meetings of the municipal board of zoning appeals shall be open to the public. The municipal board of zoning appeals shall adopt rules of procedure and shall keep records of applications and actions thereof, which shall be a public record. Compensation of the members of the municipal board of zoning appeals shall be set by the legislative body. 
(3)  Appeals: How taken. An appeal to the municipal board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, or bureau affected by any decision of the administrator based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this division. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the municipal board of zoning appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. In all cases where an appeal is made by a property owner or other interested party, the most current fee for administrative reviews shall be due with the complete application. The administrator shall transmit to the municipal board of zoning appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal action was taken. The municipal board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give public and personal notice commensurate with current city policies. At the hearing, any person or party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(4)  Powers . The municipal board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers: 
a.  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by the administrator or other administrative official in carrying out or enforcement of any provisions of this division. 
b.  Variance procedures. In the case of a request for a variance, the following shall apply: 
i.  The City of Millersville, Tennessee Municipal Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this division. 
ii.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures as defined herein, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this division to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
iii.  In passing upon such applications, the municipal board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this division, and: 
(a)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other property to the injury of others; 
(b)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion; 
(c)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage; 
(d)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(e)  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent use; 
(f)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(g)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(h)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(i)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(j)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, and streets and bridges. 
iv.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this division, the municipal board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes of this division. 
v.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(b)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum relief necessary, considering the flood hazard and the factors listed in section 90-289. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, or a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance (as high as $25.00 for $100.00) coverage, and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
(Ord. No. 12-602, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Secs. 90-290-90-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 90-311. - District regulations. 
    The following regulations shall apply in the special overlay zoning districts established in section 90-121. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-509, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-312. - Purpose and intent. 
    Overlay districts are hereby established as a means of addressing specific aspects of land use control or development that transcend conventional zoning district provisions. Included are overlay district provisions that permit greater design flexibility; an overlay to protect areas subject to flooding; and an overlay district designed to regulate the location of adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-509.1, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-313. - Applicability of division provisions. 
    An overlay district shall represent a mapped geographic area depicted upon the official zoning map. Overlay districts may be applied to the districts so indicated by this chapter and may encompass one or more of those districts. Unless expressly stated to the contrary in this chapter, all lands encumbered by an overlay district shall conform to all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-509.2, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-314. - Minor industrial overlay district. 
(a)  Intent . The intent of the minor industrial overlay district is to provide a low-impact option for landowners to conduct highly limited industrial operations on property that also retains its original zoning. The unique features of this classification tightly constrict the property owners in terms of visual and physical impacts to the adjoining properties, and the environment. Further, it is the intent of the City of Millersville to monitor all lots that are successfully applied with this zoning overlay to ensure ongoing compliance. 
(b)  District regulations. When this zoning overlay is affixed to the base zoning the following regulations will also apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in the minor industrial overlay district include industrial-based businesses that abide all of the following provisions: 
a.  Minimum lot size five acres; maximum lot size ten acres. 
b.  Limited to eight vehicles that are class 1 through class 4 (up to 16,000 lbs.); only two of those eight can be class 5 or 6 vehicles (up to 26,000 lbs.) which can be parked overnight, outside on the property. All other vehicles must be removed from the property or parked in a garage nightly. 
c.  If no accessory structures exist on the property, then the parcel is limited to one accessory structure that is no larger than 25% of the footprint of the primary structure, not to exceed 200 square feet. 
1.  If accessory structures (totaling 25% or less of the main building square footage) exist on the parcel at the time when this overlay is applied, then no other additional accessory structures can be built regardless of the size. 
i.  Existing accessory structures can be demolished and removed. At that point, one new accessory structure can be built within the confines of this section. 
2.  No lot with existing accessory structures that total more than 25% of the square footage of the principal building shall be affixed with this overlay. 
3.  If the principal building possesses a footprint of 5,000 square feet or more, then no new accessory structures will be permissible. 
i.  Existing accessory structures on lots with a principal building of this size are allowable provided it was erected at least five years before application was made for this overlay. 
d.  All newly built structures, if applicable or allowable at all, must adhere to the design review criteria for commercial, not industrial, buildings. 
e.  Only wall signs are permissible. The owner is limited to signage of 20 square feet in area. No more than two wall signs are permissible; in those cases, one must be four square feet or less. In either case, no illumination is permissible for these signs whatsoever, and none of them shall extend above the roofline. 
f.  Hazardous materials are limited to 0 or 1 on the HMIS III "Hazard Index" (Minimal Hazard, or Slight Hazard, respectively). Owners are also limited to materials that do not require more than OSHA safety glasses and/or gloves to handle (Letter B on the HMIS III "Personal Protection Index"). 
g.  Dumpsters must be fully enclosed with a combination of brick walls and wood privacy fencing that is no more, or no less than eight feet in height. Dumpster enclosures do not count as accessory structures, and they must be located on the parcel to be completely out of view from traffic on municipal public roads. Evergreen screening shall be implemented to shield the view of the dumpster enclosure if it's visible from adjoining properties. 
h.  Sound levels above 60 decibels (normal volume level for vernacular conversation), as measured at the property lines, are prohibited at all times. 
i.  Noxious odors emanating from the property applied with the minor industrial overlay district are strictly prohibited. 
j.  No outside storage of any type whatsoever is allowable, including fuel tanks and vehicle repair equipment. 
k.  Rows of plantings, as per the standards of the definition of "buffer strip" in section 90-7 of this chapter, shall be installed on property boundaries that abut residentially used, or residentially zoned parcels. If existing vegetation on the lot receiving the minor industrial overlay (not the neighbor's lot) meets or exceeds the standards of the definition of "buffer strip," then a memorandum to the record from city staff will suffice for this requirement. 
(2)  Uses prohibited. 
a.  Vehicle repairs that are not minor in scope or incidental to the business operation are strictly prohibited. 
b.  Salvage operations of any type are strictly prohibited. 
c.  All uses that cannot abide by the stipulations above are strictly prohibited. 
(3)  Dimensional regulations. Unless stipulated in this chapter, all uses permitted with a minor industrial overlay shall abide by the dimensional/bulk regulations (i.e., setbacks) of the base district it overlays. If there are competing provisions between them, the stricter/strictest shall apply. In terms of lot size minimums, the first provision of this section and the lot size minimums of the original and base zoning classification must both be met. 
(Ord. No. 10-574, § 2, 10-19-2010) 
Secs. 90-315-90-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 90-331. - Intent and limitations of division. 
(a)  The intent of this division is to provide the degree of control over certain activities which by their very nature are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby 
having a deleterious effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent area. The activities in this section have been determined by various legal actions as activities which a community may control but not prohibit. 
(b)  This grouping is intended to include all adult-oriented businesses and activities defined by this chapter. This grouping includes all facilities wherein material is presented or exhibited which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-510.1, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-332. - Adult entertainment district. 
(a)  Description. This adult entertainment district is designed for the provision and control of certain businesses classified in this section as adult entertainment/sexually oriented business. This adult entertainment district attempts to buffer any surrounding districts from the possible adverse impacts from these uses. All residential development is excluded from this adult entertainment district to protect residences from an undesirable environment. Community facilities which provide needed services to special industrial development are permitted. This adult entertainment district requires a public hearing for rezoning. 
(b)  Uses permitted. In the adult entertainment district, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted: 
Adult arcade 
Adult bookstore 
Adult minimotion picture theater 
Adult motion picture theater 
Adult escort services 
Body piercing parlors 
The editing and/or distribution operations for media depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," defined in section 90-7 
Nontherapeutic massage services 
(c)  Uses permitted as special exceptions. In the adult entertainment district, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted as special exception after a public hearing, review and approval in accordance with section 90-58: None. 
(d)  Uses prohibited. Prohibited uses in the adult entertainment district are uses not specifically permitted or uses not permitted upon approval as a special exception. 
(e)  Dimensional regulations. All uses permitted in the adult entertainment district shall comply with the following requirements, except as provided in division 2 of this article: 
(1)  Minimum lot size. A minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet is required in the adult entertainment district. 
(2)  Minimum yard requirements. 
Front yard setback ..... 45 feet Side yard setback ..... 20 feet Rear setback ..... 20 feet  
(3)  Minimum lot coverage. On any lot or parcel of land in the adult entertainment district, the area occupied by all buildings, including accessory buildings, may not exceed 50 percent of the total area of such lot or parcel. 
(4)  Height requirement. No building in the adult entertainment district shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as provided in section 90-84. 
(5)  Parking space requirements. Parking space requirements in the adult entertainment district shall be as regulated in subdivision II, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
(6)  Distance from certain other uses. The boundary line of the lot upon which such building in the adult entertainment district exists or is to be built shall be at least 1,500 feet away from the property line of schools, churches, and public gathering places. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-510.2, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 06-483, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-2006) 
Secs. 90-333-90-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 90-351. - Intent of division. 
    This division is intended to provide a maximum flexibility in design and to ensure a minimum standard of site development for commercial activities involving the location of two or more buildings on a single lot or tract of land, or any development site involving three or more acres not subdivided. Proposed uses for a planned commercial development project shall conform to the intent and permitted uses for the commercial zone within which it is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-511(A), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-352. - Procedure for approval. 
    A building permit for a planned commercial development project shall be issued by the building inspector only as authorized by the planning commission. The planning commission shall so authorize such permit only after application and review in accordance with the requirements of this division, and after the planning commission determines that the proposed project meets the intent of this chapter and that the development standards set forth by this chapter will be followed. 
(1)  Information required. The following information is required: 
a.  Site plan drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet, showing: 
1.  Small scale location map of the proposed site. 
2.  Acreage and zoning classification of the area involved. 
3.  Topographic contours at five-foot intervals. 
4.  The location and dimension of internal streets, including traffic circulation patterns, sidewalks, points of access to public streets, and off-street parking spaces and loading areas. 
5.  The location and dimensions of structures including height, bulk, and the utilization of structures including activities and number of living units, if any. 
6.  Reservations for yards and other open space areas, and landscaping/screening features. 
7.  The location and size of existing and proposed water and sewer lines, storm drainage, and any easements. 
8.  A tabulation of the land area to be devoted to various uses and activities and overall densities. 
9.  Provisions or agreements for maintenance of common open space area. 
10.  A stage development schedule, generally setting forth when the landowner intends to commence construction and completion period. 
(2)  Review procedure. 
a.  Preapplication conference. Prior to the filing of the application, the applicant shall confer with the planning commission to clarify procedures and issues. 
b.  Preliminary review. Seven copies of the proposal containing the information required above shall be submitted to the planning commission at least ten days in advance of the meeting at which it is to be considered for preliminary review. Planning commission findings, including necessary revisions or additions prior to final site plan submission, shall be outlined to the applicant. 
c.  Final review. Seven copies of the proposal shall be submitted to the planning commission at least ten days in advance of the meeting at which it is to be considered for final review. Upon final approval, the planning commission shall authorize issuance of a permit for the planned development project by the building inspector. 
(3)  Expiration of building permit. If actual construction has not begun within three years from the date of approval of the planned development project, the building permit for such project shall expire. Reinstatement of a project after expiration shall require submission of the proposal for planning commission approval. 
(4)  Amendments. Any amendments or changes to a planned development project after receiving final approval by the planning commission must be resubmitted for planning commission consideration and approval. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-511(B), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-353. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the planned commercial development is to: 
(1)  Encourage the grouping of commercial activities within areas specifically designed to accommodate the activities and to discourage the proliferation of commercial uses along major thoroughfares and residential areas. 
(2)  Encourage the orderly development of commercial areas through establishment of sound design and development standards providing for suitable location of commercial activities, parking and traffic circulation, ingress and egress, loading, landscaping and open space, and utilities and other service facilities. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-511(C), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-354. - Types of planned commercial development. 
    The two types of planned commercial development include: 
(1)  General. Planned commercial development-general provides for a range of retail trade and service activities including neighborhood commercial special purpose shopping facilities and community shopping centers. 
(2)  Office park. Planned commercial development-office park provides for adequate regulation of activities and traffic around office parks. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-511(D), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-355. - Permitted activities. 
    Activities or uses in planned commercial development shall conform to the intent and permitted uses of the particular commercial zone within which it is located. Any planned commercial development located in the highway service and general commercial and zones will come under planned commercial development-general provisions. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-511(E), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-356. - Development standards. 
(a)  Location and site requirements. In all planned commercial developments: 
(1)  The site shall comprise a single lot or tract of land. 
(2)  The site shall abut a public street a minimum of 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot area: none. 
(b)  Building area. In all planned commercial developments maximum building area shall not exceed 30 percent of the total lot area. Parking, areas, open courts, and other open space uses shall not be computed in building area. 
(c)  Maximum permitted height of structures. 
(1)  Planned commercial development-general: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
(2)  Planned commercial development-office park: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
(d)  Minimum yards. 
Setback From Public Street Right-of-Way Rear Yard Side Yard Planned Commercial 
Development-general 35 feet 20 feet 15 feet Planned Commercial 
Development-Office Park 40 feet 20 feet 15 feet  
In any planned commercial development abutting a residential district, the minimum distance between any building and a residential district boundary in all cases shall be 100 feet. Not less than 75 feet of such required space shall be devoted to grass, trees, shrubs, and other landscaping; the remainder of such space may be used for off-street parking. 
(e)  Building location requirements. 
(1)  In all planned commercial developments, the minimum distance between any building and any internal street shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance between buildings shall be: 
Planned commercial development-general ..... 25 feet Planned commercial development-office park ..... 25 feet  
(f)  Maximum lot coverage. In any planned commercial development no more than 80 percent of the total surface land area shall be improved with buildings, structures, parking and loading areas, streets, driveways, or roadways. 
(g)  Minimum off-street parking space requirements. 
(1)  An off-street parking space shall contain a minimum of 180 square feet, exclusive of access and maneuvering space. 
(2)  The off-street parking requirements shall be as provided in section 90-461. 
(3)  There shall be ten square feet of landscaped area per parking space, such landscaped areas to be evenly distributed throughout the parking area. 
(4)  Each off-street parking space shall have a curb or parking bumper to aid in preventing vehicle encroachment upon adjacent spaces. 
(5)  Curbs, planting strips, or similar aids to channelization of traffic shall be provided at the ends of parking tiers in order to clearly delineate and separate parking aisles. 
(h)  Off-street loading space. 
(1)  Size. An off-street loading space, open or enclosed, shall have three minimum dimensions: 
Length 55 feet Width 12 feet Vertical clearance 12 feet  
These dimensions shall not include driveways or entrances to, or exits from, such off-street spaces. 
(2)  Location. No off-street loading space and no entrance or exit thereto shall be located less than 50 feet from the intersection of two street lines. A location closer to such intersection may be permitted if such location is not hazardous to traffic safety and will not create traffic congestion. 
(3)  Number. In any planned commercial development there shall be one off-street loading space for a floor area of from 7,500 square feet to 10,000 square feet in a single occupancy; one additional space for each additional 15,000 square feet of such floor area or major fraction thereof; provided, however, that under no circumstances shall more than five off-street loading spaces be required for any single occupancy. 
(i)  Internal street design and construction standards. In any planned commercial development, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The maximum grade on any street shall be six percent. 
(2)  All street intersections shall be at right angles. 
(3)  All internal streets, drives, roadways, and parking and loading areas shall be privately constructed and maintained. 
(4)  All internal streets, drives, roadways, and parking and loading areas shall meet the construction standards for streets as set forth in the city's subdivision regulations. 
(5)  The minimum pavement width of any internal street, road, or drive shall be 20 feet. 
(j)  Access requirements. In any planned commercial development, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Access to public streets shall be controlled in the interest of public safety. Each building or group of buildings and accompanying parking or service area shall be physically separated from public streets by a curb, planting strip, or other suitable barrier that prevents unchanneled motor vehicle ingress and egress and clearly delineates authorized points of access. 
(2)  A point of access, i.e., a drive, curb cut, or other opening for vehicles onto a street shall not exceed 30 feet in width. 
(3)  There shall be no more than two points of access to any one public street on a lot of less than 400 feet, but more than 100 feet of public street frontage. Lots with less than 100 feet frontage on a public street shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. On lots of more than 400 feet frontage on a public street, the minimum distance between access points in addition to those indicated above shall be 1,000 feet. 
(4)  No points of access shall be permitted within 50 feet of the curbline (or street line where there is no curb) of any public street intersection. 
(5)  No access point to a public street shall be made without written approval of the building inspector. 
(k)  Utility provisions. 
(1)  All planned commercial developments shall be serviced with public sanitary sewerage and water lines of not less than eight inches and six inches, respectively. Septic sewage disposal may be permitted with the approval of the planning commission and the county department of public health. 
(2)  All electric, telephone, and similar service lines and wiring shall be installed underground, and there shall be no utility poles or overhead wiring in any planned commercial development. 
(l)  Storage of solid waste material. In all planned commercial developments, solid waste storage areas shall be screened from public view and shall be maintained in such a manner as to meet county public health department requirements. 
(m)  Street graphics. Street graphic provisions, as provided in section 90-16, are effective in planned commercial developments. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-511, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-357-90-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 90-381. - Intent of division. 
    The purpose and intent of this division is to encourage the total planning of relatively large tracts of land consistent with the long-range general comprehensive plan of the city; encourage innovations in design and the application of sound design principles; provide a framework within which an effective relationship of different land uses and activities can be planned on a total basis; provide a harmonious relationship with surrounding development; minimizing such influences as land use incompatibilities, heavy traffic and congestion, and excessive demands on planned and existing public facilities; and provide a means of developing areas of physiographic or other physical features to enhance natural beauty and other attributes. This division shall only be used for planned developments upon the determination by the board of zoning appeals that the proposed development is in harmony with the purpose and intent as stipulated. Planned developments are permitted only as special exceptions after review by the board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512(A), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-382. - General provisions. 
    The following general provisions apply to all planned developments: 
(1)  Ownership and division of land. No tract of land may be considered for or approved as a planned development, unless such tract is under single ownership. The holder of a written option to purchase, any governmental agency, or a redeveloper under contract shall be considered landowners for purposes of this section. Unless otherwise provided as a condition of approval of a planned development, the landowner of an adopted planned development may divide and transfer parts of such development. The transferee shall complete each such unit, and use and maintain it in strict conformance with the adopted final master development plan. 
(2)  Relationship to subdivision regulations. The uniqueness of each proposal for a planned development may require that there be modification from the specifications established in the subdivision regulations adopted by the municipal planning commission. Modification may be incorporated only with the approval of the planning commission. 
(3)  Common open space. 
a.  The location, shape, site, and character of the common open space shall be reviewed in detail. 
b.  Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the planned development considering proposed land use, its size, density, expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings or structures to be provided. 
c.  Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use but common open space containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures, and improvements which are permitted in the common open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the common open space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space with regard to its topography and unimproved condition. 
d.  The use and improvements of common open space must be planned in relation to any existing or proposed public or semipublic open space which adjoins or which is within close proximity to the perimeter of the planned development. 
e.  All land shown on the final development plan as common open space, when not retained by the developer, must be conveyed under one of the following options: 
1.  It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to maintain the common open space and any buildings, structures, or improvements which have been placed on it. 
2.  It may be conveyed to a trustee provided in a deed of record which establishes an association or similar organization for the maintenance of the planned development. The common open space may be conveyed to the trustees subject to the approval of the board of zoning appeals which will result in the restrictions of the common open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and which will provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which ensures its intended purpose. 
f.  No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the final development plan unless the final development plan has been amended to permit that use. However, no change of use authorized may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting rights of enforcement. 
g.  The developer or any organization established for the ownership and maintenance of any common open space shall not dispose of any common open space by sale or otherwise (except to an organization established to own and maintain the common open space) without first offering to dedicate the same to the city. Such dedication must be approved by the board of zoning appeals and accepted by the board of commissioners. 
h.  If the developer or the organization established to own and maintain common open space, or any successor organization, shall at any time after the establishment of the planned development fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the adopted master development plan, the building inspector may serve written notice upon such organization and/or the owners or residents of the planned development. If deficiencies or maintenance are not corrected after 30 days, the building inspector shall call upon any public or private agency to maintain the common open space. The cost of such maintenance by such agency shall be assessed proportionally against the properties within the planned development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become a lien on such properties. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512(B), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-383. - Minimum size. 
    The minimum size of a planned residential development shall be two acres. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.1, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-384. - Types of planned developments. 
    Planned developments shall consist of two types. They are as follows: 
(1)  Single purpose planned development. A single purpose planned development is one which shall consist primarily of one principal use or activity. The principal use or activity is residential in nature and is housed in two or more buildings. 
(2)  Mixed purpose planned development. A mixed purpose planned development is one which shall consist of two principal uses or activities. The principal uses or activities may be either residential and commercial, in nature and are housed in two or more buildings. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.2, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-385. - Permitted activities and uses. 
    Any activity or use that is allowed in the zoning district where the planned development is located shall be permitted as part of that planned development. Other uses, which are not located, may, however, be permitted by the board of zoning appeals, provided that such uses are desirable or convenient for the users of the planned development as it is developed or the immediate neighborhood, and provided that such uses are planned so as to ensure that they will not materially alter the existing character of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.3, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-386. - Limitations on commercial activities in planned developments. 
    The commercial activities allowed in a mixed purpose planned development shall be permitted, provided that such activities shall not exceed in the aggregate more than five percent of the total floor area in such development, and provided further that the maximum floor area devoted to such activities by any single establishment shall be 3,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.4, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-387. - Obstructions, height regulations, accessory structures, customary home occupations, off-street parking and sign control. 
    All structures and facilities within a planned development shall conform to the requirements governing these items as specified in the regulation pertaining to the appropriate district within which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.5, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-388. - Overall densities for residential activities. 
    The maximum overall densities for residential activities shall be in terms of the number of dwelling units per gross acre of all the area within a development as provided in this section. 
(1)  Maximum density for any residential component shall not exceed the maximum residential density permitted in the zone district where the planned development is located. For planned developments proposed in zone districts that do not have established residential densities, the maximum density for any residential component shall not exceed the highest residential density by type permitted in the city. 
(2)  Density increases over and above the permitted zone district maximum density may be granted by the board of zoning appeals and shall be governed by the precepts listed as follows, which are to be treated as additive, and not compounded: 
a.  For mixed residential types, a maximum increase of 20 percent. 
b.  For mixed purpose planned development, a maximum increase of 16 percent. 
c.  For underground utilities, a maximum increase of ten percent. 
d.  For improved common open space, a maximum increase of 16 percent. 
e.  For unimproved common open space, a maximum increase of 12 percent. 
f.  For preservation of natural, historic or archaeological features, a maximum of 16 percent. 
g.  For every additional acre above the minimum area size requirement for planned developments, two percent increase to a maximum of ten percent. 
(3)  Reductions in the permitted zone district maximum density may be required by the board of zoning appeals, if it is determined that such reduction is warranted by the following conditions: 
a.  Inconvenient or unsafe access of the planned development. 
b.  Traffic congestion for streets adjoining the development. 
c.  An excessive burden imposed on parks, recreational areas, schools and other public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve the development. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.6, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-389. - Minimum lot area and frontage requirements within a planned development. 
    No minimum lot size or yards shall be required within a planned development, except that frontage on dedicated public roads shall observe front yard requirements in accordance with the zoning classification where the development is located, and peripheral yards abutting the exterior limits of the planned development boundary (except for boundaries delineated in or by water) shall observe yard requirements in accordance with the zoning classification in which the development is located. Every dwelling unit or other permitted use in the planned development shall have access to a public road or street either directly or via an approved private road, pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated to public use or reserved for private use, or common element guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not required to front on a public dedicated road or street. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.7, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-390. - Building spacing. 
(a)  Minimum. Space between buildings shall be one-half of the sum of the heights of the buildings, but in no case shall the distance be less than 20 feet. 
(b)  Minimum distance to the property line. The minimum distance between the building and the property line shall be one-half the height of the building but in no case shall the distance be less than 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.8, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-391. - Perimeter requirements. 
    If topographical or other barriers do not provide adequate privacy for existing uses adjacent to the planned development, the planning commission or board of zoning appeals may impose either of the following requirements: 
(1)  Structures located on the perimeter of the planned development must be set back by a distance sufficient to protect the privacy and amenity of adjacent existing uses, if applicable. 
(2)  Structures located on the perimeter of the planned development must be permanently screened in a manner which is sufficient to protect the privacy and amenity of adjacent existing uses. Such screening should be suitably landscaped with grass and/or ground cover, bunkers, shrubs and trees. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.9, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-392. - Administrative procedure. 
(a)  Outline development plan. 
(1)  The developer shall make a request to construct a planned development within one of the allowable districts to the building inspector. At his option, the developer may accompany his request with an outline development plan specified in this section. If no outline development plan is filed with the request, the developer shall submit a preliminary development plan as outlined in the following section. 
(2)  An outline development plan consists of both maps and a written statement. 
a.  The maps may be in a general schematic form, but must contain the following information: 
1.  The existing topographic character of the land. 
2.  Existing and proposed land uses and the approximate density of the existing dwellings. 
3.  The approximate location of any road shown on the major thoroughfare plan. 
4.  Public uses, including schools, parks, play areas, and other open spaces, both existing and proposed. 
5.  The written statement to accompany the outline development plan must contain the following information: 
i.  A statement of the present ownership of the land included with the proposed development. 
ii.  A general indication of the expected schedule of the development. 
(3)  Within 30 days after the filing of the outline plan, the building inspector shall forward the plan to the planning commission with a written report recommending the plan be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved, giving reasons for these recommendations. 
(4)  The planning commission will act on the recommendation by the staff. Within 30 days, the planning commission shall submit its recommendations regarding approval, disapproval, etc., to the board of zoning appeals. The procedure specified for special exceptions in division 1, article II of this chapter shall be followed and a public hearing shall be held. However, no building permits will be issued on land within the planned development until final plans for the development have been reviewed and approval granted by the board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  Preliminary development plan. 
(1)  If an outline development plan has been submitted and approved, the planning commission and board of zoning appeals shall review the submission of a preliminary development plan in stages or as a whole. If a preliminary development plan has not been submitted within three months following the approval of the outline development plan, the board of zoning appeals may withdraw its approval of the planned development. In its discretion and for good cause, the board of zoning appeals may extend for three months the period for the filing of the preliminary development plan. 
(2)  The preliminary development plan must include all of the following information: 
a.  A map showing street systems, lot lines, lot designs, and existing topographic characteristics. 
b.  Areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation buildings, supporting commercial areas, similar public and semipublic uses. 
c.  A site plan for each building site and common open area, showing the approximate location and dimensions of all buildings, structures, and improvements and indicating the open space around buildings and structures. 
d.  Elevation and perspective drawings of all proposed structures and improvements. The drawings need not be the results of final architectural decisions and need not be in detail. 
e.  A development schedule indicating: 
1.  The approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin; 
2.  The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin; 
3.  The anticipated rate of development; 
4.  The approximate dates when the development of each of the stages in the development will be completed; and 
5.  The area and location of common open space that will be provided at each stage. 
f.  An off-street parking and loading plan. 
g.  An estimate of population and density and extent of activities to be allocated to parts of the project. 
h.  The general means of the disposition of sanitary waste and stormwater. 
i.  A tabulation of the land area to be devoted to various uses and activities and overall densities. 
j.  Agreements, provisions, or covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development and any of its common open areas. 
k.  The following plans and diagrams, insofar as the board of zoning appeals finds that the planned development creates special problems of traffic, parking, landscaping or economic feasibility: 
1.  A circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods, and pedestrians within the planned development and, to and from existing and proposed thoroughfares. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of this circulation pattern must be shown. 
2.  A landscaping and tree planting plan. 
3.  An economic feasibility report or market analysis. 
l.  If no outline development plan has been filed, the preliminary plan must contain the information required by subsections (a)(2)a and (a)(2)b of this section, and must include enough of the area surrounding the proposed planned development to show the relationship of the planned development to adjacent uses. 
(3)  The board of zoning appeals may review the preliminary development plan and recommend its approval to the planning commission if it complies with the intent of this planned development section and contains all the information as specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Final development plan. 
(1)  Within three months following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the developer shall file with the board of zoning appeals a final plan containing in final form the information previously required in granting preliminary approval and the necessary signatures as required by the city subdivision regulations. In its discretion, and for good cause, the board of zoning appeals may extend for three months the period for the filing of the final development plan. 
(2)  The board of zoning appeals shall review the final development, and if it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan shall recommend approval to the planning commission. 
(3)  The building inspector shall issue building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved final development plan if they are in conformity with the approved final development plan and with all other applicable regulations. He shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any completed building or structure located in an area covered by the approved final development plan if the complete building or structure conforms to the requirements of the approved final development plan and all other applicable regulations. 
(d)  Changes to final development plan. 
(1)  No changes may be made in the approved final plan during the construction of the planned development, except as specified. 
a.  Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and structures may be authorized by the board of zoning appeals if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved and after notification to the planning commission. No change authorized by this section may change the size of any building or structure by more than ten percent. 
b.  All other changes in use, rearrangement of lots, blocks, or building tracts, provisions for open spaces, or any other desired changes in the approved final plat must be submitted to the planning commission which will make its recommendation for approval or disapproval to the board of zoning appeals. No amendments may be made in the approved final plat unless they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved or by changes in the development policy of the city. 
(2)  Any changes which are approved for the final plan must be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final plan. 
(3)  If no construction has begun or no use has been established in the development within one year after approval of the final development plan, the final development plan will lapse and be of no further effect. 
(e)  Control of planned development following completion. 
(1)  Upon completion of all the work within the development, the board of zoning appeals shall issue a certificate of completion. The secretary of the board of zoning appeals shall note the issuance of the certificate on the recorded final development plan. 
(2)  After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned development will be governed by the approved final development plan rather than by any other provisions of the regulations of this division. 
(3)  After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes may be made in the approved final development plan, except upon application to the board of zoning appeals under the procedures provided as follows: 
a.  Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the board of zoning appeals, if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan. No change authorized by this section may change the size of any building or structure by more than ten percent. 
b.  Any uses not authorized by the approved final plan, but allowable in the planned development as a permitted use under the provisions of this regulation, or permitted as a special exception in the zone in which the planned development is located, may be added to the final development plan upon approval by the board of zoning appeals. 
c.  A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed, but only in compliance with the final development plan, unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under one of the two procedures specified in subsection (e)(3) of this section. 
d.  Changes in the use of common open space may be authorized by an amendment to the final development plan under one of the two procedures specified in this subsection (e)(3). 
e.  All other changes in the final development plan must be made by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures authorized by the regulations of this division. No changes may be made in the final development plan, unless they are required for the continued successful functioning of the planned development, or unless they are required by changes in the development policy of the city or county. 
(4)  No changes in the final development plan which are approved under this section are to be considered as a waiver of the covenants limiting the use of land, buildings, structures, and improvements within the area of the planned development, and all rights to enforce these covenants against any changes permitted by this section are expressly reserved. 
(f)  Subdivision and resale of the planned development. 
(1)  A planned development may be subdivided or resubdivided for purposes of sale or lease after the certificate of completion has been issued. 
(2)  If the subdivision or resubdivision of a planned development will create a new lot line the applicant shall make a request to the planning commission for the approval of the subdivision or resubdivision. The planning commission shall approve the subdivision or resubdivision if each section of the subdivided or resubdivided planned development meets the provisions of this regulation governing density, common open space, and dimensional requirements. 
(3)  All sections of a subdivided or resubdivided planned development are to be controlled by the final development plan. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-512.10, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-393-90-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - MIXED COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 90-411. - Composition. 
(a)  A mixed purpose commercial and industrial planned development shall consist primarily of industrial uses supported by complimentary commercial uses and housed in two or more buildings. 
(b)  The same provisions contained in division 8 of this article, planned commercial development shall apply, except as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-513, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-412. - Administrative procedure and review. 
(a)  Public hearing. After recommendation for approval of the general outline plan from the planning commission, the board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing following the procedures in division 2, article II of this chapter. 
(b)  Approval. The board of zoning appeals shall approve or disapprove the general outline plan. 
(c)  Preliminary and final development plan. The procedural requirements found in section 90-392 for preliminary and final development plans shall be followed. 
(d)  Buffer and landscaping required. A buffer shall be required on all boundaries of the mixed commercial and industrial planned development as specified in section 90-19, or as specified by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-513.1, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-413-90-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS APPLYING TO SPECIFIC DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-431. - Temporary use regulations. 
    The following regulations are necessary to govern the operation of certain necessary or seasonal uses nonpermanent in nature. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the building inspector. Such application shall contain a graphic description of the property to be utilized and a site plan, to determine yard requirements setbacks, sanitary facilities, and parking space for the proposed temporary use. The following uses are deemed to be temporary uses and shall be subject to the specific regulations and time limits which follow and to the regulations of any district in which such use is located: 
(1)  Carnival or circus: may obtain a temporary use permit in the commercial or industrial districts; however, such permit shall be issued for a period of not longer than 15 days. Such use shall only be permitted on lots where adequate off-street parking can be provided. 
(2)  Limited duration goods and seasonal merchandise: may obtain a 30-day temporary use permit for the display and sale of limited duration goods and seasonal merchandise not sold throughout the year on open lots in any district. 
(3)  Temporary buildings: In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for contractor's temporary office and equipment sheds incidental to construction project. Such permit shall not be valid for more than one year but may be renewed for six-month extensions; however, not more than three extensions for a particular use shall be granted. Such use shall be removed immediately upon expiration of the temporary use permit, whichever occurs sooner. 
(4)  Real estate sales office: In any district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any new subdivision which has been approved by the planning commission under the city subdivision regulations. Such office shall contain no living accommodations. The permit will be valid for one year, but may be granted two six-month extensions. Such office shall be removed upon completion of sales of the lots therein, or upon expiration of the temporary use permit, whichever occurs sooner. 
(5)  Religious tent meeting: In any district, except the I-2 general industrial district, a temporary use permit may be issued for a tent or other temporary structures to house a religious meeting. Such permit shall be issued for not more than a 30-day period. Such activity shall be permitted only on lots where adequate off-street parking can be provided. 
(6)  Temporary dwelling unit in cases of other special services: In any residential district, a temporary use permit may be issued to place a mobile home temporarily on a lot in which already contains a residential structure where the board of zoning appeals finds that special circumstances or conditions fully described in the findings of the board, exist, such that the use of a temporary residential structure is necessary in order to prevent an exceptional hardship on the applicant, provided that such a temporary structure does not represent a hazard to the safety, health, or welfare of the community. An applicant for a temporary use permit as provided under this subsection must produce a written statement from the Sumner/Robertson County Health Department approving the sewage disposal system of the temporary structure. Such a permit may be renewed for up to six months at a time, the total time for all permits not exceeding a total time for all permits not exceeding a total of 18 months. The temporary structure shall be treated as an accessory building. 
(7)  Temporary manufacture of road materials: In any district, except the residential districts, a temporary use permit may be issued upon approval by the board of zoning appeals to operate manufacturing plants which are necessary in order to produce the materials required for the construction of approved public roads where the board finds that such a use is not potentially noxious, dangerous, or offensive. In the exercise of its approval, the board of zoning appeals may impose such conditions upon the proposed plants as it may deem advisable in the furtherance of the general purposes of this chapter. Such a permit may be initially issued for a nine-month period. A permit may be renewed for up to six months at a time, the total time for all permits not exceeding a total of 24 months. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-403, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 05-457, § 1, 2-28-2005) 
Sec. 90-432. - Home occupations. 
    A home occupation is a gainful occupation or profession conducted entirely within the principal dwelling unit by members of the household residing on the premises. Only one person other than members of the household shall be employed. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, with no more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit being used to conduct the home occupation. This section classifies all home occupations as minor home occupations or major home occupations, all other uses that are not considered under one of these classifications is prohibited under the regulations of this section. 
(1)  Minor home occupations. A minor home occupation is a limited activity conducted on premises that differs from its residential character. Minor home occupations shall include offices for accountants, architects, artists, engineers and the like, and other uses that will not require an increased amount of traffic to and from the residence. Uses such as barbershops or beauty shops, auto repair or any similar use shall not be considered as minor home occupations. Due to the small scale of operation, minor home occupations are not required to obtain special exception permits from the board of zoning appeals. 
(2)  Major home occupations. Uses classified as major home occupations are those conducted within homes that may cause an increase in the amount of neighborhood traffic. This increase in traffic may be in the form of persons served by the home occupation or by deliveries or pickups from the premises. An increased area for parking will be allowed for uses that are classified as major home occupations. All major home occupations are required to have their use approved by the board of zoning appeals prior to engaging in the activity. Major home occupations shall include barbershops and beauty shops, teaching of music and dance, small engine and appliance repair, upholstery shops, dressmakers, real estate offices, and other similar uses that in the opinion of the board of zoning appeals would meet the criteria of a major home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-404, 4-20-1999) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 90-433. - Gasoline service station restrictions. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service stations: 
(1)  There shall be a building setback from all street right-of-way lines of a distance of not less than 40 feet, except for canopies designed to cover the gasoline pump islands. 
(2)  Gasoline pumps shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any street right-of-way line. 
(3)  Sign requirements as established in subdivision III, division 2, article III of this chapter shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-405, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-434. - Swimming pool restrictions. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all swimming pools: 
(1)  Swimming pools in residential districts or on property with a residential use shall comply with the following restrictions: 
a.  All swimming pools 24 inches and higher in height require a building permit. 
b.  No swimming pool or part thereof, including decks, patios, aprons, and walks, shall protrude into any front yard or area forward of the primary structure. 
c.  Above ground swimming pools less than 36 inches in total height may be located in side and rear yards. 
d.  Above ground swimming pools 36 inches or greater in total height shall only be located in rear yards. 
e.  Above ground swimming pools 48 inches or less in height shall be located according to the standards for accessory structures in its respective zoning district. 
f.  In ground swimming pools and above ground swimming pools greater than 48 inches in total height shall only be located within the building area as determined by the parcel's zoning designation, including building setback standards. 
g.  All raised decks shall only be located within the building area as determined by the parcel's zoning designation, including setback standards. 
(2)  The swimming pool area shall be walled, fenced or secured by other appropriate barriers so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children and pets from the street or adjacent properties. Such fence or wall shall not be less than four feet in height and maintained in good condition. 
(3)  Private swimming pools are permitted in residential and commercial districts, provided that the pool is intended, and is to be used solely for, the enjoyment of the occupants and their guests of the property on which it is located. 
(4)  Swimming pool water discharge and disposal is subject to restrictions, including Chapter 19, Stormwater Management, of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-406, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 17-678, Exh. A, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 90-435. - Development standards for multifamily dwellings. 
    The provisions set forth in this section are intended to provide design criteria for multifamily dwellings located on a single zone lot or tract that abuts a public street. Specifically, these provisions are intended to provide regulations controlling the spacing, internal orientation, etc., of multiple buildings located on a single site. It is the express purpose of these provisions to establish design criteria and to provide for the implementation of these provisions by planning commission review of the site plan required for all such developments by section 90-53(b)(2)b. 
(1)  Development standards. 
a.  General standards. It is the intent that multifamily dwellings, where they are permitted: 
1.  May be appropriately intermingled with other types of housing; 
2.  Shall not contain more than 12 dwelling units per floor on a single unbroken frontage; and 
3.  Shall constitute groupings making efficient economical, comfortable, and convenient use of land and open space, and serving the public purposes of zoning by means alternative to conventional arrangements of yards and buildable areas. 
b.  Detailed standards. 
1.  Each dwelling unit shall be provided with reasonable visual and acoustical privacy. Fences, walks, and landscaping shall be provided for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of the development and privacy of the occupants, screening of objectionable views or uses and the reduction of noise. A minimum of 30 feet shall be maintained between buildings. 
2.  Street sidewalks and on-site walks shall be provided for convenient and safe access to all living units from streets, driveways, parking courts, or garages and for convenient circulation and access to all facilities. 
3.  The appearance and character of the site shall be preserved and enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site features; and additional new plant material shall be added for privacy, shade, beauty of buildings, and grounds and to screen out objectionable features. The planting plan shall be submitted with the site development plan. 
4.  Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens, and ground cover shall be retained to the extent that they enhance the project, are effective as a screen planting or are useful in protecting slopes. 
5.  Adequate recreation facilities for the residents of the project shall be provided in locations easily accessible to the living units and where they do not impair the view and privacy of living units. 
6.  Attractive outdoor sitting areas shall be provided, appropriate in size, type and number to the needs of the residents. 
7.  Well-equipped playgrounds of adequate size and number shall be provided, where it is anticipated that children will occupy the premises. 
8.  All public and private streets located within any multifamily development shall meet the construction specifications set forth in the city subdivision regulations. 
9.  The planning commission shall act to ensure that any private drives, parking areas or other vehicular ways used for common access for two or more residents will be suitably paved and maintained as a condition of approval of the project. 
10.  Any central refuse disposal area shall be maintained in such a manner as to meet local health requirements and shall be screened from public view. 
(2)  Access and parking requirements. 
a.  Access. 
1.  Each site developed for multifamily dwellings shall meet the requirements for access set forth in sections 90-11 and 90-17. 
2.  Access and circulation shall adequately provide for firefighting, other emergency equipment, service deliveries, furniture moving vans and refuse collection. 
b.  Parking. 
1.  Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 90-461. 
2.  Off-street parking may be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. Such parking areas shall generally be located in close proximity to the dwelling units they are designed to serve. At least one parking space per dwelling unit shall be located so as to provide a maximum walking distance of 200 feet from the nearest entrance of the dwelling unit the space is to serve. Where appropriate, common driveways, parking areas, walks and steps shall be maintained and lighted for night use. Screening of parking and service areas shall be encouraged through ample use of trees, shrubs, hedges and screening walls. 
(3)  Open space requirements. Any common open space established within a multifamily dwelling development shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Quality use and improvement of common open space. 
1.  Common open space must be for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the development considering its size, density, expected population, topography and other factors. 
2.  No common open space may be put to any use not specified on the approved final development plan, unless such amendment has been approved by the planning commission. However, no change authorized may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting the use of common open space areas, and all rights to enforce the covenants is expressly reserved. 
3.  Common open space may consist of either improved or unimproved land. In this regard the approving agency may determine that all or part of stream areas, bodies of water and slopes in excess of 15 percent may be included in common open space. In making this determination, the approving agency shall be guided by the extent of these areas in relation to the development and the degree to which these areas contribute to the quality, livability, and amenity of the development. 
b.  Maintenance of open space. In an instance where common open space is to be deeded to a maintenance organization, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the association. This document is to be submitted with the application for final approval of the planned development plan. The provisions shall be included, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  The maintenance organization must be established and operational before any unit is sold. 
2.  Membership must be mandatory for each unit and must run with the land so that any successive purchaser will automatically become a member. 
3.  The restrictions covering the use, etc., of the open space must be permanent; not just for a period of years. 
4.  The associations must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of all facilities and lands deeded to it. 
5.  Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost assessed by the maintenance association; such assessment by the association can become a lien on the homeowner's property for failure to pay. 
6.  The association must be able to adjust the assessment of fees to meet changing needs. 
c.  Conveyance of common open space. All land shown on the final development plan as common open space must be conveyed under one of the following options: 
1.  It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to maintain the common open space and any buildings, structures, or improvements which have been place on it. 
2.  It may be conveyed to trustees provided in an indenture establishing an association, funded trust, or similar organization. 
The common open space must be conveyed to the trustees subject to covenants to be approved by the planning commission which restrict the common open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures its continuing use for its intended purposes. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-407, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-436. - Alternative provisions for lot size and the location of open space. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a permissive voluntary alternative procedure to be utilized in the placement of buildings and in the location of open spaces associated therewith. The provisions of this section are intended to provide variations in lot size and open space requirements within the residential districts. The density standards established for individual districts are to be maintained on an overall basis and thereby provide desirable and proper open air space, tree cover, recreation areas or scenic vistas; all with the intent of preserving the natural beauty of the area, while at the same time maintaining the necessary maximum population density limitations of the district in which this procedure may be permitted. 
(b)  General provisions. The provisions contained within this section are intended to provide a flexible procedure for locating dwellings upon sites. As such, the provisions do not constitute a use, but an alternative procedure for the spacing of buildings and the use of open areas surrounding those buildings. It is necessary, however, that the purposes and intent of this chapter be ensured and that proper light, air, and privacy be made available for each dwelling unit. A site development plan as provided for in this section is required not only as an accurate statement of the development, but as an enforceable legal instrument whereby the planning commission may be assured that the general purposes, standards, etc., contained in this section are being met. 
(c)  Site development plan required. 
(1)  Contents. A site development plan containing the information required by section 90-53, shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval along with a sketch plat as required by the subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Coordinated review. Upon receipt of a site development plan and sketch plat containing information as required in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the planning commission may: 
a.  Concurrently review the site development plan and sketch plat; 
b.  Jointly approve, approve with modification, or disapprove these documents; and 
c.  In the instance of approval, or approval with modification, transfer the site development plan to the building inspector for enforcement. 
(3)  Enforcement. Upon approval of a site development plan, the building inspector shall become responsible for enforcement of the plan. Only minimal adjustments involving the placement of any structure will be permitted once a site development plan has been approved. Any other change shall require submission of a proposed amendment to the approved plan. 
(d)  Development standards. The following standards and requirements shall apply to all alternative density developments: 
(1)  General standards for development. In the interest of promoting the most appropriate economical use of the land while ensuring that the character of the residential district is maintained, the planning commission in its review of a proposed development shall consider the following: 
a.  The protection of the characters, property values, privacy and other characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  The provision for surface drainage control, sewage disposal, and water supply, recreation and traffic control; and 
c.  The preservation and protection of existing trees, ground cover, top soil, streams, rock outcroppings and scenic or historic sites from dangers and damage caused by excessive and poorly planned grading for streets and building sites. 
(2)  Availability of public utilities. Generally all public utilities, specifically including water and a central sewage collection and treatment system shall be available. Where public sewer is not available, no lot or housing site may be created which is less than 20,000 square feet in area and all septic fields for each dwelling unit shall be located within the area of fee simple ownership of such dwelling unit. 
(3)  Permitted density. The density permitted is intended to be within the range of that permitted within more typical developments offering no common open space. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall be computed as follows: 
a.  From the gross acreage available within the development shall be subtracted: 
1.  Any portion of the site which is within the right-of-way and/or easement for major utilities such as gas or electric transmission lines where the full use of the land is not available to the landowner, because of restrictions thereon; 
2.  Any portion of the site which lies within a regulated floodway. 
b.  The area remaining after the above adjustments shall be divided by the minimum development area per dwelling unit for the district in which the dwelling unit is located. For developments located in more than one zoning district, the density shall be computed separately for that portion of the development lying within each district. No developmental density may be transferred across zoning district boundaries. 
(4)  Minimum lot area and lot width. No lot of record may be created within the district indicated which has less area than required for the type dwelling indicated. The following dimensional requirements shall be maintained in all alternative density developments: 
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 Minimum lot size 20,000 10,000 6,000 4,000 3,500 Lot width at building line 100 75 60 50 40 Front yard setback 35 30 30 25 20 Rear yard setback 15 10 10 10 10 Side yard setback 10 10 5 5 5  
(5)  Lot coverage. Individual dwellings may exceed the maximum lot coverage provisions established for the district in which such site is located. However, in no instance shall the aggregated site coverage of all dwellings exceed the coverage provisions established for the district in which such site is located. If a project lies within two or more zoning districts, the coverage ratio applicable to each zone district shall apply to these dwellings located within it. No transfer of bulk is permitted among zoning districts. 
(6)  Access to dwellings. Access to each lot shall be in compliance with section 90-11. 
(7)  Pedestrian circulation. The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be insulated as completely as possible from the street system in order to provide separation of pedestrian underpasses or overpasses in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping areas, and other neighborhood uses which generate a considerable amount of pedestrian traffic. 
(e)  Open space requirements. Any common open space provided within a development this type shall: 
(1)  Quality use and improvement of common open space. 
a.  Common open space must be for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the development considering its size, density, expected population, topography and other factors. 
b.  No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the approved final development plan, unless such plan has been amended and approved by the planning commission. However, no change authorized may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting the use of common open space areas, and all rights to enforce these covenants against any use permitted are expressly reserved. 
c.  Common open space may, subject to approval by the planning commission, shall consist of either improved or unimproved land. In this regard, the approving agency may determine that all or part of stream areas, bodies of water and slopes in excess of 15 percent may be included in common open space. In making this determination, the approving agency shall be guided by the extent of these areas in relation to the development and the degree to which these areas contribute to the quality, livability, and amenity of the development. 
(2)  Mandatory provisions governing organization and operation of maintenance association. In an instance where common open space is to be deeded to a maintenance organization, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the association. This document is to be submitted with the application for final approval of the development plan. The provisions shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The maintenance organization must be established and operational before any homes are sold. 
b.  Membership must be mandatory for each home buyer and must run with the land so that any successive purchaser will automatically become a member. 
c.  The restrictions covering the use, etc., of the open space must be permanent, not just for a period of years. 
d.  The associations must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of all facilities and lands deeded to it. 
e.  Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost assessed by the maintenance association; such assessment by the association can become a lien on the homeowner's property for failure to pay. 
f.  The association must be able to adjust the assessment of fees to meet changing needs. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-410, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-437. - Development standards for automobile wrecking yards, junkyards and salvage yards. 
(a)  A site development plan specified in section 90-53 shall be submitted for review on all proposals subject to this section. The approval of such plan along with any accompanying conditions associated with a particular development is precedent to any approval under this section. The planning commission is the agency responsible for this review. 
(b)  Because of the nature and character of their operations, automobile wrecking and salvage yards, junkyards, and similar uses of land can have a decidedly detrimental effect upon surrounding properties. Salvage and wrecking yards tend to create problems of noise, dust, traffic and health hazards, and may adversely affect property value by their general appearance. The following standards shall be used as a guide in evaluating whether proposed land uses, such as those outlined in this division, will have properly minimized their objectionable characteristics: 
(1)  All motor vehicles stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that they will not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that they will not constitute a place or places in which rats, mice, or other vermin may be harbored, reared, or propagated. 
(2)  Because of the tendency for salvage yards to promote the breeding of vermin, no such operation shall be permitted closer than 1,000 feet from any established residential zone. 
(3)  All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed opaque fence, screen, or wall, excepting driveway areas, between eight and 12 feet in height. Storage between the road and street and such fence, screen, or wall for concealment shall be maintained in good condition. 
(4)  All such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary condition and so as not to be a menace to public health or safety. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall be as regulated in section 90-461. 
(6)  Ingress and egress. The number of vehicular access driveways permitted on any single street frontage shall be limited to: 
a.  One driveway where the parcel to be used has a maximum road or street frontage of 100 feet or less. 
b.  Two driveways where the road or street frontage exceeds 100 feet. Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be limited to 25 feet in width maximum, exclusive of curb returns. 
(7)  No automobile wrecking yard, junkyard, or salvage yard shall be permitted within 300 feet of any public road, except where a more stringent state or federal law applies. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-411, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-438. - Development standards for cemeteries. 
    The following standards shall be imposed upon the development and construction of cemeteries: 
(1)  The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector and larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare. 
(2)  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 acres. 
(3)  All structures including, but not limited to, mausoleums, permanent monuments, or maintenance buildings shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way. 
(4)  All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(5)  All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained in good order in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-412, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-439-90-460. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Off-Street Parking and Loading[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Parking, § 78-111 et seq. 

Sec. 90-461. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    In all districts, accessory off-street parking shall be provided in conformity with the requirements set forth in this section for all uses permitted by right or as a conditional use. A parking space is required for a portion of a unit of measure one-half or more of the amount set forth in this section. For an enlargement or modification resulting in a net increase in the floor area or other applicable unit of measure specified in this section, the same requirements shall apply to such net increase in the floor area or other specified unit of measurement. In the case of uses where the planning commission is required to prescribe the number of parking spaces, it shall base its determination on such factors as the traffic generation of the facilities, the time operation of such facilities, their location, and other such factors as affect the need for off-street parking as required under the conditional use provisions. Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on each lot upon which any of the following uses are hereafter established. One vehicle space shall be 162 square feet in size (nine feet by 18 feet), and such space shall be provided on each lot upon which any of the following uses are hereafter established. One vehicle space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley. The required number of parking spaces shall be provided on property owned by the relevant property owner. Such spaces shall be located where they are within easy walking distance and easily accessible to the services and uses they service. Street or highway right-of-way shall not be utilized to meet the minimum number of required parking spaces. The number of parking spaces provided shall meet the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth as follows: 
(1)  Residential activities. 
a.  Permanent. 
1.  Single-family dwellings; two-family dwellings, mobile homes: two per each dwelling unit. 
2.  Multifamily dwelling (three or more); townhouses; condominiums: two spaces per each dwelling unit. 
3.  Elderly housing, (persons over the age of 60): 11/2 spaces per unit. 
b.  Semipermanent. 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse: 11/2 spaces for each dwelling or rooming unit. 
(2)  Community facility activities. 
a.  Cultural and recreational services. Accessory off-street parking shall be provided for the specific number of square feet of gross area or seating capacity or other specified unit of measurement (or fraction or one-half or more thereof) for the type following specified uses within the activity types indicated. 
1.  Art galleries, museums, libraries: one space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Swimming pools: one space per four persons, based on design capacity of pool. 
3.  Parks, playgrounds and athletic fields: ten spaces for every acre of land devoted to field, plus one space for every four spectator seats. 
4.  Recreation centers and gymnasiums (public/nonprofit): 50 percent of the capacity in persons. 
b.  Essential public transport, communication, and utility services. 
Electric and gas substations: one space for each employee on major shift, plus one per company vehicle. 
c.  Administrative services; government office: one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Community assembly: one space for every three persons of rated capacity of the facility. 
e.  Education facilities; public and private schools. 
1.  Kindergarten and nursery: one space for each employee. 
2.  Elementary and middle schools, grade 1-9: one space for each teacher and staff member, plus one space per two classrooms. 
3.  High school, grades 9-12: one space for each teacher and staff member, plus one space for every three students, based on design capacity. 
4.  Vocational or trade schools: one space for each student, plus one space for each employee. 
f.  Extensive impact facilities. 
1.  Airports, heliports, or other aeronautical devices: one space for each employee, plus one space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area in areas open to public. 
2.  Detention or correctional institutions: one space for each staff member and facility vehicle, plus one space per 25 inmates. 
3.  Electricity generating facilities, radio, and television towers, and transmission facilities: one space for each employee. 
4.  Railroad, bus, and transit terminals for passengers: one space for each 200 square feet of waiting room. 
5.  Railroad yards and other transportation equipment marshaling and storage yards: one space for each employee. 
6.  Water and sewage treatment plants: one space for every employee. 
g.  Health care facilities. 
1.  Hospitals: one space for two beds, plus 11/2 spaces for each emergency room examination table or bed, plus one per employee on major shift other than doctors, plus one space for each doctor on staff. 
2.  Medical or dental clinics: three spaces for each staff member or doctor or dentist. 
h.  Special personal and group care facilities. 
1.  Day care centers and family day care homes: one space for each staff member, plus one space for every eight pupils. 
2.  Family and group care facilities: two spaces for every employee. 
3.  Nursing homes or convalescent homes: one space for each staff member, plus one space for each three patient beds. 
i.  Religious facilities. 
All uses: one space for each three seats. 
(3)  Commercial activities. 
Uses located on freestanding sites. One parking space shall be required for each of the following amounts of gross floor area. For example, where you see the number 250, in the column labeled "gross floor area," this means, one parking space is required for every 250 square feet of gross floor area in the building, or rooms to be used for each activity. 
Activity Type Gross Floor Area (Square Feet) 1. Nursery or green house retail sales One space per 1,000 square feet of sales area, plus one space for each employee. 2. Retail trade: automotive, ATV (all-terrain vehicles), marine craft, utility trailers, recreation vehicles, motorcycles, aircraft, and all motorized and/or wheeled vehicles sales, rental and delivery One space per 500 square feet of enclosed sales or rental floor area, plus one space per 2,500 square feet of open sales or rental display area, plus two spaces per service bay, plus one space for each employee. The open sales or rental display area must be paved, concrete or an approved hard surface. 3. Retail sale of building materials, farm equipment and hardware One space per 400 square feet of enclosed sales area, plus one space per 2,500 square feet of open sales display area, plus one space for each employee. 4. Food and beverage service One space for every three seats, plus one space for each employee on major shift. 5. Food service drive-in (fast food) One space for every two seats, plus one space for each employee on major shift. 6. Retail food stores a. Convenience store 150 b. Grocery store 200 7. General retail store a. Up to 25,000 square feet 200 b. Over 25,000 square feet 250 8. Furniture store and home furnishings 200 9. Shopping center 100,000 square feet or less 200 Over 100,000 250 Service Activities 1. Animal care and veterinarian services; veterinary hospital Three spaces for every doctor, plus one space for each employee. 2. Automobile services and repair One space for each employee, plus two spaces for each service bay. 3. Business services (All Uses) 400, plus one space for each employee. 4. Contract construction office 300, plus one space for each company vehicle. 5. Equipment repair services 300 6. Entertainment and amusement a. Art galleries 800 b. Bowling alleys Five spaces for each alley, plus one space for employee. c. Billiard parlor Two spaces per table. d. Coin-operated arcades 250 e. Commercial recreation Dancehalls and skating rink 100 Golf courses, driving range, putt-putt course Six spaces per hole, plus one space for each employee. Exhibitions halls, auditoriums, amphitheaters One space for each three seats, plus one space for each employee. f. Motion picture theater One space for each three seats, plus one space for each employee. g. Recording, television, and radio studios One space for each employee. h. Resorts and group camps One space for every campsite, plus one space for each employee. i. Fairgrounds, amusement parks, carnivals, circuses One space for every 200 square feet of enclosed building, plus one space for every three persons the facility is designed to accommodate. [7. Reserved] 8. Finance, insurance and real estate services (All Uses) 200, plus one space per each employee. 9. Gasoline service station 500, plus two spaces for each service bay and one space for each employee. 10. Funeral, mortuary, undertaking services One space for every four seats, plus one space for each employee, plus one space for every company vehicle. 11. Office professional 300 12. Office, medical, dental Three spaces per treatment room, plus one space for every doctor, dentist or employee. 13. Transient habitation a. Hotel, motels, tourist homes or courts One space for each room to be rented, plus one space for each employee. b. Sporting and recreational vehicle camps One space for each travel vehicle or pad, plus one space per each employee.  
(4)  Industrial activities. 
a.  Manufacturing/industrial: five spaces, plus one space for each employee on the shift of maximum employment. 
b.  Warehousing, foods or freight transport, and storage: one space for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each 10,000 square feet of open storage. A minimum of five spaces shall be provided by any establishment. 
c.  Automobile wrecking yards, scrap metal processing, junkyards: one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Other. For buildings and land uses not referred to in the preceded activity classifications and specifically listed in the corresponding use classification listings cited within section 90-8, the off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-401, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-462. - Certification of minimum parking requirements. 
    Each application for a building permit shall include information as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking spaces and the means of ingress and egress to such space. This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the building inspector to determine whether or not the requirements of section 90-461 are met. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-401.1, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-463. - Combination of required parking spaces. 
    The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use, except that the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-401.2, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-464. - Remote parking spaces. 
    If the off-street parking space required by this chapter cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such space may be provided on any land within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use, provided that such land is in the same ownership or lease as the principal use. Such land shall be used for no other purpose so long as no other adequate provision of parking space, meeting the requirements of this chapter, has been made for the principal use. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-401.3, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-465. - Extension of parking area into a residential district. 
    Required parking space may be extended 100 feet into a residential district, provided that: 
(1)  The parking area adjoins a commercial or industrial district. 
(2)  The parking space in this area have their only access to or front upon the same street as the property in the commercial or industrial districts for which it provides the required parking spaces. 
(3)  The parking area is separated from abutting properties in the residential districts by a 25-foot buffer strip. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-401.4, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-466. - Requirements for design of parking lots. 
(a)  Except for parcels of land devoted to one-family and two-family residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress. 
(b)  Each parking space shall be no less than 162 square feet in area. 
(c)  Entrances and exits for all off-street in such comply with the requirements of subdivision IV, division 11, article III of this chapter. 
(d)  The parking lot shall be designed in such a manner as to provide adequate drainage and to eliminate the possibility of stagnant pools of water. 
(e)  There shall be a parking aisle at least 22 feet wide serving all 90 degree and 60 degree angled parking spaces. For all 30 and 45 degree angled parking spaces, there shall be a minimum parking aisle of 16 feet in width. 
(f)  All off-street parking areas containing five spaces or more shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or other hard surfaced dustless material and so constructed to provide for adequate drainage for both on-site and off-site and to prevent the release of dust. All parking spaces shall be clearly marked. 
(g)  No parking spaces serving any residential development shall be located further than 60 feet from the respective dwelling unit such spaces serve. 
(h)  All parking lots shall be in compliance with the American Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-401.5, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-467. - Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
    Every building or structure constructed and used for business or trade involving the receiving or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise shall provide space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to a public or private alley, or if there is no alley to a public street. The minimum required spaces for this section shall be based on the total usable floor area of each principal building according to the following table: 
Total Usable Floor Area 
For Principal 
Building Spaces Required 0 to 9,999 square feet One space 10,000 to 14,999 square feet Two spaces 15,000 to 19,999 square feet Three spaces Over 20,000 square feet Four spaces, plus one space for each additional 20,000 square feet  
Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements for Industrial Uses 
5,000 to 40,000 square feet One space Over 40,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet Two spaces Each additional 100,000 square feet or major fraction thereof One space  
The board of zoning appeals may reduce or increase this requirement in the interest of safety where unusual or special conditions are due consideration. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-402, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-468-90-490. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Signs, Billboards and Other Advertising Structures 

Sec. 90-491. - Intent and objectives. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to promote the well-being of the community by establishing standards that ensure the provision of signs adequate to meet essential communication needs while safeguarding the rights of the people in the community to a safe, healthful and attractive environment. Within this overall framework, it is the intent of this subdivision to: 
(1)  Protect the right to the use of signs for the identification of activities and any related products, services and events and for noncommercial messages; 
(2)  Ensure proper exposure of signs to their intended viewers; 
(3)  Protect the right of individuals to privacy and freedom from nuisances; 
(4)  Protect the value of property and improvements thereon; 
(5)  Permit signs that are constructed and maintained in a safe condition; 
(6)  Ensure that signs are constructed and maintained in a safe condition; 
(7)  Encourage design that enhances the readability and effectiveness of signs; 
(8)  Prevent signs from interfering with traffic regulatory devices or otherwise obstructing motorist or pedestrian vision; 
(9)  Reduce traffic hazards; 
(10)  Eliminate obsolete signs; 
(11)  Provide an efficient and effective means of administration and enforcement. 
(b)  Scope. Except for signs that are prohibited in all districts in section 90-494, the regulations of this subdivision shall apply to all signs and their appurtenances that are visible from the outside of buildings, including interior window signs and all exterior signs, except those located within and visible only from within enclosed courtyards, malls, or similar enclosures. This subdivision shall not in any manner attempt to censure the written or depicted copy on any permitted sign. Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a commodity or service for sale, and that complies with size, location, height, lighting, and spacing requirements of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.1, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-492. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning means any nonrigid material such as fabric or flexible plastic that is supported by or stretched over a frame that is attached to an exterior wall. 
    Awning sign means a sign placed directly on the surface of an awning. 
    Banner means a sign that is mounted on or attached to a nonrigid surface such as cloth, fabric, or paper. 
    Billboard. See Off-premises sign. 
    Bulletin board sign means a particular type of changeable copy sign that displays copy in a casement made of glass or plexiglass. 
    Canopy means an extension of the roof of a building or a freestanding structure that has a roof with support, but no walls. 
    Canopy sign means a sign attached to a canopy. 
    Copy means the characters, letters, or illustrations displayed on a sign face. 
    Frontage, building, means the length of a building that faces a street, parking area, or private drive. 
    Illegal sign means a sign that was constructed in violation of regulations that existed at the time it was built. 
    Marquee means a permanent structure other than a roof attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection from natural elements. 
    Marquee sign means a sign attached to and made part of a marquee or any other similar projection from a building. 
    Nonconforming sign means a sign that met all legal requirements when constructed, but that is not in compliance with this subdivision. An illegal sign is not a nonconforming sign. 
    Sign means any writing (including letter, word or numeral), pictorial representation (including illustration or decoration); emblem (including device, symbol, or trademark); flag (including banner, streamer, or pennant); inflatable devices; or any other figure of similar character, which: 
(1)  Is a structure or any part thereof, or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or other structure; 
(2)  Is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; and 
(3)  Is visible from outside a building. 
    Sign, abandoned, means any sign in which the functions of direction and/or identification of a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted or product available are obsolete. 
    Sign, accessory, means any sign that directs attention to a person, activity, or commodity on the same zone lot. 
    Sign, advertising, means a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the same zone lot, including any expressive sign larger than 15 square feet; or directs attention to any brand name or trade name product that may be incidentally available on the same zone lot as the sign provided the establishment offering the product is not associated with the brand or trade name of the product being advertised. 
    Sign, animated, means a sign that is animated, moving, rotating or appears to be animated, moving or rotating. 
    Sign, banner, means a sign having the copy applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. The term "banner" shall include animated and/or fluttering devices designed to attract attention. 
    Sign, building mounted, means any sign attached to or supported by any building or other structure that has a purpose other than solely to support a sign, except a sign attached to any upright pole or support when the sign is wider than such pole or support, which shall be considered a freestanding sign. 
    Sign, changeable copy, means a sign designed so the copy can be changed while the display surface remains unchanged; includes such signs as manually or electronically changed readerboards and fuel price displays. 
    Sign, civic, means a type of accessory sign that identifies or provides related information about community facility activity types. 
    Sign, development, means a type of incidental sign that denotes the future facility, the architect, the engineer, the contractor, the lending agency and/or the developer on a construction site. 
    Sign, direct illumination, means all illuminated signs not included in the definition of the terms "sign, luminous background," and "sign, indirect illumination." 
    Sign, directional, means any sign which provides information relative to safely identifying vehicular entrances and exits to parking lots or traffic circulation areas for activities. Directional signs may include logo, symbols or a business name and shall not exceed three square feet in size nor 30 inches in height. Such signs shall be located on the private premises and only one shall be installed per driveway. 
    Sign, directory, means a sign which lists the names of individuals, businesses, or products available at a single site. 
    Sign, expressive, means any sign that express an opinion, feeling or point of view, such as political, ideological, religious, campaign, and good will signs. Depending on its size, and expressive sign may be an incidental, temporary, or permanent advertising sign. 
    Sign, freestanding, means any sign that is not attached to or supported by any building or other structure that has a purpose other than solely to support the sign and any sign attached to any upright pole or supports when such sign is wider than such pole or support. 
    Sign, handtacked, means a temporary advertising sign commonly attached, tacked, hung, or suspended from any available structure, usually intended to announce an upcoming event such as a music performance, garage sale, or church bazaar. 
    Sign, incidental, means an accessory sign intended primarily for the convenience or direction of the public including: accessory residential signs smaller than three square feet that indicate name, address or home occupation; signs that indicate the types of credit available at a business; realty signs; signs with information that is warning in nature, such as "danger," "no trespassing," or "beware of dog"; signs indicating temporary events such as a garage sale or open house; political yard signs; and expressive signs smaller than three square feet. 
    Sign, indirect illumination, means any illuminated sign which is either a sign illuminated entirely from an external artificial source or an illuminated sign which all attached or internal artificial sources of illumination are not directly visible or are shielded by an opaque material. 
    Sign, large residential, means a type of accessory sign larger than three square feet that indicates the name and/or address of a residential activity type that contains four or more dwelling or rooming units; and shall include a sign at the principal entrance to any subdivision or residential planned development that contains more than 12 dwelling units. 
    Sign, luminous background, means a sign created by transilluminating or backlighting of a translucent plastic or glass panel, or panels of similar material, which may be integrally pigmented, painted, or opaqued. 
    Sign, monument, means a freestanding sign with a base affixed to the ground which measures at least two-thirds the horizontal length of the sign. 
    Sign, permanent, means any permitted sign which is not restricted as to the duration of time it can be displayed. 
    Sign, portable, means any sign which is movable, portable, or designed to be portable which is in the shape of an "A" frame, panel, or mounted on wheels or legs of any kind, whether or not permanently affixed to the ground or buildings. 
    Sign, projecting, means any sign that: 
(1)  Is attached to a wall and projects outward from the wall more than 12 inches; or 
(2)  Is suspended from any structure that constitutes a covering or shelter such as a canopy, portico, or marquee. 
Usually, though not always, the face of a projecting sign will be perpendicular to or from a wide angle with the surface to which it is attached. 
    Sign, realty, means a type of incidental sign that temporarily provides information regarding the sale, lease or rent of the premises or any improvements thereon which is no larger than nine square feet. 
    Sign, structure, means a structure, including uprights, supports, frames, display surfaces, and other appurtenances, intended to support and display one or more signs. 
    Sign, wall, means a type of building mounted sign that is attached to a wall (including parapet wall) or other structure that supports a roof, including any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy or awning and any sign attached to any side face of a marquee; that does not project outward more than 12 inches from the surface to which it is attached; and in which the sign face is parallel to the plane of the surface to which it is attached. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.2, 4-20-1999) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-493. - Exempt signs and temporary signs. 
(a)  Exempt signs. The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter or from the requirement to obtain a sign permit: 
(1)  Address and name of resident: Signs indicating address and/or name of residential occupants of the premises, not exceeding two square feet in area, and not including any commercial advertising or identification. 
(2)  Artwork: Works of art that do not include any commercial messages or references. 
(3)  Construction signs: Temporary signs warning of construction, excavation, or similar hazards so long as the hazard may exist. 
(4)  Decals: Decals affixed to windows or door glass panes, such as indicating membership in a business group or credit cards accepted at the establishments. 
(5)  Directional signs: Signs giving on-site directional assistance for the convenience of the public, not exceeding two square feet in area or located closer than five feet to any property line. Directional signs may be internally lit or illuminated by white light only. 
(6)  Flags, emblems, insignia, and banners: Of any governmental agency or religious, charitable, public or nonprofit organization, subject to the following: No single flag that is flown shall exceed 40 square feet in area and no single zoning lot shall fly more than three such flags. If the total area of such flags exceeds 72 square feet, the excess area shall be included in the sign area calculations for the zoning lot. Flagpoles shall not exceed 25 feet in height. Wall-mounted flags, emblems, insignia, and banners shall be limited to one per zoning lot and shall not exceed 40 square feet in area. 
(7)  Handicapped parking space sign: Signs not exceeding two square feet in area reserving parking spaces for handicapped motorists. 
(8)  Home occupation signs: On-premises identification signs for home occupations shall not exceed two square feet in area and shall contain only the name of the business and/or business owner. Such signs shall be located on an exterior wall, window, or door of the premises. 
(9)  Public signs: Signs erected by government agencies or utilities including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing, and identification signs for public facilities, and any signs erected by the board of commissioners or under the direction of the board of commissioners. 
(10)  Seasonal signs: Signs in the nature of decorations which are seasonal, clearly incidental and customarily associated with any national, local, or religious holiday. 
(11)  Security and warning signs: On-premises signs regulating the use of the premises, such as "no trespassing," "no hunting," and "no soliciting" signs, that do not exceed two square feet in area in residential areas and five square feet in commercial and industrial areas. 
(12)  Temporary real estate signs: Temporary signs indicating the availability of real property for lease or sale, located on the premises being leased or sold. Display of such signs shall be limited to one sign per property not exceeding six feet in height and not exceeding four square feet in area in residential zones and eight square feet in area in all other zones. Such signs shall be removed within seven days of the settlement or lease of the property. 
(b)  Temporary signs requiring approval. The following signs may be erected only after approval from the enforcing officer. Any temporary sign not removed by the expiration of the appropriate time limit noted in this section, the administrator may remove it and charge the costs of removal to the individual or enterprise responsible. 
(1)  Special event signs: Signs announcing special events including, but not limited to grand openings, new management, going out of business, and events sponsored by religious, charitable, or public service groups. Any business, individual, or organization may display two temporary signs including portable signs, twice during the calendar year for a period not to exceed 30 days. Such signs shall not be located in any public right-of-way or in any location that would impair visibility of the motoring public, and shall be removed immediately following the event. 
(2)  Temporary farm products signs: Temporary on-premises signs announcing the availability of seasonal farm products. The number of signs shall not exceed two and the total area of all such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet, nor shall any sign exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  Construction signs: Temporary signs announcing new buildings, or projects, erected after the commencement of building construction or site development. Each construction site shall be limited to one construction sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area and eight feet on height, which shall be removed by the time a permanent sign is erected or a certificate of occupancy for the building is issued, whichever occurs first. 
(4)  Auction signs: Signs announcing and directing the public to the auction site shall be limited to a maximum of five signs per event and shall not exceed 16 square feet, except on the auction site itself, and this sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. No sign shall be placed in such a manner that would obstruct vision of motorist or be a detriment to the functions of business. All signs shall be removed within one business day following the event. Any sign not complying with this chapter shall be removed at the owner's expense and be subject to penalty. 
(5)  Temporary political signs: On-premises temporary political signs may be located in any residential, commercial, or industrial district. A permit, one per candidate displaying signs, is required and must be obtained prior to the placement of these signs. The candidate and person obtaining the permit shall be responsible for the removal of the signs. Additional provisions shall be as follows: 
a.  Political signs shall only be placed and/or displayed within 45 days prior to the date of election and must be removed within seven days following the date of election. 
b.  Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size. 
c.  If more than one sign per candidate is displayed on the same lot, the total sign square footage for each candidate may not exceed 16 square feet per 150 lineal feet of road frontage. 
d.  No political signs may be placed on any property, or the right-of-way adjacent to the property, without the permission of the property owner. 
e.  Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet from the paved edge of any public street or paved shoulder of such street. 
f.  Placement of legally permitted political signs on public street rights-of-way shall be exempt from the enforcement provisions of section 90-494(a)(5). Such exemption from enforcement is provided solely by the city and does not grant authority to place signs in a right-of-way owned by the state or any other right holder and shall not limit the enforcement of restrictions by the right-of-way owner. The signs are not granted rights or protection within the right-of-way and may be at risk of removal, damage, or other mishap resulting from the use or care of the right-of-way. 
g.  Political signs shall be exempt from the regulations of temporary signs specified in section 90-497(3), Location of temporary signs, provided the signs meet all regulations set forth in this subsection. 
h.  On election day and on days of early voting at city hall, political signs may be displayed on city hall property in accordance with regulations set forth in section 2-1. No trailers displaying political signs may be parked on city hall property. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.3, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 02-411, § 1, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 06-498, § 1, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 90-494. - General provisions. 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  No sign, except for those specified in section 90-493(a), shall be erected until a permit has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  No sign shall resemble or approximate the size, shape, form, or color of any official traffic control sign, signal, or device. 
(3)  No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with the visibility or effectiveness of any traffic control sign, or with driver vision at any access points. 
(4)  On any corner lot no sign shall be erected or placed in a manner to impede or obstruct vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along such street lines 50 feet from the point of the intersection. 
(5)  No sign other than duly authorized governmental signs shall be erected or maintained within any public street right-of-way. 
(6)  No sign shall be painted on or attached to any trees, rocks, fence posts, utility poles, or similar structures or objects. 
(7)  No sign shall obstruct any doorway, window, or fire escape. 
(8)  The light from any illuminated sign shall be so directed, shaded, or shielded that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises nor affect in any way the safe vision of operators of moving vehicles. Light shall not be permitted to shine or reflect on or into any residential structure. 
(9)  All pole and monument signs shall be limited to no more than eight items of information. 
(b)  Surface area display standards. 
(1)  The supports or uprights and any covering thereon on which one or more signs is mounted shall not be included in the display surface area. 
(2)  On signs in which the copy together with the background are designed as an integrated unit separate from the structure on which the sign is mounted, the display surface area shall be the total area within a perimeter that encloses the entire sign copy of background. 
(3)  On signs that do not have a distinct background separate from the structure on which the sign is mounted, the display surface area shall be the area within a continuous single perimeter composed of one or more rectangles, circles, and/or triangles that enclose the extreme limits of the copy considered to be the sign. 
(4)  When two sign faces of the same shape and dimensions are mounted back to back on the same sign structure and are either parallel or from an angle not exceeding 30 degrees, only one of the sign faces shall be used to compute the display surface area. If the angle of the sign faces exceeds 30 degrees, then both faces shall be used to compute the display surface area. 
(5)  In any district which permits advertising signs the computation of display surface area shall include both advertising and accessory signs. 
(6)  On a corner lot, a permitted sign may be located along each street frontage. 
(c)  Height of signs. The following general rules shall apply in the determination of the height of signs: 
(1)  The height of any sign shall be measured to the topmost point of the sign or sign structure from the average grade level at the base of the supports or the base of any sign directly attached to the ground. 
(2)  The height of signs placed on berms, mounds, or similar landscape features or on hills or mounds left after a lot is graded shall be measured from the finished or established grade around such features. 
(d)  Signs prohibited in all districts. The following signs or types of signs are prohibited in all districts and are hereby declared to be illegal: 
(1)  Any sign that is abandoned, deteriorated, unsafe, or not otherwise identified in this subdivision; 
(2)  Any sign which is painted on or attached to a vehicle or a vehicular trailer unless such vehicle is in operable condition, carrying all current and valid licenses, and used primarily for the transportation of goods and/or persons in the everyday and ordinary course of business of the owner thereof; 
(3)  Signs which are made structurally sound by guy wires or unsightly bracing; 
(4)  Signs which contain any kind of strobe or pulsating lights; 
(5)  Animated signs; 
(6)  Banner signs, except as permitted in section 90-493; 
(7)  Any sign with direct illumination provided by exposed bulbs or lamps; 
(8)  Off-premises signs, except as permitted in this subdivision; 
(9)  Flashing signs; 
(10)  Handtacked signs, on utility poles, fence posts and trees; 
(11)  Portable signs, except as permitted in section 90-493; 
(12)  Roof signs. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.4, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-495. - Signs permitted in residential districts. 
    Within the residential districts, the following signs are permitted subject to the provisions set forth in this section: 
(1)  Community facility activities. 
a.  A community facility activity may have one civic sign constructed as a monument sign or a wall sign. 
b.  A monument sign shall not exceed four feet in height and 25 square feet in size. Ground signs which are integrated into an attractive brick, stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth berm, all of which shall be permanently landscaped, may exceed four feet in height to a maximum of six feet. 
c.  A wall sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in size. 
d.  Civic signs may be illuminated by indirect means or with luminous background, provided that the light source does not illuminate surrounding properties. 
e.  Civic signs shall be set back from the street right-of-way and property lines, a minimum of eight feet. 
(2)  Development signs. 
a.  A development sign may be located at the major entrance to a new development. Such sign shall be removed within one year of the approval of the development by the planning commission, provided that in the case of a multiyear development the time for removal may be extended by the enforcing officer one additional year for each year the development is under continuous construction. Such signs may be either a pole or ground sign. 
b.  A development sign shall not exceed 300 square feet in size nor 15 feet in height. 
c.  A development sign shall not be lighted. 
d.  Any development sign shall be set back from the street right-of-way a minimum of 20 feet. 
(3)  Large residential signs. 
a.  Subdivision identification signs may be permitted at the main entrance to a subdivision. 
b.  Each subdivision is allowed a maximum of two identification signs located at main entrances. These signs are to be located on private property or in a median if one is present. 
c.  All subdivision identification signs shall be integrally designed as a part of a permanently constructed and maintained wall, fence, or similar feature or shall be a ground sign. All such areas shall be attractively landscaped. 
d.  A subdivision identification sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in size. 
e.  The maximum height of such signs shall be four feet when constructed as a ground sign. Ground signs which are integrated into an attractive brick, stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth berm, all of which shall be permanently landscaped, may exceed four feet in height to a maximum of six feet. 
f.  All subdivision identification signs and the attendant landscaped area shall be owned and maintained either by the owner/developer or by a legally established homeowners association. 
g.  Any lighting on such signs shall be integrated into the entrance feature and shall be subdued and shall light only such sign. No light shall shine or reflect on or into any residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.5, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-496. - Permitted signs in commercial and industrial districts. 
    Within the commercial and industrial districts, the following signs are permitted, subject to the provisions as set forth in this section: 
(1)  Commercial district signs. Within commercial (excluding highway commercial) districts, the following standards for signs shall apply: 
a.  Accessory business and civic signs are permitted and shall be either wall or projecting signs, except as set forth in subsections (1)d, (1)e, and (1)f of this section. All other sign types are prohibited. 
b.  A use may be permitted to have one projecting sign attached to the front of the building subject to the following standards: 
1.  Such sign shall not exceed 80 square feet in display surface area. 
2.  Such sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height measured from the bottom of the sign provided that in no case shall such sign extend above the roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
3.  Such sign shall clear the established grade by a minimum of ten feet. 
4.  Such sign shall be no closer than 25 feet to any other projecting sign. 
5.  The copy information shall be limited to the identification of the owner, address, name and/or principal activity conducted on the premises. 
c.  Wall signs are permitted, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in display surface area. 
2.  Such sign shall be located on the front wall of the building which is oriented to the street from which access is derived. For uses with two street frontages, wall signs may be located on a wall for each frontage. For uses not oriented to a public street, the wall considered to be the front of the use shall be used for location of such signage. 
3.  Such sign shall not extend above the roofline of the building to which it is attached nor shall such sign project outward from the building more than 12 inches. 
4.  Such sign placed in the horizontal space between windows of a two story building shall not exceed in height more than two-thirds of the distance between the top of the window below and the sill of the window above. 
5.  Such sign shall not cover or interrupt major architectural features of the building. 
6.  If a use utilizes both wall and projecting signs, the total display surface area shall not exceed 80 square feet. 
7.  The copy information shall be limited to the identification of the owner, address, name and/or principal activity conducted on the premises. 
d.  If a use on a lot is set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet and has off-street parking, then such use may utilize one ground or pole sign subject to the following standards. All other signs on the same lot shall be wall signs: 
1.  Such sign shall have a maximum display surface area of 50 square feet. The maximum display surface area for all signs on the same lot shall be 125 square feet. 
2.  The maximum height of a pole sign shall be 30 feet and of a ground sign four feet. Ground signs which are integrated into an attractive brick, or stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth berm, all of which shall be permanently landscaped, may exceed four feet in height to a maximum of six feet. 
3.  The number of signs permitted on a sign structure shall be limited to one sign, except that an additional sign which is a changeable copy sign may be permitted with a maximum display surface area of 20 square feet. 
4.  Such sign shall be set back from the right-of-way a minimum of eight feet. 
e.  A commercial complex of two or more acres, which is set back from the right-of-way a minimum of 30 feet and has off-street parking may utilize the following provisions: 
1.  A commercial complex may be permitted one pole or ground sign for each street frontage identifying the name of the complex or business. If a street frontage is in excess of 250 feet in length, one additional such sign shall be permitted. The maximum size of each such sign shall be a ratio of one-half to one of square footage of sign area to the length of the street frontage or the front facade of the building, whichever is greater, with a maximum sign area of 100 square feet. Such sign shall not exceed 30 feet in height or the height of the building, whichever is less, if a pole sign; or four feet in height if a ground sign. Ground signs which are integrated into an attractive brick, stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth berm, all of which shall be permanently landscaped, may exceed four feet in height to a maximum of six feet. If the ratio of one-half to one results in a sign less than 50 square feet in size, then a minimum size sign of 50 square feet shall be permitted. 
2.  Additional signage may be permitted on the buildings within the complex and shall be either wall signs, projecting signs, or signage painted on glass windows or a combination thereof. Such signage shall be in scale with the size of the wall of the building upon which it is located and be architecturally compatible. The display surface area of such signage shall not exceed five percent of the square footage of such wall and may be apportioned for multiple occupants with each occupant being entitled to an equal share of the display surface area. 
3.  In lieu of a pole or ground sign identifying the name of the complex, such commercial complex may utilize a directory sign identifying individual occupancies subject to the same size requirements as in this subsection (1). 
4.  A directory sign listing the names of individual businesses or occupancies may be permitted at the entrance to the parking lot or at the entrance of each building. The maximum display surface area shall not exceed ten square feet and the maximum height shall be six feet. 
f.  Signs may be illuminated subject to the following standards: 
1.  Exposed bulbs or luminous tubes are prohibited. 
2.  No sign shall change color or intensity. 
3.  In no event shall the light from any illuminated sign exceed one footcandle at the property line of any lot that is zoned residential or agricultural. 
4.  The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect the surrounding or facing premises nor adversely affect safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private streets or parking areas. Light shall not shine or reflect on or into any residential structure. 
5.  Electronic scrolling message signs will be permitted in C-1 zones only. These signs must meet all provisions of this subsection, and: 
i.  These signs shall be permanently embedded in a stone, masonry or steel monument or pylon sign. 
ii.  The electronically generated message of the full signboard shall not change at an interval greater than four times per minute. 
iii.  Continuous streaming, special effects and moving scene depiction on these signs are prohibited. 
(2)  Highway commercial and industrial district signs. Within the highway commercial and industrial districts, the following standards for signs shall apply: 
a.  Accessory business and civic signs are permitted as follows: 
1.  A use on a lot shall be permitted to have one ground or pole sign per street frontage. The maximum display surface area shall be 80 square feet. The maximum display surface area for all signs on the same lot shall be 160 square feet. 
2.  The maximum height shall be 25 feet for a pole sign and four feet for a ground sign. Ground signs which are integrated into an attractive brick, stone, or wood architectural feature or an earth berm, all of which shall be permanently landscaped, may exceed four feet in height to a maximum of six feet. 
3.  Either type sign shall be set back from the right-of-way a minimum of eight feet. 
4.  The number of signs permitted on a sign structure shall be limited to one sign except that an additional sign which is a changeable copy sign may be permitted with a maximum display surface area of 20 square feet. 
5.  In addition to the signage permitted, a use on a lot shall be allowed to have wall signs or signage painted on glass at the entrance to the building. Wall signs shall be subject to the standards contained in subsection (1)c of this section. 
6.  A commercial complex shall be subject to the provisions contained in subsection (1)e of this section. 
b.  For those business or uses located at the I-65 interchange, the following additional provisions shall apply: 
1.  The maximum height for a pole sign shall be 100 feet. 
2.  The maximum display surface area for a pole sign shall be 100 square feet. The maximum display surface area for all signs on the same zone lot shall be 175 square feet. 
c.  Interstate off-site advertising signs may be permitted only within the highway commercial and industrial along the I-65 highway corridor, and oriented thereto and subject to the following standards: 
1.  All off-site advertising signs shall be freestanding and mounted upon a single support pole, and shall not be double stacked or constructed side by side. 
2.  The maximum display surface area shall be 675 square feet. 
3.  An off-site advertising sign shall not be located on the same lot as any other use. 
4.  No advertising sign shall be located on or extend across any public right-of-way. 
5.  No new advertising sign shall be erected by a sign company until it has removed an equal number of nonconforming advertising signs which it operates. 
6.  The minimum distance between off-site advertising signs located along and oriented toward the same public street shall be 2,000 feet and shall be applied as follows: The spacing requirements shall be applied separately to each side of a public street. 
7.  No off-site advertising sign shall be located closer than 1,000 feet from any other such sign regardless of location or orientation. 
8.  The maximum height of advertising signs shall be 50 feet above the elevation of the pavement nearest the sign. 
9.  No advertising sign shall be located closer than 500 feet from any property zoned residential. 
(3)  General off-site advertising signs. General off-site advertising signs may be permitted within any commercial or industrial district subject to the following standards: 
a.  The maximum display area shall be 72 square feet. 
b.  These signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 16 feet with a minimum of ten feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign face. 
c.  An off-site advertising sign shall be setback a minimum of 12 feet from any public right-of-way. This distance is measured from the leading edge of the sign. 
d.  All off-site advertising shall be no closer than 1,000 feet from any other off-site sign, measured along the road right-of-way. 
e.  All off-site signs shall be at least 100 feet from any residential district or 250 feet from any residential district along the same side of the road. 
f.  All off-site signs must meet the minimum side or rear setbacks for the district which they are located. 
g.  Off-site signs erected or placed on developed lots must maintain a spacing of 100 feet from any permanent freestanding sign. 
h.  In the event that a business cannot meet the stipulations in this section, then a one-time allowance for a grand opening of a business, as described on the original business license issued, may advertise off-site on one commercial property that is no greater than 600 feet away from the building of the business in question. Such signs shall not be displayed publicly for a period longer than 60 days. The sign shall be no greater than 20 square feet, and can be a part of an existing, legal, conforming/nonconforming sign. 
    These limited, temporary signs shall not be free standing banner signs, be placed in the public right-of-way, create a public safety hazard of any type, or be placed on another building/structure. If the same business type continues with the new management, then this allowance can be repeated if a new business license is filed in place of the original. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.6, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 04-448, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 12-600, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 90-497. - Temporary sign provisions. 
    Temporary signs shall be permitted for any lawful activity on a lot or parcel, subject to the provisions set forth in this section: 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  All temporary signs are required to obtain a yearly permit to place one temporary sign on a parcel or lot. Each permit shall be issued for a 12-month period to be renewed the first month of each year. These permits will be $25.00 to assist in the cost of administration of this section. 
b.  Banners may be used as temporary signs. 
c.  All such signs shall be securely installed or fastened and positioned in place so as not to constitute a hazard of any kind. 
d.  No temporary sign shall be displayed on a roof. 
e.  No temporary sign shall be permitted to project into or over any public street right-of-way, except a banner announcing a fair, festival, parade, or similar activity that will be open to the general public. 
f.  Temporary signs are permitted at construction sites for the purpose of identifying names of contractors, consultants, etc., and shall be limited to three items of information. 
(2)  Display surface area, height, and illumination. 
a.  Maximum display surface area shall be 35 square feet except for street banners which shall not be limited. 
b.  Maximum height shall be ten feet, except that banners displayed over a public street shall have a minimum clearance of 15 feet. 
c.  Temporary signs shall not be illuminated except in commercial or industrial districts. 
d.  No sign shall flash or pulsate in any way. 
e.  Any sign that is lighted shall be done in compliance with the National Electrical Code. 
(3)  Location of temporary signs. 
a.  All temporary signs shall setback a minimum of five feet, from any street right-of-way, unless an alternate location is approved by the building inspector in special cases. No temporary graphic shall overhand or encroach on any street right-of-way at any time. 
b.  The minimum distance between any two such signs on the same lot shall be 150 feet. 
c.  No temporary signs shall be closer than 50 feet from any permanent sign. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.7, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-498. - Nonconforming and noncomplying sign provisions. 
    Any sign lawfully existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter but which is not permitted either by type of sign, location, or district or which fails to meet the standards on regulations shall be classified as either nonconforming or noncomplying. 
(1)  Removal of temporary nonconforming signs. Nonconforming portable and handtacked signs and signs in a public right-of-way shall be removed within 45 days. Nonconforming flashing or animated signs shall be caused to stop flashing or animation within 45 days. 
(2)  Alterations to nonconforming and noncomplying signs. A nonconforming or noncomplying sign may be altered subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed alteration is not greater than 50 percent of the total sign structure or alteration costs are not greater than 50 percent of its depreciated value. 
b.  The total copy of an advertising sign may be changed in accordance with normal business practices. 
c.  The proposed alteration conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
d.  No new nonconformance or noncompliance is created. 
(3)  Damage or destruction of nonconforming and noncomplying signs. When any such sign is damaged or destroyed from any cause to the extent of 50 percent of the sign structure or to the extent of 50 percent of its depreciated value at the time of its damage or destruction, the sign shall be removed or otherwise made to conform or comply with all appropriate provisions of this chapter. Except that any advertising sign located within 660 feet of a federal highway as defined by the Federal Highway Beautification Act and oriented to that highway shall not be removed until compensation can be made to the extent required by law. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-408.8, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-499-90-520. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Development Standards For Mobile Home Parks 

Sec. 90-521. - Intent of subdivision; definitions. 
(a)  The regulations of this subdivision are intended to ensure a minimum standard of site development for mobile home parks where permitted as a special exception in a zoning district. 
(b)  A mobile home park and an R-5M subdivision development are defined as follows: 
(1)  Mobile home park. A residential community where inhabitants rent tracts of land for mobile home dwellings. 
(2)  R-5M major subdivision development. A major subdivision of land where the inhabitants own their own home and land parcel. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409, 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 05-460, § 2, 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 90-522. - Building permit. 
(a)  Required. The application for a mobile home park permit shall be filed with the building inspector after the applicant has secured all water, storm water, erosion and sediment, sewer, and other permits required for the project. However, construction or extension of a mobile home park may not commence within the area of jurisdiction of this chapter until a mobile home park site plan has been approved by the planning commission, after recommendations and approval [of] the special exception is secured by the board of zoning appeals (BZA). The BZA, as per its normal operations, may attach whatever conditions it sees fit to the approval in order to protect the neighborhood or adjoining properties. 
(b)  Site plan required. A mobile home park building permit may only be issued for construction or extension of a mobile home park upon submission of a site plan containing the following information: 
(1)  The pertinent standards of the site plan checklist. 
(2)  The proposed use of all on-site buildings. 
(3)  Off-street parking area for recreation vehicles. 
(4)  Location of park and recreation areas. 
(5)  Elevation survey at five-foot intervals. 
(6)  All buildings outside of the park within 200 feet of it. 
(7)  Complete and attached drainage plan. 
(8)  A time schedule for development shall be prepared which shall demonstrate the applicant's readiness and ability to provide the proposed services. Such time shall be for a period not to exceed one year. 
(9)  Such other architectural, engineering, and topographical data as may be required to permit the county health department, the building inspector, the planning commission, the board of zoning appeals, to determine if the provisions of this subdivision are being complied with shall be submitted with the site plan. 
(c)  Inspection fee. A mobile home park will include a much larger number of inspections than projects typical to the average site plan. Accordingly, an inspection fee shall be required for approval of a mobile home park which shall be submitted at the time when the building permit is paid for. These inspections shall be in accordance with section 90-527 of this chapter. 
(1)  The inspection fee shall be $500.00 plus $10.00 per unit within, and $20.00 for the 25th unit and beyond. 
(2)  The inspection fee shall be paid annually upon inspection of the mobile home park by the codes enforcement administrator and building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(A), 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 05-460, § 2, 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 90-523. - Development standards. 
(a)  Generally. The development standards for mobile home parks shall match those found in the R-5M mobile home residential district (section 90-157), including, but not limited to, the bulk regulations, design, and parking and accessory building requirements. 
(b)  Minimum development size. No mobile home park shall be approved which contains less than seven and one-half acre in area or has less than 15 mobile home spaces. 
(c)  Signage. Each mobile home park shall be is required to display, at each entry on the road frontage, a stone monument sign not to exceed 24 square feet in area and not more than four feet in height. Lighting of these signs is to be exterior, and located within three feet shining upwards, on to the sign only, from the ground. 
(d)  Safety standards. All safety standards for federal, state, and city guidelines must be adhered to. 
(e)  Recreation area. Adequate recreation facilities for the residents of the development shall be provided in locations easily accessible to the living units and where they do not impair the view and privacy of living units. Attractive outdoor sitting areas shall be provided, appropriate in size, type and number to the needs of the residents. Well-equipped playgrounds of adequate size and number shall be provided where it is anticipated that children will occupy the premises. The city shall require 200 square feet of playground space for every ten units. 
(f)  Circulation. All internal streets must be constructed and maintained to the street standards expressed Millersville Subdivision Regulations and related city ordinances. There shall be no on-street parking in R-5M developments. 
(g)  Utilities and other services 
(1)  An accessible, adequate, safe, and potable water supply shall be provided in each mobile home development on trunk lines not less than six inches in diameter. 
(2)  Each mobile home development shall be equipped with fire hydrants spaced no more than 500 feet apart, and no more than 500 feet from any mobile home lot, or building envelope. 
(3)  Each mobile home must be provided with connection to the Millersville sanitary sewer line system. 
(4)  Service buildings, housing sanitation and laundry facilities, shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable government ordinances and building codes. 
(5)  Each mobile home lot and park shall be maintained free of litter and accumulation of any kind of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for insect pests. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(B), 4-20-1999; Ord. No. 05-460, § 2, 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 90-524. - Responsibility of park management. 
(a)  The permittee shall operate the mobile home park in compliance with this subdivision and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The permittee shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this subdivision and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this subdivision. 
(c)  The permittee shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand to the satisfaction of the building inspector which includes securing its stability to anchor pins and installing all utility connections. 
(d)  The permittee shall maintain a register containing the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of each mobile home occupant. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home and motor vehicle by which it was towed. 
(3)  The make, model, year, and license number of each mobile home and motor vehicle. 
(4)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home. 
(e)  The mobile home park shall keep the register record available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. 
(f)  The register record shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(g)  The permittee shall notify the health authority immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park. 
(h)  The permit to operate shall be conspicuously posted in the mobile home park office at all times. 
(i)  The permittee shall be answerable for the violation of any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(C), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-525. - Responsibilities of park occupants. 
(a)  The park occupants shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and shall maintain the mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of the mobile home on its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections and anchoring in accordance with the instruction of the park management. 
(c)  Skirtings, awnings, and other additions shall be installed only if permitted and approved by the park management. When installed, they shall be maintained in good repair. The space immediately underneath each mobile home shall be used for storage only if permitted by the park management. If permitted, the following conditions shall be satisfied: 
(1)  The storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious material. 
(2)  Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home. 
(3)  The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting. 
(d)  The park occupant shall store and dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. The garbage container shall be rodentproof, insectproof, and watertight. 
(e)  Fire extinguishers for class B and C fires shall be kept at the premises and maintained in working condition. 
(f)  All park occupants shall be required to register their pets (dogs and cats) with the park management. 
(g)  All park occupants shall be required to have their pets (dogs and cats) on a leash and shall not be allowed to roam free and unleashed. 
(h)  Park occupants shall not be allowed to construct or place pens for animals on the park premises. 
(i)  No inoperative automobiles, junk, or noncontained trash shall be allowed within the park. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(D), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-526. - Inspections. 
(a)  The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make annual inspections to determine the conditions of mobile home parks, in order to ensure the health and safety of occupants of mobile home parks and of the general public. 
(b)  The building inspector shall have the power to enter upon any private and public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the annual inspection as it is related to the enforcement of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(E)(1), (2), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-527. - Penalties for violation of subdivision. 
(a)  Any person violating any provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9 of this Code for each offense. 
(b)  Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any extension of an existing mobile home park is considered a noncomplying use and is hereby prohibited unless such park is brought up to the standards stated in this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(E)(3), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-528. - Revocation of permit. 
    The board of zoning appeals may revoke any permit to maintain and operate a park when the permittee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this subdivision. After such conviction, the permit may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being operated and maintained in full compliance with this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(F), 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 90-529. - Prohibited structures. 
(a)  Cabanas, travel trailers, and other similarly enclosed structures are prohibited. 
(b)  Trailers with or without toilet facilities that cannot be connected to approved sewer systems shall not be permitted in a mobile home park. 
(c)  Mobile homes shall not be used for commercial, industrial or other nonresidential uses within a mobile home park, except that one mobile home in the park may be used to house a rental office. 
(Ord. No. 98-322, § 11-409(G), 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 90-530-90-550. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Transmission and Communications Towers and Stations 

Sec. 90-551. - Intent of subdivision. 
    It is the intent of this subdivision to avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, and maintained, while ensuring such towers are compatible with the surrounding land uses. The purpose of this subdivision is also to promote and encourage shared use/collocation of such towers and antenna support structures as a primary option, rather than the construction of single-use towers. The standards of this subdivision exclude amateur and ham radio operators. 
(Ord. No. 01-391, art. IV, § 11-413.1.1, 8-21-2001) 
Sec. 90-552. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antennas means any exterior apparatus including poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves including, but not limited to, radio waves and microwaves. 
    Guyed tower means a tower that is supported and secured to the ground by a series of tethered wires. The codes enforcement officer shall secure a list of known communication tower users within the city limits. That list will be updated whenever a communication tower entity is given preliminary approval for site construction. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure even if the highest point is an antenna. 
    Safe tower means a tower that is specifically engineered to collapse in on itself with the debris taking approximately ten percent of the tower height. Monopole towers may be engineered for this feature, but not always. Self-supporting steel lattice towers are synonymous with the industry term, "safe towers." 
    Tower means any structure that is designated and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including safe towers and guyed towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. 
(Ord. No. 01-391, art. IV, § 11-413.1.1, 8-21-2001) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-553. - Standards for telephone, telegraph, and communications transmitter stations and towers. 
(a)  Generally. All transmitter stations, including towers and operating equipment located within the city, shall be allowed in any district, upon site review of the planning commission and shall adhere to the following standards: Monopole communication tower designs must be in compliance with the industry standard, "Safe Tower," within the city limits. All communication towers, except stealth and camouflage structures, shall he constructed to accommodate a minimum of two providers. Applicants shall explore and exhaust all attempts to locate or co-op its antenna on all existing towers or structures within a 3,000-foot radius of the proposed site. New towers may be permitted if the applicant demonstrates to the planning commission that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicants proposed antenna, because of the following conditions: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna and related equipment. 
(5)  Any claim by the applicant that fees, costs or contractual provisions required sharing an existing tower or structure, or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing, are unreasonable. 
(b)  Notification. All communication tower applicants shall provide notice by certified mail to all users on the list. The following information shall be included in the notice: Description of the proposed tower; general location; longitude and latitude; general rate structure for leasing space, which shall be based on reasonable local charges; proposed height; a phone number to locate the applicant or agent for the communication tower, and a shared use application form. The intent of the notice shall be to invite potential communication tower users to apply for space on the proposed tower. A copy of this notice shall be mailed to the codes enforcement officer. 
(1)  Potential communication tower users shall respond to the notice within 20 days of receipt of the certified mailing. A response shall be submitted utilizing the shared application form. A completed shared use application form shall be sent to the owner of the proposed communication tower or authorized agent. The tower applicant shall not be responsible for a lack of response received after the 20-day period. 
(2)  Feasibility of each shared use request received within the proper time limit shall be evaluated by the applicant. The evaluation shall document the feasibility of shared use between the proposed communication tower and a potential lessee or sharer. Factors to be considered when evaluating the feasibility of shared use include, but are not limited to: structural capacity, radio frequency (RF) interference, geographic service area requirements, mechanical or electrical incompatibilities, inability or ability to locate equipment on approved and unbuilt communication towers, cost (if fees and costs for sharing would exceed the cost of the new communication tower amortized over a 25-year period). Federal Communication Commission (FCC) limitations that would preclude shared use, and other applicable code requirements. 
(3)  If the applicant rejects one or more requests for shared use and if potential lessees dispute the rejections for shared use, the following procedure shall occur in ten working days after the shared use response deadline: 
a.  Submittal. The applicant shall submit two copies of the following to the code enforcement officer: A brief evaluation of each rejected response; all design data for the proposed communication tower; and an explanation indicating the structural improvements necessary to facilitate the requests that are rejected due to structural limitations paid for by the tower lessee. 
b.  Consultant. The planning commission, if desired, shall forward copies of all applications for shared use and the applicant's evaluation of each rejected request to a qualified communications consultant. The consultant shall be selected by and retained at the discretion of the planning commission and paid by the applicant who is refusing to allow collocation from an interested service provider. 
c.  Evaluation. Within ten working days of receiving the shared use response that was rejected by the applicant and disputed by the potential tower space lessee, the consultant shall review and prepare an evaluation. Three copies of the consultant's evaluations shall be sent to the planning commission. One of these copies shall be made an official part of the communication tower application, the others shall be forwarded to the applicant and interested provider by the code enforcement officer. The consultant's evaluation shall be considered advisory, and aid the planning commission in its review of the communication tower application. 
All towers with a height of 150 feet (from base to top) or more shall be constructed in accordance with Electronic Industries Association (EIA) standard 222E-1996, utilizing a wind rating of 80 miles per hour, plus ice loading for the city. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a certification by a professional engineer licensed in the state and competent in such design. 
(4)  All towers shall have lot sizes and fall zones subject to the following standards: 
a.  A minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet is required for any lots holding a communications tower. 
b.  For "safe" or "self-collapsing" towers the fall zone, taking the shape of a circle, shall be setback from all property and leasehold lines by a distance determined by adding the height of the collapsing portion, plus ten percent of that height, plus an additional five feet. 
c.  For a guyed tower, or standard tower, the fall zone, also taking the shape of a circle, shall be setback from all property and leasehold lines by a distance determined by calculating 125 percent of the height of the tower. 
d.  For property owners that cannot meet these setbacks, legally recorded "fall zone" easements, drafted for the life of the tower, could be secured from adjoining property owner(s) and be presented to the city for deliberation and approval in lieu of meeting these setbacks. 
(c)  Fencing. The entire site in either fee-simple ownership or leasehold procurement containing such tower and equipment shall be enclosed with a fence no shorter than six feet in height. Access gates will be locked at all times when the site is not occupied. 
(d)  Screening. Where the tower site abuts, is within, or is contiguous to any zoning district, there shall be provided a continuous, solid screening of such plant materials as will provide a reasonable yearround evergreen screening. Screening, as required in this subsection, shall be not less than four feet in height at the time of planting, and shall be permanently maintained by the leaseholder or owner of the subject property. (See the definition of the term "buffer strip" in article I of this chapter.) In locations where natural timber growth previously exists and suffices to meet these definitions, to the satisfaction on of the enforcing officer, no additional screening is required. If natural timber growth exists, but it is not to the satisfaction of the enforcing officer, additional screening is required to augment the natural growth to meet such definitions. 
(e)  Tower illumination. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(f)  Access and parking. An access drive is required to the site, and shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width at ingress and egress, being adequate for passage of automobiles and small trucks. The easement shall expand at tower site to a minimum of 25 feet at site allowing for two parking spaces. 
(g)  Noise. A description of all audible noise-generating equipment, including the times and decibel levels of the noise which will be produced is required with the preliminary plat. 
(h)  Finish. All equipment, antennas, poles or towers shall have a nonreflective finish and shall be painted or otherwise treated to minimize visual impacts. Antennas which will be viewed primarily against the skyline shall be painted light gray or light blue or other approved color. 
(i)  Public health. No telecommunication facility shall be located or operated in such a manner that it poses, either by itself or in combination with other such facilities, a potential threat to public health. To that end no telecommunication facility or combination of facilities shall produce at any time power densities in any inhabited area that exceed the FCC-adopted standard for human exposure, as amended, or any more restrictive standard subsequently adopted or promulgated by the city, county, the state, or the federal government. 
(1)  Initial compliance with nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) calculations levels. Initial compliance with this subsection shall be demonstrated for any facility within 400 feet of residential uses or sensitive receptors such as schools, churches, hospitals, etc., and all broadcast radio and television facilities, regardless of adjacent land uses, through submission, at the time of application the necessary permit or entitlement, of NIER specifying NIER levels in the inhabited area where the levels produced are projected to be highest. If these calculated NIER levels exceed 80 percent of the NIER standard established by this section, the applicant shall hire a qualified electrical engineer licensed by the state to measure NIER levels at such location after the facility is in operation. A report of these measurements and the findings with respect to compliance with the established NIER standard shall be submitted to the planning commission. Such facility shall not commence normal operations until it complies with this standard. Proof of such compliance shall be a certification provided by the engineer who prepared the original report. 
(2)  Ongoing compliance with NIER levels. Every telecommunication facility within 400 feet of an inhabited area and all broadcast radio and television facilities shall demonstrate continued compliance with the NIER standard established by this section. Every five years a report listing each transmitter and antenna present at the facility and the effective radiated power radiated shall be submitted to the planning commission. If either the equipment or effective radiated power has changed, calculations specifying NIER levels in the inhabited areas where such levels are projected to be highest shall be prepared. NIER calculations shall also be prepared every time the adopted NIER standard changes. If calculated levels in either of these cases exceed 80 percent of the standard established by this section, the operator of the facility shall hire a qualified electrical engineer licensed by the state to measure the actual NIER levels produced. A report of these calculations, required measurements, if any, and the authors'/engineers' findings with respect to compliance with the current NIER standard shall be submitted to the planning commission within five years of facility approval and every five years thereafter. In the case of a change in the standard, the required report shall be submitted within 90 days of the date such change becomes effective. 
(3)  Failed compliance. Failure to supply the required reports or to remain in continued compliance with the NIER standard established by this section shall be grounds for revocation of the use permit or other entitlement. Location of new towers is strongly encouraged on city property. or the public right-of-way. In consideration, the city will give notice to the communications tower entity whether it chooses to take possession of the tower after that entity informs the city that the tower is no longer needed. If the city declines to take possession, the provisions of subsection (k) of this section (abandonment), will apply. 
(j)  Signage. Towers may not be used to exhibit any signage or other advertising of any sort. No proposed wireless telecommunication site should be designed, located or operated as to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications. 
(k)  High voltage. If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the communication tower and it is present in a ground grid or in the tower, warning signs shall be permanently attached to the exterior side of the perimeter fence and located every 20 feet. The signs shall display in bold letters at least eight inches high the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE-DANGER." 
(l)  Abandonment. Any antenna or tower not operated for a continuous period of three months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the tower or antenna within 90 days of receipt of notice from the building inspector. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or site plan approval, whichever occurs first, the property owners or tower operators shall submit all executed removal agreement to ensure compliance with this subsection. The removal agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
(1)  Surety for removal. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, surety shall be submitted by the property owner or tower operator to ensure the removal of abandoned communication towers. The form of surety shall be subject to approval by the planning commission and city attorney. The required surety shall be irrevocable, unless released by the board of zoning appeals. The surety shall be utilized to cover the cost of removal and disposal of abandoned towers and shall consist of the following: 
a.  Submittal of an estimate from a certified structural engineer indicating the cost to remove and dispose of the tower; 
b.  A surety equivalent to 50 percent of the estimated cost to remove and dispose of the tower; 
c.  An agreement to pool multiple sureties of the tower owner or property owner required by this section to allow pooled surety to be used to remove abandoned towers; and 
d.  An agreement by the tower owner or property owner to replenish surety pool upon utilization of surety by the city. 
(2)  Alternative to surety for removal. The planning commission, subject to the review of the city attorney, may accept documentation from a tower owner that adequate resources or irrevocable contractual obligations are available to remove obsolete or abandoned communication towers. 
(m)  Retention of consultant. The planning commission may utilize an outside consultant at the applicant's sole expense to review the application and make independent determinations and recommendations on issues including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with radio frequency emission standards; 
(2)  Review of the written evidence, as outlined in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) of this section, substantiating that collocation is not feasible; 
(3)  The identification of alternative solutions when the planning commission believes that the proposed facilities may create a significant impact to the surrounding area; or 
(4)  Review and/or verification of the NIER analysis. 
(Ord. No. 01-391, art. IV, § 11-413.1, 8-21-2001; Ord. No. 06-495, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 90-554. - Application requirements. 
    An application to develop a transmission and communications tower shall include as minimum the following: 
(1)  All plot plan information cited in this chapter, which is deemed applicable by the planning commission. 
(2)  All pertinent documentation required from section 90-553 not limited to certified notification for shared use, feasibility evaluations, noise description, and NIER reports. 
(3)  A "Determination of No Hazard" from the FAA, as well as all required FCC permit information. 
(4)  Documentation that any applicable leasehold is no more than 50 years in duration. 
(5)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other communications/transmission towers or support structures within a one-half mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including city-owned property. 
(6)  An affidavit attesting to the fact that the project applicant made diligent, unsuccessful efforts to install or collocate the project applicant's telecommunications facilities on city-owned towers or useable antenna support structures located within a 3,000-foot radius of the proposed tower site. 
(7)  If applicable, an affidavit attesting to the fact that no existing communications tower exists within a 3,000-foot radius. If a communications tower exists within the 3,000-foot radius and collocation is not available or appropriate, the applicant must provide an affidavit attesting to those issues. The intent of this affidavit shall illustrate that the project applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the project applicant's telecommunications facilities on towers of useable antenna support structures owned by other persons located within a 3,000-foot radius of the proposed tower site. The affidavit shall expound only the pertinent issues, point-by-point, outlined in subsections 90-553(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) and (a)(5). 
(8)  Building permits. In addition to the review processes required in this section, a building permit shall be required for all towers, support and accessory structures, and antenna attachments, except as otherwise provided by state or local law. 
(9)  An annual site inspection fee of $500.00, plus all costs incurred by the city for contracting with engineers, technicians and other persons necessary to provide the required inspection, for every communications tower or station shall be assessed by the city. The fee will be due and payable on January 15 of each year. This fee may be waived under the following conditions: 
a.  The owner or manager of the tower provides an inspection report that cites compliance to Millersville Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision V, Transmission and Communication Towers and Stations, no later than the second Friday of each December. Such report shall include the following: 
1.  Structural integrity of tower and load-bearing elements; 
2.  A written, comprehensive report of all electrical components by a certified professional (such as an inspector from the Tennessee State Electrical Inspector's office) indicating compliance with the most recent electrical codes; 
3.  Electromagnetic radiation emissions for antennas and all electrical components (once every five years); 
4.  Physical condition of fencing, parking area, access road; and 
5.  Adherence to stormwater runoff and drainage parameters of the State of Tennessee and the City of Millersville. 
(Ord. No. 01-391, art. IV, § 11-413.3, 8-21-2001; Ord. No. 12-599, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 90-555. - Amateur radio stations. 
(a)  No tower shall be placed within any required front, side, or rear setback area. 
(b)  Towers shall be placed behind the rear building line of the principal structure of the lot. 
(c)  All towers shall be properly grounded as per the National Electric Code, 810, section C. 
(d)  Amateur towers greater than 100 feet in height are subject to the following additional provisions: at no time shall the fall radius of the tower include any habitable structure owned by the amateur. The applicant shall provide documentation of ownership, lease, or permanent easement rights for the entire fall radius of the tower. The tower shall be equipped with guards or other devices to prevent it from being climbed without authorization of the amateur. The applicant shall submit documentation to the enforcing officer for the city sufficient to show that all provisions of this section have been met. 
(e)  Amateur towers located at a site other than the principal residence of a licensed ham operator shall meet the requirements for setbacks, fencing, screening, access/parking, as detailed under the guidelines in this subdivision. However, amateur towers without ground-mounted equipment or buildings need only meet the requirements for access/parking and be designed so that they are not accessible to unauthorized climbing. Temporary towers may be erected for a maximum of 48 hours for special events or emergencies upon approval by the enforcing officer for the city. Because of their intermittent nature, these facilities solely for personal use, such as citizens band radio antenna or antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the amateur radio service, or for the incidental use of a collocated commercial activity shall be required to comply with applicable FCC rules for NIER emissions, but they shall be routinely exempt from the submission requirements in this section, unless otherwise required by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-391, art. IV, § 11-413.2, 8-21-2001) 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision regulations adopted by the planning commission, as set out in that certain pamphlet entitled "Subdivision Regulations, Millersville, Tennessee, Current as of 1995." Capitalization has been standardized and numerical expressions have been conformed to reflect the style used in the Code of Ordinances. Any material appearing in brackets has been added by the editor for clarity. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 32; streets, sidewalks and public places, ch. 74; floodplain district, § 90-231 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1-101. - Title. 
    These regulations shall hereinafter be known and cited as the ["]Subdivision Regulations of the City of [Millersville,] Millersville, Tennessee.["] 
1-102. - Authority. 
    These subdivision regulations are adopted by the Millersville Planning Commission (hereinafter referred to as "planning commission"), in pursuance of the authority and powers granted by Sections 13-4-301 through 13-4-309, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§13-4-301-13-4-309]. Having adopted a major street plan for the jurisdictional area, and filed a certified copy of the plan with the Sumner County Register of Deeds (hereinafter referred to as "county register"), as required by Section 13-4-302, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-302], and having held a public hearing as indicated in section 13-4-303 [T.C.A. § 13-4-303], of these regulations, the planning commission has fulfilled the requirements set forth in state law as prerequisites to the adoption of these regulations. 
1-103. - Jurisdiction. 
    These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions, as herein defined, located within Millersville, Tennessee. No land shall be subdivided within the jurisdictional area until the subdivider submits a plat as required by these regulations, obtains planning commission approval of the plat, and files the approved plat with the county register. 
1-104. - Policy and purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the planning commission to consider the subdivision of land and development of a subdivision plat as subject to the control of the adopted land use or community development plan (hereinafter referred to as "land development plan") of the jurisdictional area for orderly, planned, and efficient physical and economical development. 
    Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger of health, fire, flood, or other menace. Land shall not be subdivided until proper provisions have been made for drainage, water, sewerage, other public utilities, and for other required public services. The existing and proposed public improvements shall generally conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the land development plan. The regulations herein shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the Millersville Municipal Zoning Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as "zoning ordinance"). 
    These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the jurisdictional area. 
(2)  To guide the development of the jurisdictional area in accordance with the land development plan, considering the suitability of nonresidential and public areas and having regard for the most beneficial land use in such areas. 
(3)  To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population. 
(4)  To enhance the character and the social and economic stability and encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the jurisdictional area. 
(5)  To conserve the value of land, buildings, and improvements throughout the jurisdictional area and to minimize detrimental conflicts among the uses of land and structures. 
(6)  To guide public and private policy and action adequately providing for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational areas, and other public requirements and facilities. 
(7)  To provide for the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the efficient traffic movement throughout the jurisdictional area. 
(8)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to insure proper legal descriptions and proper monumenting of land. 
(9)  To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(10)  To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to preserve the integrity, stability, beauty, and value of the jurisdictional area. 
(11)  To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the jurisdictional area, and to insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
(12)  To provide for open spaces through efficient design and layout of the land, including the use of average density in providing for minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as established in the zoning ordinance. 
(13)  To encourage subdivision design which would maximize the conservation of all forms of energy. 
1-105. - Interpretation, conflict, and severability. 
105.1. Interpretation. These regulations shall be construed as the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, and welfare. 
1-105.2. Conflict with public and private provisions. 
1-105.201. Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are most restrictive or imposes higher standards shall govern. 
1-105.202. Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction; provided, that where these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. 
    Where any private provision exceeds the standards set forth herein, such shall be considered a private contract between the parties of interest, and as such is beyond the jurisdiction of the planning commission. 
1-105.3. Severability. If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The planning commission hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision, or application. 
1-106. - Saving provision. 
    These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of prior subdivision regulations; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue; or as affecting the liability of any person; or as waiving any right of the local government under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations; or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person by lawful action of the governing body, except as expressly provided, otherwise, in these regulations. 
1-106.1. Previously approved subdivisions. 
1-106.101. Unexpired preliminary approval. The approval granted on any plat prior to the effective date of these regulations shall remain in force and effect for the time period stipulated by the regulations under which the approval was first granted. 
1-106.102. Expired preliminary approval. In any instance in which the period of preliminary approval shall have passed with some portion of the subdivision not having received final approval, and the applicant wishes an extension of the preliminary approval, the planning commission may: 
(1)  Permit the remaining portion of the subdivision to be constructed and to receive approval under provisions set forth in the regulations whereby preliminary approval was originally granted; or 
(2)  Stipulate that the plat is null and void and that a new plat be presented subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
In making this determination, the planning commission shall consider all pertinent facts available to it. The current state and active pursuit of construction and development activities within the subdivision shall be given due consideration in the course of the planning commission's deliberation on this question. 
1-107. - Amendments. 
1-107.1. Enactment. For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general welfare, the planning commission may from time to time amend these regulations. Before the adoption of any amendment to these regulations, a public hearing thereon shall be held by the planning commission as required by Section 13-4-303, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-303]. 
1-107.2. Codification and distribution. Subsequent to the adoption of any amendment to these regulations, such amendment shall be incorporated into the text of these regulations in the following manner: 
(1)  Replacement pages shall be prepared incorporating the new or changed language. Each such new or replacement page shall have the amendment number and shall be dated so as to indicate the date of the last revision of the page. 
(2)  In article 7, of these regulations, each adopted amendment shall be numbered consecutively and printed on pages separate from any other amendment and in a manner which fully states any language deleted from these regulations and any language added and the place in the text of each such change. 
1-108. - Resubdivision of land. 
1-108.1. Procedure for resubdivision. If any change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat would affect the layout of any public street, alley, or road (hereinafter referred to as public way) shown on such plat, or area reserved, thereon, for public use, or any lot line, or if it would affect any map, plan, or plat legally recorded before the adoption of any subdivision regulations, such amendment shall be approved by the planning commission by the same procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision. 
1-108.2. Procedures for subdivision where future resubdivision is foreseen. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land or double the minimum required area for any zoning district in which the lot is located, and the planning commission has reason to believe that any such lot(s) will be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the planning commission may require that the subdivision and development of such parcel of land allow for the future opening of public ways and the ultimate extension of adjacent public ways. The planning commission may also require that dedications providing for the future opening and extension of such public ways be indicated on the plat. 
1-109. - Conditions. 
    Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision are exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to the planning commission. The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions imposed by the planning commission for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land so as to provide for the physical and economical development of the jurisdictional area and for the safety and general welfare of future plot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
1-110. - Vacation of plats. 
    Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot described therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the plat or part of the plat to be vacated. The planning commission shall follow the same procedure for approval of instrument as required for approval of plats. The governing body may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, or public ways. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged, or approved, and duly recorded or filed; the instrument shall operate to void the recorded plat and divest all public rights in the public ways, and public grounds and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. When any lot or lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided only if all of the owners of lots in such platted area join in the execution of such writing. 
1-111. - Variances. 
1-111.1. General. If the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, a variance from these regulations may be granted; provided, such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the general intent and purpose of these regulations and; provided, further, that the planning commission shall not recommend variations unless it shall make findings based upon written evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare, or be injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the specific property involved, a particular hardship (not self-imposed) to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations were carried out; and 
(4)  The variance will not in any manner alter the provisions of the land development plan, the major street or road plan, or any zoning ordinance. 
    Where the planning commission concludes that the purpose of these regulations may be specifically served to an equal or greater extent by an alternative proposal, condition, or circumstance, it may approve other variations to these regulations. 
1-111.2. Procedures. In approving any variance from these regulations, the planning commission shall state fully in the minutes, the grounds for the variance and all of the facts upon which the decision is made. 
1-111.3. Conditions. In approving variances, the planning commission may impose such conditions as in its judgment will secure substantially the objectives, standards, and requirements of the regulations. 
1-112. - Enforcement, violation, and penalties. 
1-112.1. General. 
1-112.101. Authority. The enforcement of these regulations and the penalties for violations are provided pursuant to Title 13, Chapter 3, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 13-3-101-13-3-411]. 
1-112.102. Enforcing officer. It shall be the duty of the enforcing officer to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of legal council any violations or lack of compliance, herewith. 
1-112.103. Recording of plats. Pursuant to Section 13-4-302, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-302], no plat of a subdivision of land within the jurisdictional area shall be received or recorded by the county register until the plat has received final approval of the planning commission, in accordance with these regulations, and such approval has been endorsed in writing on the plat by the planning commission secretary in the manner prescribed by section 2-104, of these regulations. 
1-112.104. Use of unapproved plats. Pursuant to Section 13-4-306, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-306], no owner or agent of the owner of any land shall convey such land contrary to the provisions stated therein. 
1-112.105. Public ways and utilities. Pursuant to Section 13-4-307, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-307], the governing body shall not nor shall any public authority accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any public way, lay or authorize the laying of water mains or sewers, or construct or authorize the construction of other facilities or utilities in any public ways located within the jurisdictional area unless such way shall have been accepted, opened, or otherwise received the legal status of a public way prior to the attachment of the planning commission's jurisdiction or unless such way corresponds in its location and lines to a way shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or on a public way plat made by the planning commission. 
    However, that the governing body may override the planning commission as provided in Title 13, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-2-101 et seq.]. 
    In case of any state highway constructed or to be constructed within the jurisdictional area with state funds as a part of the state highway system, the submission to the planning commission shall be by the Tennessee Commissioner of Transportation, who shall have the power to overrule the disapproval of the planning commission. 
1-112.106. Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of any provision of these regulations. 
1-112.107. Access to lots by public way or private easement. Pursuant to Section 13-4-308, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-308], no building permit shall be issued and no building or structure shall be erected on any lot within the jurisdictional area, unless the public way giving access to the lot upon which the building or structure is proposed to be placed shall have been accepted or opened or shall have, otherwise, received the legal status of a public way as provided by law; provided, that the provisions of this section relating to access shall not apply to subdivisions of property zoned commercial or industrial and that no building permit shall be withheld in such cases of noncompliance with this section. 
    Provided, further, that when a permanent easement to a public way is used as access to a lot or tract of land having been or being separated by deed or plat from other property, such easement shall be at least 50 feet in width from and after the time of adoption of these regulations and shall not be used to provide access to more than one lot or tract of land. 
    The above section shall not be construed to prohibit the development of buildings on lots or tracts within permanent access provided by private ways when such development is in the form of condominium ownership of such private improvements which have been approved by the planning commission and will be in private ownership and control in perpetuity. 
1-112.2. Penalties for violations. 
1-112.201. Recording of unapproved plats. Any county register receiving, filing, or recording a plat of a subdivision in violation of section 1-112.103, of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. 
1-112.202. Use of unapproved plats. Any owner or agent of the owner of any land who violates section 1-112.104, of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as other misdemeanors as provided by law. 
1-112.3. Civil enforcement. 
1-112.301. General. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages; to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises; these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in subsection 1-112.2, of these regulations. 
1-112.302. Specific statutory remedies. 
A.  Conveyance of unapproved plats. The governing body may enjoin by action for injunction any transfer of, sale of, or agreement to sell any land in violation of these regulations. 
B.  Erection of unlawful buildings. Where any building or structure is erected or being erected on any lot in violation of the road or easement frontage requirements of these regulations, the enforcing officer or other governmental representative may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause the building or structure to be vacated or removed. 
C.  Enforcement of surety instrument. Where a bond is accepted in lieu of completion of subdivision improvements and utilities as provided in article 3, of these regulations, the governing body may enforce such surety in the manner prescribed by legal council for the jurisdictional area. 
The moneys collected on such surety shall be paid into the treasury of the local government. Upon the order of the planning commission such moneys shall be applied to the construction and installation of the bonded improvements and utilities under guarantee. 
ARTICLE 2. - PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

2-101. - General procedure. 
2-101.1. Plat approval requirements. Before any contract is executed for the sale of any parcel of land which is proposed to be subdivided and before any permit for the erection of any structure in a proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure the planning commission's approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures of this article. 
2-101.2. Classification of subdivisions. The planning commission shall classify each subdivision proposal as either major or minor as defined herein. 
2-101.201. Review procedure. The subdivider shall follow the procedure described below in order to secure plat approval. 
(1)  Minor subdivision. 
(a)  Preapplication conference with the enforcing officer including submittal of a scale drawing or survey of the proposed subdivision for preliminary discussion and review. 
(b)  Submittal of a final plat, prepared, in accordance with the specifications in section 5-104 for approval by the planning commission. 
(2)  Major subdivision. 
(a)  Preapplication conference on the subdivision with the planning commission and/or staff assistant to the planning commission, generally including a sketch plat, and discussion of the proposed area to be subdivided. 
(b)  Submittal of a preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with section 5-102, herein for planning commission approval. 
(c)  Securing of approvals from other public agencies. 
(d)  Submittal of the final subdivision plat, prepared in accordance with section 5-104, herein for planning commission approval. 
2-101.3. Official submission date. For the purpose of these regulations, for both major and minor subdivisions, the date of the regular meeting of the planning commission at which the public hearing on the final subdivision plat, including any adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submittal date of the plat at which the statutory period required in Section 13-4-304, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-304], for formal approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence. 
2-101.4. Policy on floodprone areas. In determining the appropriateness of land subdivision at any site containing a floodprone area, the planning commission, in reviewing any plat, shall consider the policy and purpose set forth in section 1-104, of these regulations, and, additionally: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to the increased flood heights or velocities, either potential or actual, caused by subdivision fill, roads, and intended uses; 
(2)  The danger that intended uses or improvements may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
(3)  The adequacy of proposed water supply, sanitation, and drainage systems, and the ability of these systems to function under flood conditions; 
(4)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage upon the individual owner; 
(5)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community at large; 
(6)  The requirements of the subdivision for a waterfront location; 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed subdivision and land uses; 
(8)  The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development or development anticipated in the foreseeable future; 
(9)  The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the land development plan and the floodplain management program for the area; 
(10)  The safety of access to the property for emergency vehicles in times of flood; 
(11)  The expected heights, duration, velocity, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; 
(12)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, public ways, and bridges; and 
(13)  The effect of the proposed subdivision upon the planning commission's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program, if such governing body is, or elects to be, in the program. 
    No subdivision or part, thereof, shall be approved by the planning commission if proposed levees, fills, structures, or other features will individually or collectively, increase flood flows, heights, duration, or damages. The regulatory limits (the 100-year flood level) shall be determined from the latest study for the jurisdictional area, and any subsequent revisions, thereto. Specific engineering studies are to be formulated by the developer in those areas in which flood data are not currently available, if deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
    In any instance in which the planning commission determines that a proposed subdivision may affect the flood height, velocity, or duration in any floodprone area outside its jurisdiction, the commission shall take all actions necessary and proper to ensure the coordinated review of the development with the appropriate governmental agencies of the affected area. 
    In approving plans for subdivision of land containing floodprone areas, the planning commission shall ensure that development will proceed in such a way that property lying within any floodway, as defined by these regulations, will be maintained in a manner as prescribed by any zoning ordinance. The planning commission shall also ensure that development within any floodway fringe area (within the 100-year flood level) will be protected adequately against potential flood hazards by the methods prescribed in article 4 of these regulations. 
    The planning commission shall disapprove the subdivision of any land containing a floodprone area when the commission determines that subdivision plans are not consistent with the policy stated in this section. 
2-101.5. Special provisions governing unit ownership (condominium) subdivisions. 
2-101.501. General provisions. 
A.  Intent. This section is intended to augment the general legislation of Sections 64-2701 through 64-2722, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 66-27-101-66-27-123], entitled, "Horizontal Property Act," by providing supplemental rules and regulations for the implementation of the act, as specifically authorized in Section 64-2721, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 66-27-121]. 
B.  Applicability. Whenever a developer, the sole owner, or the co-owners of a building or buildings expressly declare through the submission of a master deed, lease, or plat their desire to submit their property to a regime, as established and provided by Sections 64-2701 through 64-2722, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 66-27-101-66-27-123], wherein there is established a horizontal property regime, each such condominium or horizontal property regime created under the authority of these provisions for the purpose of sale or transfer of real property is subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
2-101.502. Submission of plat required. Prior to the sale or transfer of any property incorporated in the property regime, the developer, sole owner, or co-owners of such property shall submit to the planning commission a subdivision plat of such property in the manner prescribed by this article; and such plat, if approved, shall be filed with the county register in the manner prescribed by this article. 
2-101.503. Determination of subdivision type. Condominium subdivisions shall be classified by the planning commission during the plat review process as either horizontal condominiums or vertical condominiums as defined in article 6 of these regulations. 
2-101.504. Procedure. An applicant seeking approval of condominium subdivision shall proceed through the normal procedure for subdivision approval, as set forth in this article. 
2-101.505. Contents of plans and documents. The plats, plans, and documents submitted by an applicant seeking approval of condominium subdivision shall conform with the specifications set forth in article 5, of these regulations. 
2-102. - Sketch plat. 
2-102.1. Purpose of sketch plat. The planning commission shall require a sketch plat from the developer for a preapplication conference with the planning commission. The sketch plat is to be a concept plan for design purposes and should be used to discover all factors which may have an impact on the proposed development and to advise the subdivider of various possibilities before substantial amounts of time and money have been invested in a detailed proposal which may contain elements contrary to these regulations. 
2-102.2. Sketch plat requirements. The sketch plat shall include the information set forth in section 5-101. 
2-102.3. Approval of sketch plat. When a sketch plat is submitted for planning commission approval, the number of copies required and timing of the submission shall be as for a preliminary plat. Approval of the plat shall constitute authorization to prepare detailed plans and specifications. 
2-102.4. Expiration of approval. The approval of the sketch plat shall expire within one year, if no further progress is made toward the development. An extension may be granted upon proper application. 
2-103. - Preliminary plat (major subdivisions only). 
2-103.1. Application procedure and requirements. The applicant shall file with the planning commission a preliminary plat. The failure of the applicant to satisfy the requirements of this section with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat. The preliminary plat application shall be prepared in accordance with section 5-102, and: 
(1)  Be made at the office of the chief enforcing officer and shall be accompanied by a fee of $.50 per lot or $5.00, whichever is greater; 
(2)  Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all land immediately adjacent, extending 200 feet therefrom, or of that directly opposite, thereto, extending 200 feet from the road frontage of such opposite land. The lot pattern of surrounding development shall be shown within that area located within 200 feet of the proposed development; 
(3)  Be accompanied by a minimum of seven copies of the preliminary plat as described herein. The copies shall be distributed at least seven days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered. Distribution shall be as follows: one copy to each member of the planning commission, one copy to the chief enforcing officer, one copy to the staff planner of the planning commission; 
(4)  Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of construction plans as described in section 5-103, of these regulations, if deemed necessary by the planning commission; and 
(5)  Be presented to staff assistant to the planning commission at least 15 days prior to a regular officially opened meeting of the planning commission. 
2-103.2. Administrative review. An administrative review meeting shall be conducted on the preliminary plat, construction plans, and any exhibits submitted in conformance with these regulations. This review shall include the staff assistant to the planning commission and any other appropriate official. The review meeting shall be held prior to the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting at which the plat is to be reviewed. The findings of the review meeting shall be presented to the planning commission. 
    With expert assistance, as necessary, the subdivider shall prepare a report, on any proposed subdivision containing or abutting a floodprone area. Such report shall estimate the discharge of the regulatory flood; determine the specific flooding threat at the site of the proposed subdivision, and indicate whether the subdivision is located in a floodway or floodway fringe area by: 
(1)  Calculation of water surface elevations and regulatory flood protections based upon a hydraulic analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood; 
(2)  Computation of the floodway required to convey the regulatory flood without increasing natural flood heights of the regulatory flood more than one foot at any point; and 
(3)  Unless otherwise established, computation of increases in flood heights caused by any encroachment shall be based upon the reasonable assumption that there will be an equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within that reach. No increase in flood stages attributable to encroachments on the floodplain of any river or stream shall be permitted in any one reach or for the cumulative effect of several reaches. 
2-103.3. Notice of hearing. The planning commission shall hold a hearing as required by Section 13-4-304, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-304], on each plat brought before it. 
2-103.4. Preliminary approval. After the planning commission has reviewed the preliminary plat, construction plans, exhibits, and the results of administrative review, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary plat within 30 days after the date of the regular meeting of the planning commission at which the hearing on preliminary approval, including adjourned date, thereof, is closed. 
    A certificate of preliminary approval shall be issued by the secretary of the planning commission, upon demand, and the applicant may proceed to apply for final subdivision plat approval in the manner prescribed by section 2-104 of these regulations. 
    After the planning commission approves, conditionally approves, or disapproves the preliminary plat, one copy of the proposed preliminary plat shall be returned to the developer with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval thereon. If a preliminary plat is disapproved the planning commission shall state specific reasons for disapproval which shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting. 
    Before the planning commission approves a preliminary plat showing land for any public use, the planning commission shall obtain approval for the land reservation from the appropriate governmental agency. 
2-103.5. Public improvements. The planning commission may require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat by the secretary of the planning commission. If the planning commission does not require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to signing of the final subdivision plat, an adequate performance bond shall be approved. The amount of such bond shall be established by the planning commission based upon the recommendation of the appropriate governmental representative or by receipt of cost bids from two or more independent contracting firms equal to the cost of all necessary improvements plus; an additional ten percent to cover inflation shall be added. It is the subdivider's responsibility to furnish these estimates to the planning commission. 
    Such bond shall be submitted by the applicant at the time of application for final subdivision plat approval. The planning commission shall require the applicant to indicate on the plat all public ways and improvements to be dedicated; all districts for water, fire, and utility improvements which shall be required to be established or extended; and any other special requirements deemed necessary by the planning commission in order for the subdivision plat to conform to the major street or road plan and the land development plan for the jurisdictional area. 
2-103.6. Effective period of preliminary approval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of 12 months, at the end of which time final approval of the subdivision plat must have been obtained from the planning commission, although the plat need not have been signed and filed with the county register. Any plat not receiving final approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer shall be required to submit a new plat for preliminary approval subject to any zoning provisions and the subdivision regulations currently in effect. 
2-103.7. Zoning regulations. Every plat shall conform to any existing zoning regulations and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of proposed final approval, except that any plat which has received preliminary approval shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to such zoning ordinance or these regulations rendering the plat nonconforming as to bulk, use, or development standards, provided, that final approval is obtained within the effective period of preliminary approval set forth in subsection 2-102.6, above. 
2-104. - Final subdivision plat (minor and major subdivisions). 
2-104.1. Application procedure and requirements. A subdivider shall file with the planning commission a final plat. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with section 5-104 and: 
(1)  Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof, for which final approval is sought; 
(2)  Be accompanied by a minimum of seven copies of the final subdivision plat as described herein. Distribution of the copies shall be as in section 2-103.1(3); 
(3)  Comply substantially with the preliminary plat, where such plat is required; 
(4)  Be presented to the chief enforcing officer to the planning commission at least 15 days prior to the regular meeting of the commission at which it is to be considered; 
(5)  Be accompanied by formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all public ways and uses, utilities, parks, and easements, in a form approved by legal council, as applicable. (The subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as shown in article 5 of these regulations.); 
(6)  Be accompanied by a performance bond, if required, in a form satisfactory to the legal council and in an amount satisfactory to the planning commission upon recommendation by the appropriate governmental representative. It shall include provisions that the principal of the bond shall comply with all the terms of the resolution of final subdivision plat approval, as determined by the planning commission, including, but without limitations, the performance of all required subdivision and offsite improvements, and that all improvements and land included in the irrevocable offers of dedication shall be dedicated to the governing body free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the premises; 
(7)  Be accompanied by written assurance from any public utility companies serving the area of the subdivision that necessary utilities will be installed and by proof that the applicant has submitted petitions in writing for the creation or extension of any utility districts as required by the planning commission upon preliminary plat approval; and 
(8)  Be accompanied, if the final plat contains open space, or recreational facilities, or if any portion of the site is in common ownership, by the following documentation for approval by the planning commission and with the final plat: 
(a)  Plans for improvement and maintenance of the open space or facilities located thereon. 
(b)  Articles of incorporation and bylaws of the co-owners association or other legal entity (where open space or facilities are to be deeded to a co-owners association or similar organization acting on behalf of the joint owners of said property) charged with improving or maintaining the open space or facilities, and declaration of covenants and restrictions pertaining to each and every property within the subdivision; and 
(c)  Declaration of covenants and restrictions pertaining to open space and facilities which assure the continued use of said facilities for the purpose intended, where open space or facilities are to be retained by the developer. 
2-104.2. Endorsement of notations. The notations and certifications required by subsection 5-104.2, of these regulations to appear upon the final plat shall be endorsed by appropriate officials and other persons prior to application for final subdivision plat approval, except that the certificate of planning commission approval shall be signed at the time specified in section 2-105 of these regulations. 
2-104.3. Hearing and decision on final plat. The planning commission shall hold a hearing as required by Section 13-4-304, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-304], on each final plat brought before it. The planning commission shall, within 30 days after submission of the plat, approve, modify, or disapprove the final subdivision plat by resolution, which shall set forth in detail any conditions to which the approval is subject, or reasons for disapproval. In no event shall the period of time stipulated by the planning commission for completion of required improvements exceed one year from the date of final resolution. 
    Failure of the planning commission to act upon a plat within the prescribed time shall be deemed approval of the plat, and in such event, a certificate of approval, entitling the subdivider to proceed as specified in subsection 2-104.4 and section 2-105 of these regulations, shall be issued, upon demand, by the secretary of the planning commission. The applicant, however, may permit an extension of the time permitted for planning commission review. 
    One copy of the final subdivision plat shall be returned to the subdivider with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval noted thereon. 
2-104.4. Vested rights. No vested rights, if any, shall accrue to any plat by reason of preliminary or final approval until the actual signing of the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. All requirements, conditions, or regulations adopted by the planning commission, applicable to the particular subdivision or to all subdivisions generally, shall be deemed a condition for any subdivision prior to the time of the signing of the final plat by the secretary of the planning commission. Where the planning commission has required the installation of improvements prior to the signing of the final plat, the planning commission shall not modify unreasonably the conditions set forth in the resolution of final approval. 
2-105. - Signing and recording of subdivision plat. 
2-105.1. Signing of plat. 
(1)  When a bond is required, the secretary of the planning commission shall endorse approval on the plat after the bond has been approved by the planning commission and after all the conditions of the resolution pertaining to the plat have been satisfied. 
(2)  When installation of improvements is required, the secretary of the planning commission shall endorse approval on the plat after all conditions of the resolution have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the governing body as shown on certifications by the appropriate governmental representative (local government engineer or specific utility superintendent) that the necessary dedications of public lands and improvements have been accomplished. 
(3)  When the conditions of this section are satisfied, the secretary shall sign the permanent reproducible original of the subdivision plat. 
2-105.2. Recording of plat. It shall be the responsibility of the chief enforcing officer to file [the] plat with the county register's office within ____________ days of the date of signature. Simultaneously, with the filing of the plat, the chief enforcing officer to the planning [commission] shall record the agreement of dedication together with such legal documents as the [sic] shall be require[d] to be recorded by legal council. 
2-105.3. Sectionalizing major subdivision plats. Prior to granting final approval of a major subdivision plat, the planning commission may permit the plat to be divided into two or more sections and may impose such conditions upon the filing of each section as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the subdivision. 
    The planning commission may require that a performance bond be in such amount as is commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed and may defer the remaining required performance bond principal amount until the remaining sections of the plat are offered for filing. The developer also may file irrevocable offers to dedicate public ways and improvements in the section offered to be filed and defer filing offers of dedication for the remaining sections until such sections, subject to any conditions imposed by the planning commission, shall be granted concurrently with final approval of the plat. Such authorized sections must contain at least ten percent of the total number of lots contained in the proposed plat unless a specific waiver of this requirement is granted by the planning commission. 
ARTICLE 3. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

3-101. - Improvements and performance bond. 
3-101.1. Completion of improvements. Before the final subdivision plat is signed by the planning commission officer specified in section 2-105.1 of these regulations, all applicants shall complete, in accordance with the planning commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the appropriate governmental representative, all public way, sanitary, and other improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in these regulations and approved by the planning commission, and shall dedicate such improvements to the governing body free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated. 
3-101.2. Surety instrument. The planning commission at its discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat by providing that, as an alternative, the applicant post a bond or other surety at the time of submission for final subdivision approval in an amount estimated by the planning commission as sufficient to guarantee to the governing body the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the incompleted portion of required improvements. (See subsection 2-103.5). 
    Such surety instrument shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to legal counsel as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution, as set forth in these regulations. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the planning commission in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat and shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not in any event exceed one year from date of final approval, unless a longer period is specifically authorized by the planning commission. 
    Such surety instrument shall be approved by the planning commission or appropriate governmental representative as to amount, and conditions. The planning commission may, upon proof of difficulty, extend the completion date set forth in such surety instrument for a maximum period of one additional year. The planning commission may accept, at any time during the surety period of substitution of principal. 
3-101.3. Temporary improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the planning commission, and shall maintain them to a reasonable satisfaction for the period specified by the planning commission. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the applicant shall file with the governing body a separate suitable bond for temporary facilities, which shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
3-101.4. Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the applicant at his expense. Any provisions for reimbursement by the governing body or any utility agency shall be stipulated clearly in the provisions of any bonds. 
3-101.5. Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bonds and contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of said contract or bond, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this article. 
3-101.6. Failure to complete improvements. In subdivisions for which no performance bond has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the period specified by the planning commission in the resolution approving the plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases in which a performance bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond, the governing body thereupon may declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default. 
3-101.7. Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of public ways, easements, and parks shall be by formal action of the governing body. Such action shall be in the form of a resolution recommended by the planning commission to the governing body. The approval by the planning commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the governing body of any public way, easement, or other ground shown on the plat. The planning commission may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
3-102. - Inspection of improvements. 
3-102.1. General procedures. The planning commission may provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion. If the appropriate governmental representative finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the governing body's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements to the required standards. Whenever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be liable severally and jointly for completing said improvements according to specifications. 
3-102.2. Release or reduction of performance bond. 
3-102.201. Certificate of satisfactory completion. The governing body shall not accept dedication of required public improvements nor release nor reduce a performance bond until the appropriate governmental representative submits a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the planning commission and the appropriate governmental representative (through submission of a detailed "as built" survey of the subdivision indicating location, dimensions, construction materials, and any other information required by the planning commission) that the layout and the line and grade of all public improvements are in accordance with the approved construction plans for the subdivision. Upon such approval and recommendation, the governing body, thereafter, may accept the dedicated improvements in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsections 1-112.107 and 3-101.7, of these regulations. 
3-102.202. Reduction of performance bond. A performance bond may be reduced upon actual dedication and acceptance of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the plat. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced below 25 percent of the principal amount prior to final acceptance of all items covered under the bond. 
3-103. - Maintenance of improvements. 
    The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements including all lot improvements, until acceptance of the public improvements by the governmental body. 
    The applicant may be required to file a maintenance bond with the governing body prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by the appropriate governmental representative and in a form satisfactory to legal council, in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements, including all lot improvements, for a period of one year after the date of acceptance of the public improvements by the governing body. 
3-104. - Deferral or waiver of required improvements. 
    The planning commission may defer or waive at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all such improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities. 
    Whenever it is deemed necessary by the planning commission to defer the construction of any improvement required herein because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or other reasons, the developer shall either pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the governing body prior to signing of the final subdivision plat by the appropriate governmental representative(s) or post a bond or other surety instrument ensuring completion of said improvements upon demand of the governing body. 
3-105. - Escrow deposits for lot improvements. 
3-105.1. Acceptance of escrow funds. Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any lot improvements required by these regulations cannot be performed, the enforcing officer, nevertheless, may issue a certificate of occupancy upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the appropriate governmental representative for the cost of such improvements; provided, however, that there otherwise is no danger to the health, safety, or general welfare. The performance bond covering such lot improvements shall remain in full force and effect. 
3-105.2. Procedures on escrow fund. All required improvements for which escrow moneys have been accepted by the enforcing officer at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the developer within a period of nine months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. In the event that the improvements have not been installed properly at the end of the time period, the enforcing officer shall provide written notice of two weeks to the developer requiring him to install the improvements, and in the event they are not installed properly, in the judgment of the enforcing officer, he may request the governing body to proceed to install or to contract for the installation of the necessary improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. 
    At the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow moneys are being deposited, the applicant shall obtain and file with the enforcing officer, prior to obtaining the certificate of occupancy, a notarized statement from the purchaser(s) of the premises authorizing the enforcing officer to install the improvements at the end of the nine month period in the event the improvements have not been installed properly by the developer. 
3-106. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(1)  Where a performance bond has been required for a subdivision, or any section of a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision or section thereof shall be issued prior to the completion and dedication of the improvements to the appropriate governmental unit, as required in the planning commission's resolution of final approval of the subdivision plat. 
(2)  The extent of public way improvements shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire equipment prior to the issuance of an occupancy certificate. The developer shall at the time of the dedication submit moneys in escrow to the governing body in a sum to be determined by the appropriate governmental representative. 
(3)  No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent of lots in a subdivision, or if ten percent be less than two lots, for the final two lots of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the planning commission's resolution of final plat approval have been fully completed, dedicated, and accepted by the governmental body. 
ARTICLE 4. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND DESIGN 

4-101. - General requirements. 
4-101.1. Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, or regulations, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  All applicable provisions of Tennessee Law, regulations, or policy; 
(2)  Any zoning ordinance, any building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws or policies of the governing body; 
(3)  The adopted general plan and major road or street plan; 
(4)  The rules of the county health department and the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation; 
(5)  The rules, as applicable, of the Federal Highway Administration or Tennessee Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a nonlocal highway; and 
(6)  The standards and regulations adopted by all other boards, commissions, and agencies of the governing body, where applicable. 
    Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above rules or with the provisions set forth in section 1-104, of these regulations. 
4-101.2. Self-imposed restrictions. 
    If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by any zoning ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be recorded with the county register on a separate form, along with the final subdivision plat. 
4-101.3. Monuments. The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein and as approved by a registered land surveyor. These monuments shall be concrete not less than 30 inches in length; not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter; and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded. Monuments shall be located and set as follows: 
(1)  Monuments shall be located on public way right-of-way lines, at public way intersections, and sections, and at the beginning and ending point of curves. All monuments shall be spaced so as to be within sight of each other. 
(2)  The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field. These monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line and at all corners or breaks at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line, and at all angle points along a meander line, said points to be not less than 20 feet back from the bank of any river or stream, except that when such corners or points fall within a public way or proposed future public way, the monuments shall be placed on the side line of the public way. 
(3)  All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be monumented in the field by like monuments as described above. Such monuments shall be placed at each end of all curves, at a point where a river changed its radius, and at all angle points in any line. All lot corners not falling on any of the above described points shall be marked by iron rods, pipe, or pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighth-inch in diameter. 
(4)  The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighth inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 18 inches long. Such pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream and lot line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
(5)  All monuments and pins shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a surveyor or an engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering prior to the time the planning commission recommends approval of the final plat or release of the bond where bond is made in lieu of improvements. 
4-101.4. Character of the land. Land which the planning commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which would be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of inhabitants of the land and surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed, unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning commission, upon recommendation of any staff assistant serving the planning commission and/or other governmental representative, if any, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as will not involve such a danger. 
    Where protection against flood damage is necessary, in the opinion of the planning commission, flood-damage protection techniques may include, as deemed appropriate by the planning commission: 
(1)  The imposition of any surety and deed restrictions enforceable by the planning commission to regulate the future type and design of uses within the floodprone areas; 
(2)  Flood-protection measures designed so as not to increase, either individually or collectively, flood flows, height, duration, or damages, and so as not to infringe upon the regulatory floodway; 
(3)  Installation of flood-warning systems; 
(4)  The use of fill, dikes, levees, and other protective measures; and 
(5)  The use of floodproofing measures, which may include: 
(a)  Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement. 
(b)  Installation of watertight doors, bulk shutters, or other similar methods of closure. 
(c)  Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures. 
(d)  Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage through walls. 
(e)  Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation. 
(f)  Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures. 
(g)  Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of or contamination of floodwaters. 
(h)  Installation of pumps or comparable facilities for subsurface drainage systems to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood pressures. 
(i)  Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and stormwater into buildings or structures. 
(j)  Building design and construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure of floating debris. 
(k)  Location and installation of all electrical equipment, circuits, and appliances so that they are protected from inundation by the regulatory flood. 
(l)  Location of storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, or other toxic materials which could be hazardous to the public health, safety, and welfare at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, or design of such facilities to prevent flotation of storage containers or damage to storage containers which could result in the escape of toxic materials. 
    All such flood-protection measures shall be designed so as not to substantially increase, either individually or collectively, flood flows, height, duration, or damages and so as not to infringe upon the regulatory floodway. See section 2-103.2(2)(b). 
    The acceptability of any flood protection methods formulated by the subdivider or his agent shall be determined by the planning commission, which shall be guided by the policies set forth in sections 1-104 and 2-101.4 of these regulations. 
4-101.5. Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The planning commission shall have authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be determined at sketch or preliminary plat approval. 
4-102. - Lot requirements. 
4-102.1. Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography, flood hazards, or other conditions in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with any zoning ordinance and state and county public health department regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved public way. 
    Where reasonably feasible lot arrangement shall be such that building sites will afford maximum utilization of energy conservation measures, such as providing for solar access purposes. 
    Where a lot in any floodprone area must be improved to provide a building site free from flooding, such improvements shall be made outside the floodway by elevation or fill to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation (100-year flood) for a distance extending at least 25 feet beyond the limits of intended structures and, additionally, extending a sufficient distance to include areas for subsurface sewage disposal if the lot is not to be connected to a public sanitary sewer system. Any fill shall be protected against erosion by rip-rap, vegetative cover, or other methods deemed acceptable by the planning commission. 
    In nonresidential building sites outside a floodway but subject to flooding, the use of structural floodproofing methods specified in section 4-101.4 of these regulations, as an alternative to landfill, may be approved by the planning commission, as provided in section 2-101.4 of these regulations. 
4-102.2. Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of any zoning ordinance, where applicable. Where lots are more than double the minimum area required by any zoning ordinance, the planning commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future public ways where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with any zoning ordinance and these regulations. Where solar access is a primary consideration, side lot lines shall generally run from due north to due south, regardless of the resulting angle of incidence with a public way. A variation of up to 25 degrees east or west of this axis is permitted; further variations may be allowed, but only to provide a better public way or lot plan. 
    Dimensions of the corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback requirements from both public way rights-of-way. 
    Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, and as established in any zoning ordinance. 
    Where no zoning ordinance is in effect, and public sewerage is not available (as determined by section 4-107.2, of these regulations), the minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet; it shall be larger than the minimum, if required by local health authority. 
4-102.3. Building setback lines. In the case of electric transmission lines where easement widths are not definitely established, a minimum building setback line from the center of the transmission line shall be established as follows: 
Voltage of Line Building Setback  46 KV 371/2 feet  69 KV 50 feet 161 KV 75 feet  
4-102.4. Double frontage lots and access to lots. 
4-102.401. Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
4-102.402. Access from arterial or collector public ways. The planning commission may require that lots shall not derive access exclusively from arterial or collector public ways. Where driveway access from such public ways may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning commission may require that the lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards. Driveways shall be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back onto arterial or collector public ways. 
4-102.5. Soil preservation, grading, erosion control, and seeding. 
4-102.501. Soil preservation and final grading. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved construction plan. 
    Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide cover on the lots, cover between any sidewalks and curbs, and be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
4-102.502. Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings; individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. 
4-102.6. Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land or left or deposited on any lot or public way at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the lot, and removal of such waste shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy. Neither shall any such waste be left nor deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. 
4-102.7. Fencing. Each subdivider or developer shall be required to furnish and install all fences wherever the planning commission determines that a hazardous condition exists. Such fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the planning commission, as appropriate, and shall be noted on the final plat as to height and required materials. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any affected lot until such fence improvements have been installed. 
4-102.8. Water bodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The planning commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a governmental responsibility. 
    No more than ten percent of the minimum area of a lot required under any zoning ordinance may be satisfied by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates a buildable area of a lot from the public way by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure approved by the planning commission and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a structure on such a lot until the installation is completed and approved by the planning commission and/or the appropriate governmental representative. 
4-103. - Public ways. 
4-103.1. General requirements. 
4-103.101. Frontage on improved public ways. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from either an existing public way except as provided in section 1-112.107, of these regulations or, if any new street construction or improvement is involved, a street approved and dedicated as provided in articles 2 and 3, of these regulations. Any such public way must be suitably improved to the standards required by this article or be bonded by a performance bond required under these regulations, with the roadway and right-of-way widths required by this article or the major street or road plan. 
4-103.102. Grading and improvement plan. Public ways shall be graded and improved to conform to the standards required by this section and shall be approved as to design and specification by the appropriate governmental representative in accordance with the specifications required herein. No surface shall be applied to the base of any proposed public way prior to the approval of the final plat of the subdivision or of the final approval of any section of the subdivision in question without having been properly inspected. 
4-103.103. Improvements in floodable areas. The finished elevation of proposed public ways subject to flood shall be no more than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation. The planning commission may require profiles and elevations of public ways to determine compliance with this requirement. All drainage structures shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows without increasing flood height. Where fill is used to bring the finished elevation of any public way to the required elevation, such fill shall not encroach upon a floodway, and the fill shall be protected against erosion by rip-rap, vegetative cover, or other methods deemed acceptable by the planning commission. 
4-103.104. Topography and arrangement. 
(1)  All public ways shall be arranged so as to obtain as many of the building sites as possible at or above the grades of the public ways. Grades of public ways shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall not be permitted. Specific design standards are contained in section 4-103.2 of these regulations. 
(2)  The use of public ways running in a east-west direction and lots on a north-south axis is encouraged for energy conservation of developments. 
(3)  All public ways shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of public ways and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the major street or road plan or the land development plan. 
(4)  All public ways shall be properly related to special traffic generators, such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping areas or centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land use. 
(5)  Minor public ways shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography; to discourage use by through traffic; to permit efficient drainage and utility systems; and to require the minimum ways necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
(6)  The use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sac, or "U"-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
(7)  Proposed public ways shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the planning commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the subdivision design with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(8)  In business and industrial developments, public ways and other access routes shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas, so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian traffic. 
4-103.105. Blocks. 
(1)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Exceptions to this prescribed block width may be permitted in blocks adjacent to major public ways, railroads, or waterways. 
(2)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(a)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(b)  Any zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(c)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and 
(d)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(3)  Block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,600 feet nor be less than 200 feet, except as the planning commission deems necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of the public way pattern. Wherever practicable, blocks along arterial or collector routes shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length. 
(4)  Blocks designed for industrial or commercial uses shall be of such length and width as may be deemed suitable by the planning commission. 
(5)  In any long block, the planning commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage, facilities, and/or pedestrian traffic. 
    A pedestrian walkway, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the planning commission through the approximate center of any block more than 800 feet long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to a school, playground, shopping center, transportation facility, or other community facility. 
4-103.106. Access to arterials and collectors. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector route, the planning commission may require that access to such public way be limited by: 
(1)  The subdivision of lots so as to back on the arterial or collector route and front on a parallel minor route; 
(2)  A series of cul-de-sac, "U" shaped public ways, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel public way, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial or collector route; or 
(3)  A marginal access or service public way, separated from the arterial or collector route by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points. 
    The number of residential or local public ways entering on arterial or collector routes shall be kept to a minimum. 
4-103.107. Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips adjacent to a proposed public way in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such public way shall generally not be permitted. 
    However, in extraordinary circumstances the planning commission may allow creation of a reserve strip to enable a more appropriate pattern of lots or public ways. Where such is created the planning commission must agree to any and all future depositions of same. A notation to this effect shall be entered on the final plat or approved as an auxiliary instrument attached, thereto. 
4-103.108. Arrangement of continuing and dead-end public ways. 
(a)  Arrangement of continuing public ways. The arrangement of public ways shall provide for the continuation of major public ways between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient provision of utilities, and when such continuation is in accordance with the major street or road plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the public way must be a dead-end public way temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de-sac, temporary T- or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end public ways as required in the following turnabout standards, with a notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal public way right-of-way shall revert to abutting property owners whenever the public way is continued. 
    The planning commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end public ways in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
(b)  Dead-end public ways. Where a public way does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the planning commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the planning commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnabout shall be provided at the end of a dead-end public way in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
    For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end public ways shall, in general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
4-103.2. Design standards. 
4-103.201. Purpose. In order to provide public ways of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire-fighting, sanitation, and road-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate public ways so as to compose a convenient and safe system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the public way design standards set forth in this section are hereby required. (Public way classification shall be as indicated on the land development plan or major street or road plan; otherwise, the public way shall be classified by the planning commission according to the definitions in article 6, of these regulations.) 
4-103.202. General design. The general design of all public ways shall conform to the standards in the table on the following pages. 
4-103.203. Required construction. All public ways shall be constructed according to the construction specifications contained in appendix B. The required cross-section shall be as indicated in the road section illustrations. Typical intersections with radii are also shown. 
4-103.204. Intersections. 
(1)  Public ways shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new public ways at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be permitted. An oblique public way should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two public ways shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing public way shall coincide, wherever practicable, with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such public way. Jogs within public ways having center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected public ways have separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where public ways intersect arterial or collector routes, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersections of arterial or collector public ways shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
General Design Standards for Public Ways 
Improvement Residential 
Public Way Nonresidential Public Way (Industrial, Commercial; Other) Minimum Right-of-Way Width (in Feet) Minor 50 50 Collector 60 80 or (See *Below) Arterial * * Minimum Width of Roadway or Paved Area (in Feet) not Including Parking Requirements Minor 20 24 Collector 22 24 Arterial 24 or (See * Below) 36 or (See * Below) Maximum Percentage Grade Minor 10 6 Collector 7 6 Arterial 6 5 Pavement Crown The paved surface shall slope downward from the center line of the street outward to the edge of the paved surface on each side two-fifths of an inch per foot. Minimum Center Line Radius of Curve (in Feet)** Minor 100 200 Collector 200 200 Arterial 500 500 Minimum Length of Vertical Curves Minor 100 feet, but not less than 20 feet for each algebraic difference in grade. Collector 100 feet, but not less than 20 feet for each algebraic difference in grade. Arterial 300 feet, but not less than 50 feet for each algebraic difference in grade. Minimum Length of Tangents Between Reverse Curves (In Feet) Minor 100 200 Collector 100 200 Arterial 300 400 Minimum Sight Distance (in Feet)*** Minor 200 250 Collector 240 250 Arterial 300 400 Intersection Across Corners 75 Feet Back Across Corners 75 Feet Back Minimum Turnaround on Cul-de-sacs on Minor Public Ways (In Feet) Right-of-Way Diameter 100 160 Pavement Diameter 80 140 Length of Cul-de-sac Permanent Serving no more than 14 dwelling units and not exceeding 700 feet in length. Temporary Serving no more than 26 dwelling units and not exceeding 1,000 feet in length. Minimum Radius (In Feet) of Return at Intersections At Right-of-Way 25 30 At Pavement 35 50  
*As determined by appropriate governmental representative. 
**Applies where a deflection angle of 15 degrees or more in the alignment of pavement occurs. 
***The sight distance is measured from a point 41/2 feet above the center line of the roadway surface to a point 4 inches above the center line of the roadway surface. 
(3)  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two minor public ways shall be 25 feet, and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector public way shall be 30 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(4)  Where a public way intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the subdivider shall cut such ground or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance. 
(5)  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent grade for a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting public way. 
(6)  The cross-slope on all public ways, including intersections, shall be three percent or less. 
4-103.205. Excess right-of-way. A slope easement in excess of the right-of-way designated in these regulations may be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be less than three to one (3:1). Where solid rock is encountered slopes shall be one-half to one. 
4-103.206. Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad right-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  In residential areas, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normally required depth of the lot may be required adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening; the placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
(2)  In commercial or industrial areas, the nearest public way extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
(3)  Public ways parallel to a railroad, when intersecting a public way which crosses the railroad at grade, shall to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
4-103.207. Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the planning commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the subdivider without reimbursement from the governing body. The sharing of expenses for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the planning commission, shall be fixed by special agreement between the governing body and the subdivider. The cost shall be charged to the subdivider pro rata as to the percentage of his development so served. 
4-103.3. Right-of-way width dedication on existing public ways. Where a subdivision adjoins an existing narrow public way or where the major street or road plan or any zoning setback provisions indicate plans for realignment or widening of a public way that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate, at his expense, areas for widening or realigning such public way as set forth below: 
(1)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing public way; or 
(2)  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing public way, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing pavement, shall be provided. 
4-103.4. Public way surfacing and improvements. After underground utilities have been installed, the subdivider shall construct curbs or curbs with gutters, where required, and shall surface or cause to be surfaced public ways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. No public way shall be surfaced until final approval of the subdivision plat has been obtained. Surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic. Types and methods of paving shall be according to the specifications of the governing body, but in no event shall such construction be below the construction specifications set forth in appendix B of these regulations. Adequate provisions shall be made for culverts or other drains, and bridges, as required. 
    All public ways pavements, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, any curb turnabouts, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the planning commission and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. 
4-104. - Road construction specifications. 
    (See appendix B.) The road construction specifications are included in these regulations as appendix B, and are adopted as a part hereof. These specifications shall be the minimum standards for any subdivision within the jurisdictional area. 
4-105. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
4-105.1. General requirements. The planning commission shall not approve any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for stormwater or floodwater run-off channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent from any sanitary sewer system. 
4-105.2. Nature of facilities. 
4-105.201. Location. The subdivider may be required by the planning commission to transport by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist prior to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the public way right-of-way, where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction specifications contained in these regulations. 
4-105.202. Accessibility to public storm sewers. 
(1)  Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the developer shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to the specifications of the appropriate governmental representative; inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the enforcing officer. 
(2)  If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the planning commission, the subdivider shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by a public system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provisions for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the performance bond required for the final subdivision plat. 
4-105.203. Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. Necessary facilities shall be sized based on the construction specifications and assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by any zoning ordinance. 
4-105.204. Effect on downstream drainage areas. The governing body also shall study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional run-off incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the planning commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for adequate improvement of such drainage facilities in such sum as the planning commission shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 
4-105.205. Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area which is subject to flooding, the planning commission may approve such subdivision; provided, that the applicant fills the affected floodway fringe area of said subdivision to place public way elevations at no more than 12 inches below the regulatory flood elevation and first floor elevations (including basements) at no less than the regulatory flood elevation. The plat of such subdivision shall provide for a floodway along the bank of any stream or watercourse of width sufficient to contain or move the water of the regulatory flood, and no fill shall be placed in the floodway; neither shall any building nor flood-restrictive structure be erected or placed therein. The boundaries of the floodway and floodway fringe area, and the regulatory flood elevation, shall be determined by the planning commission based upon the review specified in section 2-103.2 of these regulations and the submission of flood data in construction plans as specified in section 5-103, of these regulations. 
4-105.206. Floodplain areas. The planning commission may when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area or necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. The regulatory floodway shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps. Any subdivision which contains floodprone land shall be subject to the special provisions set forth in sections 2-101.4; 4-101.4; 4-104; and 4-105.2 of these regulations. 
4-105.3. Dedication of drainage easements. 
4-105.301. General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided an easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and of such width and construction as will be adequate. Where open drainageways are utilized they shall be designed for the 25 year frequency flood. 
4-105.302. Drainage easements. 
(1)  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impracticable the inclusion of drainage facilities within a public way right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width for such facilities shall be provided across property outside the public way lines and with satisfactory access to public ways. Easements shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats. Drainage easements shall be carried from the public way to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
(2)  When a new drainage system is to be constructed which will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
(3)  The applicant shall dedicate, when required by the planning commission, either in fee, or by drainage or conservation easement, the land on both sides of an existing watercourse to a distance to be determined by the planning commission. 
(4)  Along watercourses, low-lying lands within any floodway, as determined by the planning commission pursuant to section 2-103.2, of these regulations, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Such land or lands lying within floodway fringe areas may be counted in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedure and shall not be used in determining any minimum yard requirements set forth in any zoning ordinance or these regulations. 
4-105.303. Ditching, concrete ditch paving, curbs, and culverts and storm drains. The design and construction details of drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. The design and construction details of all such facilities shall be approved by the appropriate governmental representative. 
4-106. - Water facilities. 
4.106.1. General requirements. 
(1)  Necessary action shall be taken by the developer to extend a water supply system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection. 
(2)  Where a public water main is within reasonable access of the subdivision, as determined by the planning commission, the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to construction and material specification, approval of the governing body, the Tennessee Department of Public Health, and these regulations. 
(3)  Water mains to be utilized for fire protection purposes shall be of a size to meet the flow rate requirements established for the area, and the type of development involved. Where water mains are not to be utilized for fire protection, the planning commission may approve smaller lines, as necessary, to meet potable water demand. 
(4)  All water systems, whether public or private, located in a floodprone area shall be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation. All water supply facilities located below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the water supply system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
4-106.2. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required in all subdivisions; they shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and be within 500 feet of any residential, commercial, or industrial lot. However, the planning commission may require closer spacing where physical conditions or types of structures so warrant. To eliminate future public way cuttings or openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other water supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a public way shown on the subdivision plat, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
4-107. - Sewage facilities. 
4-107.1. General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the regulations of the Tennessee Department of Public Health and by any other applicable standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed and approved in accordance with the rules, regulations, specifications, and standards, of any applicable governmental agency or appropriate unit thereof. 
4-107.2. Mandatory connection to public sewer system. 
(1)  When public sanitary sewers are within reasonable access of the subdivision, as determined by the planning commission, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer facilities to each lot therein and shall connect the facilities to the public system. The subdivider shall provide sewers which meet standards set forth in the regulations of the Tennessee Department of Public Health. 
(2)  All sanitary sewer facilities located in a flood hazard area shall be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation. All sewer facilities located below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be designed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters into the sewer system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
4-107.3. Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, lot areas shall not be less than the minimums specified in these regulations; all pertinent soil absorption tests shall be made as directed by the county environmentalist and the results submitted to the county health department for approval. 
    The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tank and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, also shall be approved by the county health department. 
    The planning commission may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high groundwater, flooding, or unsuitable soil characteristics. The planning commission may require that the subdivider note on the face of the plat and any deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in designated areas. 
4-107.4. Design criteria for sanitary sewers. 
4-107.401. General. These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations can be allowed and may be required in those instances where considered justified by the planning commission. 
4-107.402. Design factors. Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration may be given to any current zoning regulations and approved planning reports, where applicable. Sewer capacities shall be adequate to accommodate the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and industrial wastes, together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented hereinafter should be adequate in each case for the particular type of development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area using the following criteria. 
Sewer Design Flows 
Building Type Design Flow One and two family dwellings 0.02 cubic feet per second(c.f.s. per acre) Apartments One and two story 0.02 c.f.s. per acre Three through six story 0.03 c.f.s. per acre Commercial Small stores, offices and miscellaneous business 0.02 c.f.s. per acre Shopping centers 0.02 c.f.s. per acre Industrial As initially determined by appropriate governmental representative  
    These design factors shall apply to watersheds of 300 acres or less. Design factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and smaller than 1,000 acres shall 
be computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the applicable design factor for an area of 300 acres to a design factor of 0.01 c.f.s. per acre for an area of 1,000 acres unless otherwise directed by appropriate governmental representative. Design factors for watersheds larger than 1,000 acres shall be 0.01 c.f.s. per acre unless otherwise directed. 
    All sanitary sewer materials shall be A.S.T.M. and/or A.W.W.A. approved. 
4-108. - Pedestrian ways. 
4-108.1.  Pedestrian ways. 
All developers creating major subdivisions of land in the residential zoning districts of: R-5M, R-5, R-4 shall be required to build sidewalks on both sides of all streets. Developers of major subdivisions in the residential zoning districts of R-1, R-2, and R-3 shall build sidewalks on one side of the street. Planning commission may exempt developers of this requirement, or require the lower density subdivisions (R-1, R-2, and R-3) to build sidewalks on both sides of the street. 
The planning commission may require additional sidewalks, bicycle paths, and greenways between lots or away from roads to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access and shortcuts to other streets or open spaces and public facilities. These perpetual and unobstructed easements may be up to 20 feet in width, and shall be indicated on the plat. 
The planning commission may require the construction of sidewalks on any new commercial or industrial development to engender long-term community connection. The planning commission may also require the developers of major subdivisions, or commercially and industrially planned developments to widen proposed roads to allow for bicycle pathways, alone or in conjunction with sidewalks. 
Concrete curbs and appropriate storm sewers are required for all public ways where sidewalks are to be constructed. The standards of which shall be in accordance with the applicable subdivision regulations for the City of Millersville. 
4-108.2.  Design criteria. 
The width of the sidewalks shall be determined by the planning commission, in accordance with proper planning principles, during the sketch plat phase of all major subdivisions in all residential classifications, and the site plan phase for all other developments. 
Sidewalks shall be separated from the curb or street by four or more feet under normal conditions. The planning commission may allow a separation of less than four feet, but not less than two feet where extraordinary topographical features would require a retaining wall in excess of three feet in height if other solutions, such as a wider separation, are not desirable. It is the intent of this section to allow for the installation of underground easements to be placed within the median strip created between the sidewalk and the street curb. 
(1)  When sidewalks are to be constructed in a subdivision adjoining a developed area with sidewalks, the sidewalks shall be joined and extended along the same side(s) of the street. 
(2)  The median strip shall be grassed or otherwise landscaped. 
(3)  Mailboxes shall not be installed, nor or landscaping features placed in the location for the sidewalk. 
(4)  The planning commission may require an unobstructed easement of up to ten feet on either side of a sidewalk where reasonable to facilitate pedestrian access to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby public ways and may require a street separation of up to ten feet along major arterial streets. 
4-108.3.  Construction criteria. 
All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or brick. Concrete sidewalks shall rest on not less than four inches of compacted base material and shall be at least four inches in thickness of 3,500 PSI or stronger concrete and shall contain structural reinforcement. Concrete pavers or brick shall be installed in accordance with the Interlocking Concrete Pavement Institute, but not less than six inches of appropriately compacted base. Sidewalks that are likely to be subjected to vehicular traffic shall rest on not less than eight inches of appropriately compacted base material and shall be at least six inches in thickness of 3,500 PSI or stronger concrete and shall contain such other structural requirements as specified by the city engineer. 
4.108.4.  Maintenance. 
Until time of public dedication the developer shall repair and maintain all sidewalks and drainage structures and cut all grass and maintain all vegetation between the roadway and the property line of the individual lot owners. 
(1)  Homeowners' associations. In subdivisions with homeowners' associations the developer shall file copies of the recorded covenants and/or homeowner's association charter and bylaws with the city. 
(a)  The developer may dedicate the aforementioned maintenance obligations of subsection 4.108.4, and all public improvements, to the homeowners' association that entity shall be liable for those obligations. 
(b)  The homeowners' association may offer to dedicate the sidewalks, and all public improvements to the City of Millersville, pursuant to their covenant code and bylaws. 
4.108.5.  Survey of sidewalk improvements. 
All required sidewalks not constructed at the time a final plat is filed in the office of the registrar of deeds shall be covered by a form of a letter of irrevocable credit that meets the applicable requirements set forth by the city regarding the surety of all public improvements. 
A letter of irrevocable credit will be required in commercial districts if a building is occupied prior to construction of sidewalks. This letter will be released following receipt of an engineering certificate of compliance and issuance of a final use and occupancy permit. The bond for sidewalk construction will be released upon construction or at the time of road acceptance by the City Commission of Millersville. Prior to acceptance all sidewalk construction shall be complete. 
(P.C. Res. of 11-10-2003; Res. No. 01-05, 9-13-2005) 
4-109. - Utility easements. 
(1)  Easements down rear lot lines or additionally across lots, if deemed necessary by the planning commission, shall be provided for utilities (private or public). Such easements shall be at least ten feet wide, except for across-lot easements which shall be at least 20 feet wide. The subdivider shall take such actions as are necessary to ensure the coordination and continuation of utility easements established on adjacent properties with those proposed within his development. 
(2)  Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to public ways or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(3)  Temporary construction easements exceeding the width of permanent easements may be required as necessary until completion of any one project. 
4-110. - Public uses. 
4-110.1. Plat to provide for public uses. Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a school, recreation use, a portion of a major public way, or other public use, as indicated on the land development plan and/or major street or road plan, or any portion thereof, such tract shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his plat when first presented for review by the planning commission. 
    After proper determination of its necessity by the planning commission and the appropriate governmental representative(s) involved in the acquisition and use of such site, and after a determination has been made to acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into the plat prior to final approval by the planning commission and recording of the plat. 
4-110.2. Referral to the governmental agency concerned. The planning commission shall refer any plat presented in accordance with section 4-110.1. The planning commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the appropriate governmental agency 30 days for reply. 
    Among the areas which the planning commission may propose for public acquisition, when the commission deems it appropriate and consistent with the policies and purposes set forth in these regulations, is any land within a floodway or floodway fringe determined according to the procedure outlined herein. 
    The acquiring agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition. 
4-110.3. Notice to property owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report, the planning commission shall notify the property owner and shall designate on all plats any areas proposed to be acquired by any governmental agency. Upon such designation by the planning commission, any reserved portion of any floodway or floodway fringe shall be altered from its natural state by the development in any manner whatsoever, except upon written approval of the planning commission. 
4-110.4. Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a governmental agency on the final plat shall be initiated within 24 months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a plat of a proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the governmental agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed 24 months shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and the freeing of the property for development in accordance with these regulations. 
4-111. - Preservation of natural features and amenities. 
    Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the area as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision, as required by the planning commission. No change of grade of the land shall be affected nor shall any natural features be removed or relocated until a preliminary subdivision plat has been approved by the planning commission. 
4-112. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
4-112.1. General. If a proposed subdivision includes land which is zoned for a commercial or industrial purpose, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the planning commission may require. A nonresidential subdivision also shall be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in any zoning ordinance. Site plan approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the planning commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards set forth by the planning commission, and shall conform to the proposed land development plan, major street or road plan, and any zoning ordinance. 
4-112.2. Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in the regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the public way, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in areas and dimensions to the types of nonresidential development anticipated; 
(2)  Public way rights-of-way and pavements shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated; 
(3)  Special requirements may be imposed by the governing body with respect to any public way, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction specifications; 
(4)  Special requirements may be imposed by the governing body with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water drainage; 
(5)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from the proposed nonresidential subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing on existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips, when necessary; and 
(6)  Public ways carrying nonresidential traffic, especially trucks, normally shall not be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
4-113. - Underground utilities. 
    It is [the] intent of this section to ensure community protection from common tornado activity in middle Tennessee. 
Subsection 1: General requirements 
Subdivisions (two lots or more) will require underground utilities including cable, telephone, electrical lines - there shall be no poles in the subdivision to support these lines. Developers and the planning commission may reach alternative arrangements concerning underground utilities where strict compliance would cause an undue hardship based on topographical or geological realities. The burden of proof concerning hardship requests shall be the sole responsibility of the developer, and the city may allow for review of supporting documentation through the city engineer or an individual selected to fulfill that capacity. 
Subsection 2: Retention of a consultant 
The planning commission may utilize the city engineer or an outside consultant at the applicant's sole expense to review the "supporting documentation" and make independent determinations and recommendations on the physical features of the property that, in the developer's view, prohibit the installation of underground utilities. 
(Res. No. PC 04-01, 2-10-2004) 
ARTICLE 5. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED 

5-101. - Sketch plat. 
5-101.1. General. Sketch plats submitted to the planning commission, prepared in pen or pencil, shall be drawn to a convenient scale no smaller than 200 feet to an inch. 
5-101.2. Features. The sketch plat shall show: 
(1)  A scale drawing of the property and the names of the owners of adjoining property; 
(2)  Size of the original tract(s) being subdivided; 
(3)  Notation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements, or other encumbrances affecting the property; 
(4)  Approximate topography of the site, at no more than five foot intervals, extended into adjacent properties; 
(5)  Any areas which may be affected by flooding; 
(6)  General public way and lot patterns; 
(7)  Proposed phasing, if any; 
(8)  Vicinity map of property; 
(9)  Date and approximate north point; 
(10)  Name of owner; 
(11)  Name of plat designer; and 
(12)  Zoning classification. 
5-102. - Preliminary plat. 
5-102.1. General. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a surveyor, landscape architect, architect, land planner, or engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering, at a convenient scale no smaller than 200 feet to one inch. The plat may be prepared in pen or pencil, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used. The map prepared for the preliminary plat may be used for the final subdivision plat and should be permanently reproducible. Preparation in pencil will make required changes and additions easier. 
5-102.2. Features. The preliminary plat shall include: 
(1)  The location of the property to be subdivided with respect to surrounding property and public ways; 
(2)  The names of all adjoining property owners of record, or the names of adjoining developments; 
(3)  The name of adjoining public ways; 
(4)  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property, figured to the nearest 1/100 of a foot; 
(5)  The location of existing public ways, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features, such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, and bridges, as determined by the planning commission; 
(6)  The location and width of all existing and proposed easements, alleys, and other public ways and easements, and building setback lines; 
(7)  The location, scale dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots; 
(8)  The position of all existing or proposed buildings within proposed condominiums; 
(9)  The location and dimension of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation; 
(10)  The limits of floodway and floodway fringe areas and the associated regulatory flood elevation and regulatory flood protection elevation, as determined by the planning commission; 
(11)  The name and address of the owner(s) of land to be subdivided, the subdivider if other than the owner, and the land surveyor or other person preparing the plat; 
(12)  The date of the plat, approximate true north point, scale, and title of the subdivision; 
(13)  Sufficient data to determine readily the general location, bearing, and length of all lines necessary to reproduce such lines within the area to be subdivided; 
(14)  Name of the subdivision and all new public ways, as approved by the planning commission; 
(15)  The zoning classification of all zoned lots, as well as an indication of all uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider; 
(16)  The distance and bearing of one of the corners of the boundary of the subdivision to the nearest intersection of existing public ways and to the original corner of the original survey of which it is a part; 
(17)  Key map showing relation of the subdivision to all public ways, railroads, and water courses in all directions to a distance of at least one-half mile (suggested scale: one inch equals 1,000 feet); 
(18)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet where the proposed subdivision has an average slope of five percent or less, or at vertical intervals of not more than five feet where the average slope exceeds five percent (contours to be field surveyed or taken from aerial photographs acceptable to the planning commission); 
(19)  Map parcel numbers as recorded on the land tax maps of the county; 
(20)  The following notations: 
(a)  Explanation of drainage easements; 
(b)  Explanation of site easements; 
(c)  Explanation of reservations; and 
(d)  For any lot where public sewer or water systems are not available, the following: 
(i)  Areas to be used for sewage disposal and their percolation results, or if the planning commission desires, any other acceptable data to show that the site can be served effectively by septic tanks; 
(ii)  Water wells (existing and proposed); and 
(iii)  Rock outcroppings, marshes, springs, sinkholes, natural storm drains, and other outstanding topographical features. 
(21)  Draft of proposed restrictive covenants, if any, to be imposed and designation of areas subject to special restrictions; and 
(22)  A form for endorsement of planning commission approval of the preliminary plat, which shall read as follows: 
Approved by the Millersville Municipal Planning Commission, with such exceptions or conditions as are indicated in the minutes of the Commission on      Date    . 
  
Preliminary plat approval shall not constitute final approval for recording purpose. 
5-103. - Construction plans. 
5-103.1. General. Construction plans shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer for all improvements required by these regulations. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of 50 feet to an inch. Plans shall be in compliance with the specifications in article 4 of these regulations. Approval of plans must precede actual construction, and no final plat shall be considered by the planning commission until the required plans have been approved. 
5-103.2. Features. The following shall be shown on the construction plans: 
(1)  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center lines of all public ways. 
(2)  Where a proposed road intersects an existing public way or ways, the elevation along the center line of the existing public way within 100 feet of the intersection. 
(3)  Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all public ways. 
(4)  Proposed public ways, as required by the planning commission; where such are required, horizontal stationing shall be at 50 foot intervals and cross-sectional elevations shall be to an accuracy of one-tenth foot vertical on a line at right angles to the center line of the public way, each property line, and points 25 feet inside each property line. 
(5)  Plans and profiles indicating the locations and typical cross-section of public way pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins. 
(6)  The location of public way signs. 
(7)  The location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility system. 
(8)  Exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures. 
(9)  Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including but not limited to, existing public ways, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features, such as swamps, railroads, buildings, and features noted on the land development plan or major street plan. 
(10)  The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams and the approximate high- and low-water elevations of such lakes or streams shall be shown. All elevations shall be referred to the USGS datum plan. 
(11)  If the subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream, the distance and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high-water mark of such waterways. 
(12)  The developer shall prepare for any portion of a subdivision containing a floodprone area, or an area known to be subject to flooding, the following information necessary for the planning commission to determine the suitability of the particular site for the proposed development, as follows: 
(a)  Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of any part of the subdivision within a floodprone area; existing or proposed structures or building sites, fill, storage of materials, and floodproofing measures, as specified in these regulations; and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel, floodway, floodway fringe, the regulatory flood elevation, and the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
(b)  A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high-water information, if required by the planning commission; 
(c)  Surface-view plans showing elevations and contours of the ground; 
(d)  Pertinent structures, fill, or elevations of public ways; 
(e)  Water supply, sanitary facilities, soil types, and other pertinent information, as required by the planning commission; and 
(f)  Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading, storage of materials, water supply, and sanitary facilities. 
(13)  Contours at the same vertical interval as on the preliminary plat. 
(14)  In addition to the other requirements of this section, construction plans for condominium subdivisions shall contain "as built" drawings of all underground utilities, regardless of proposed ownership, and the construction design of all public facilities which are proposed for dedication to the governing body. 
(15)  A notation of construction plans approval by appropriate persons or governmental representatives. 
(16)  Title, name, address, and signature of engineer who prepared the plans. 
(17)  Date of plans, including any revision dates. 
5-104. - Final subdivision plat. 
5-104.1. General. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared on transparent drafting material at a scale 100 feet to the inch, but no smaller than 200 feet to the inch on sheets of county register plat book size. The use of an appropriate smaller scale may be permitted for lots larger than two acres. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with the sheets numbered in sequence. 
    Construction plans, if required as described in section 5-103, of these regulations, shall have been approved prior to planning commission approval of the final subdivision plat. 
5-104.2. Features. The final plat shall include: 
(1)  The location of the property to be subdivided with respect to surrounding properties and public ways. 
(2)  The names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names of adjoining developments. 
(3)  The names of adjoining public ways. 
(4)  The exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, showing angles to the nearest minute and distance to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, balanced and closed with a closure error not to exceed one to 5,000 feet. This survey shall be tied into the Tennessee Grid Coordinate System. A distance and bearing shall be provided which will link a point on the boundary of the subdivision to a monument in the right-of-way of the nearest prominent public way intersection. 
(5)  The location of all public ways, easements, water bodies, large streams or rivers, railroads, parks, and cemeteries. 
(6)  The limits of floodway and floodway fringe areas and the regulatory flood elevation and regulatory flood protection elevation; as determined by the planning commission. 
(7)  The location and width of all easements and rights-of-way for public ways, as well as the building setback lines on all lots. 
(8)  The location, dimensions, and area of all lots. All dimensions shall be field run to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. Lot areas shall be shown to the nearest one tenth of a square foot. 
(9)  The location and dimensions, to the accuracy set forth in item 6, above, of all property to be set aside for park or playground use or other public or private reservation, with a designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
(10)  The final plat of a condominium subdivision shall contain, in addition to the other information required by this section: 
(a)  An "as-built" building location and boundary survey, to "American Land Title Association" or other similar standards, showing complete and accurate dimensions and angles of the boundary of the parcel(s) on which the condominium is located, together with exterior dimensions and locations relative to those boundaries of the building(s) which constitute the condominium subdivision; 
(b)  Some sort of datum plane or other suitable vertical location reference. In meeting these requirements, it is only necessary that the upper and lower limits of each level of each condominium unit be identified specifically in relation to the vertical reference, (i.e., and appropriate permanent monument or other acceptable reference datum or fixed known point). Elaborate exterior elevations and architectural detail are not necessary to satisfy this requirement; and 
(c)  Any other special information which the planning commission may require to protect the rights of future owners of the condominium or the public in general. 
(11)  The name and address of the owner(s) of the land being subdivided. 
(12)  The name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner. 
(13)  The name of the land surveyor or other person preparing the plat. 
(14)  The date of the plat, approximate true north point, scale, and title of the subdivision. 
(15)  Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines, necessary to reproduce such lines upon the ground. This shall include the radius, central angle, and tangent distance for the center line of the curved public ways and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved public ways. The location of all monuments and pins shall be indicated on the plat. 
(16)  The name of all public ways. 
(17)  The zoning classification of all lots, as well as an indication of uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider. 
(18)  The total acreage within the subdivision. 
(19)  Lot numbers, where required. 
(20)  The line size and location of water and sewer facilities. 
(21)  The location of all fire hydrants. 
(22)  The diameter and width of all driveway culverts. 
(23)  For any lot where public sewer or water system is not available, the following shall be shown: 
(a)  Areas to be used for sewage disposal when required by the county health department; and 
(b)  Water wells (existing and proposed). 
(24)  Notations and certifications in the form reproduced in this section shall appear upon the final plat, if applicable. All required certificates shall bear the signature of the approving or authorizing agent at the time of application for final plat approval, except that the form for endorsement of the planning commission's approval for recording shall appear unsigned at the time of application for approval. 
(25)  State Department of Public Health, public water and sewer design layout and approval stamps, if applicable; also, actual design plans for filing in appropriate governmental representative's office. 
(26)  Commitment note may be printed or stamped on the final plat reflecting location and dimension of easements, or extent of other agreements or factural [factual] data, in lieu of drafted illustration, when applicable, and as approved by the planning commission. 
5-104.3. Plat certificates. 
(a)  Certification showing that the applicant is the landowner; that he offers for dedication public ways; rights-of-way, and any site for public use; and that he consents to the subdivision plan. 
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION 
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon as evidenced in book number ____________ , page ____________ , County Register's office, and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, and that offers of irrevocable dedication for all public ways, utilities, and other facilities have been filed. 
_____ , 19[20] ____________ _____Date Owner _____Title (if acting for partnership or corporation)  
(b)  Certification by appropriate governmental representative(s) that sewage disposal and/or water systems has/have been installed. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF WATER SYSTEM 
I hereby certify that the water system(s) outlined or indicated on the final subdivision plat entitled ____________ has/have been installed in accordance with current local and state government requirements, or a sufficient bond or cash deposit has been filed to guarantee said installation. 
_____ , 19[20] ____________ _____Date Name, Title and Agency or 
Authorized Approving Agent  
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR SEPTIC TANK 
General approval is hereby granted for lots proposed hereon as being suitable for subsurface sewage disposal and with the listed and/or attached restrictions. 
Before the initiation of construction, the location of the house or other structures and plans for the subsurface sewage disposal system shall be approved by the local health authority. 
__________Date Local Health Authority  
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF SEWER SYSTEM 
I hereby certify that the sewage disposal system(s) outlined or indicated on the final subdivision plat entitled ____________ , have been installed in accordance with current local and state government requirements, or a sufficient bond or cash deposit has been filed to guarantee said installation. 
__________Date Name, Title, and Agency of 
Authorized Approving Agent  
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT 
General approval is hereby granted for lots proposed hereon as being suitable for subsurface sewage disposal with the listed and/or attached restrictions. 
Before the initiation of construction, the location of the house or other structures and plans for the subsurface sewage disposal system shall be approved by the local health authority. 
__________Date Local Health Authority  
(c)  Certification on the final plat by appropriate governmental representative that the subdivider has complied with one of the following: 
(i)  Installation of all public way improvements in accordance with the requirements of these regulations; or 
(ii)  In lieu of compliance with subdivision improvement requirements, certification that surety has been posted by the subdivider in an amount approved by appropriate governmental representative to guarantee completion of all improvements. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF PUBLIC WAYS OR SURETY POSTING 
I hereby certify: (1) that all designated public ways on this final subdivision plat have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the specification of the subdivision regulations, or (2) that a performance bond or other surety has been posted with the planning commission to guarantee completion of all required improvements in case of default. 
__________Appropriate Governmental 
Representative Date  
(d)  For a subdivision containing common open space or facilities, certification on the final plat of dedication of common areas in accordance with procedures established in these regulations. 
CERTIFICATION OF COMMON AREAS DEDICATION 
(Owner)     in recording this plat has designated certain areas of land shown herein as common areas intended for use by the homeowners within (Name of Subdivision)     for recreation and related activities. The above described areas are not dedicated for use by the general public, but are dedicated to the common use and enjoyment of the homeowners within the named subdivision. 
Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions, "applicable to the above named subdivision, is hereby incorporated and made a part of this plat." 
__________Date Owner  
(e)  Certification on the final plat of planning commission's approval for recording of the plat. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR RECORDING 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the ____________ Subdivision Regulations, with the exception of such variances, if any, as are noted in the minutes of the planning commission, and that it has been approved for recording in the office of the County Register. 
__________Date Secretary, Planning Commission  
(f)  Notation of possible flooding. If any portion of the land being subdivided is subject to flooding as defined in these regulations, a notation shall be made on the plat that development or modification of the land within any floodway delineated on the plat shall is [sic] prohibited and that development within floodway fringe areas delineated on the plat shall be done in such a manner that any structure shall be protected against flood damage to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation. Any additional restrictions imposed by the planning commission upon development within floodprone areas also shall be indicated on the plat. 
(g)  Notation of health restrictions. Any modifications or limitations which may be imposed by the state or county health department shall be clearly indicated on the plat. 
(h)  Notation of private restrictions. Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of existence shall be indicated on the plat. Should these restrictions or trusteeships be of such length as to make their lettering impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat or, if the restrictions and trusteeships are of record, the plat shall note where they are recorded. 
ARTICLE 6. - DEFINITIONS 

6-101. - Usage. 
(1)  For the purpose of these regulations certain numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this article. 
(2)  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; and the word "regulations" means "these regulations." 
(3)  A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an unincorporated association of persons, such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied", as applies to any land or building, shall be construed to include the word "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
6-102. - Words and terms defined. 
    Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
    Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his authorized representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
    Architect. An architect certified and registered by the State Board of Architectural and Engineer Examiners pursuant to Section 62-202, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 62-2-501], to practice in Tennessee; or a landscape architect certified and licensed by the State Board of Landscape Architects pursuant to Section 62-203, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 62-2-801], to practice in Tennessee. 
    Arterial street or road. A major public way intended to move traffic to and from major industrial areas or a route for traffic between communities or large areas and which has an average daily traffic count in excess of 3,000. 
    Block. A tract of land bounded by public way or by a combination of such and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, or shorelines of waterways. 
    Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind; the term includes mobile homes. 
    Capital improvements program. A proposed schedule of all future projects, listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, or replacement of the physical assets of the community are included. 
    Collector street or road. A major public way intended to move traffic from local way to arterial routes. Such routes serve a neighborhood or large subdivision(s), and normally have an average daily traffic count ranging from 1,001 to 3,000. 
    Common elements. Any portion of a condominium which is held in common by owners of condominium units. These elements may be either general common elements or limited common elements, as defined below: 
    General common elements. Any of the common elements of a condominium which are held in joint ownership by all owners of the condominium. 
    Limited common elements. Any of the common elements of a condominium which are reserved for use by the owner of a particular condominium unit or group of units. 
    Condominium. A form of ownership of less than the whole of a building or system of buildings under a statute which provides the mechanics and facilities for formal filing and recordation of divided interests in real property, where the division is vertical as well as horizontal. 
    Condominium subdivision. The subdivision of property through the establishment of a condominium or horizontal property regime. 
    Condominium unit. A dwelling unit conveyed by separate title and located within a condominium. 
    Construction plan. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the planning commission. 
    Contractor. An individual, firm, or corporation with whom an owner has executed a work agreement. 
    County environmentalist. An agent designated to administer local and/or state health regulations. 
    Cul-de-sac. A street having only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Design specifications. Written descriptions of a technical nature of materials, equipment, construction systems, standards, and workmanship required for a project intended for local government ownership or maintenance. 
    Developer. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his authorized representative. 
    Dwelling unit. One room, or connected rooms connected together constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental or lease on a daily, weekly, monthly, or longer basis; it is physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure; and contains independent cooking and sleeping facilities. 
    Easement. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
    Enforcing officer. The building inspector or such person as designated by the chief executive officer responsible for enforcing the provisions of these regulations. 
    Engineer. An engineer certified and registered by the State Board of Architectural and Engineer Examiners pursuant to Section 62-202, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 62-2-401-62-2-406], to practice in Tennessee. 
    Equal degree of encroachment. The delineation of floodway limits so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable to conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. This is determined by considering the hydraulic conveyance of the floodplain along both sides of a stream for a significant reach. 
    Escrow. A fiduciary agreement with the local government in lieu of actual performance and intended to assure performance. 
    External subdivision boundary. All points along the periphery of a subdivision. 
    Final subdivision plat. The final map or drawing and accompanying materials, described in these regulations, on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented to the planning commission for approval and which, if approved is recorded with the county register of deeds. 
    Flood. A temporary rise in stream level that results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
    Flood frequency. The statistically determined average for how often a specific flood level or discharge may be equaled or exceeded. 
    Flood hazard boundary map. An official map, on which the boundaries of the floodplain areas having special flood hazards have been delineated. 
    Flood hazard or floodprone area. The maximum area of the floodplain that, on the average, is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of being flooded in any year). 
    Flood profile. A graph showing the water-surface elevation or height or [of] a particular flood event, for any point along the longitudinal course of a stream. The flood profile is determined through the use of standard open-channel hydraulic calculations. 
    Floodplain. A land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, bay, or lake which is likely to be flooded. It is composed of a floodway and floodway fringe. 
    Floodplain management program. The overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, building code regulations, health regulations, zoning ordinance regulations, and these subdivision regulations. 
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures which reduces or eliminates potential flood damage to lands; water facilities, sanitary facilities and other utilities; structures; and contents of buildings and which prevent pollution of floodwaters from such natural or manmade sources. 
    Floodway. The stream channel and adjacent over-bank area required to carry and safely discharge the 100-year flood without increasing flood levels more than one foot above natural flood levels. 
    Floodway encroachment limits. The lines marking the limits of floodways of official federal, state, and local floodplain maps. 
    Floodway fringe. The area adjoining a watercourse which, although not lying within a floodway, has been or may hereafter be covered by a 100-year flood. 
    Frontage. That side of a lot abutting on a public way ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot. 
    Governing body. The chief legislative body of any government. 
    Governmental agency. Any public body other than the governing body. 
    Governmental representative. An outside person or designated local official or employee authorized to act on behalf of the governing body in making determinations regarding legal, public works, planning, community development, or other local government matters. 
    Grade. The slope of a public way specified in percentage terms. 
    Highway, limited access. A freeway or expressway providing a trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the trafficway, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway. 
    Horizontal Property Act. The Tennessee Horizontal Property Act as codified in Sections 64-2701 through 64-2722, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 66-27-101-66-27-123]. 
    Individual sewage disposal system. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device other than a public treatment system approved by the appropriate government authorities. 
    Internal subdivision boundary. All points within a subdivision which do not constitute external boundaries. 
    Joint ownership. Joint ownership among persons shall be construed as the same owner for the purpose of imposing subdivision regulations. 
    Jurisdictional area. Planning boundary established in keeping with Sections 13-3-102, 13-3-201, and 13-3-301, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 13-3-102, 13-3-201, 13-3-301]. 
    Land development plan. The general land development plan for the jurisdiction area which meets the intent of Sections 13-3-301, 13-3-302, and 13-4-102, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 13-3-301, 13-3-302, 13-4-102]. 
    Land surveyor. A land surveyor certified and registered by the State Board of Land Survey Examiners pursuant to Section 62-1803, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 62-18-101-62-18-126], to practice in Tennessee. 
    Legal council. The person designated by the governing body to provide legal assistance for the administration of these and other regulations. 
    Lot. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer of ownership, or for building development. 
    Lot, corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two public ways. 
    Lot improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
    Major platting. All plats not classified as minor subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots or subdivisions of any size requiring any new or improved road, the extension of city or county facilities, or the creation of any public improvements or containing any floodprone area. 
    Major street or road. A public way which is classified as a collector or arterial public way according to these regulations or by the major street or road plan for the jurisdictional area. 
    Major street or road plan. The plan adopted by the planning commission, pursuant to Section[s] 13-3-402 and 13-4-302, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. §§ 13-3-402, 13-4-302], showing, among other things, "the general location, character, and extent of public ways... (and) the removal, relocation, extension, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment or change of use of existing ways." 
    Minor platting. Any plat containing not more than five lots fronting on any existing public way; not involving any new or improved public way, the extension of public facilities, or the creation of any public improvements, and not in conflict with any provision of the adopted land use development plan, major street or road plan, zoning ordinance, or these regulations. 
    Minor street or road. A public way which is not classified as an arterial or collector. 
    National flood insurance program. A program established by the U.S. Government in the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and expanded in the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, in order to provide a flood insurance at rates made affordable through a Federal subsidy in local political jurisdictions which adopt and enforce floodplain management programs meeting the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. The program regulations are found at 24 Code of Federal Regulations [24 CFR], Chapter X, Subchapter B. 
    Off-site. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
    One hundred-year flood. A flood having an average frequency of occurrence of once in 100 years, although it may occur in any year. It is based on statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed and analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the watershed. 
    Owner. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the real property. 
    Performance bond. See "bond." 
    Perimeter street. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be subdivided abuts on only one side. 
    Planning commission. The Regional Planning Commission created in accordance with Title 13 of the Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-2-101 et seq.]. 
    Preliminary plat. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for approval. 
    Premises. A tract of land together with any buildings or structures which may be thereon. 
    Public improvement. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance operation or which may affect an improvement for which city or county responsibility is established. 
    Public way. A street or road, alley or improved public right-of-way. 
    Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe longitudinal segments of a stream or river. A reach generally includes the segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are influenced by a manmade or natural obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings typically would constitute a reach. 
    Regulatory flood. See 100-year flood. 
    Regulatory flood elevation. The water-surface elevation of the regulatory flood. 
    Regulatory flood protection elevation. The elevation of the regulatory flood, plus one foot of freeboard to provide a safety factor. 
    Resubdivision. A change in a map of any approved or recorded subdivision plat alters the number of lots incorporated within the confines of the original plat. 
    Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a public way crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer line, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way," for land platting purposes, shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
    Sale or lease. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, including contract of sale or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, or other written instrument. 
    Same ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association, or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockholder, partner, associate, or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association. 
    Setback. The distance between a building wall and the nearest public way right-of-way. 
    Sketch plat. A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final subdivision plat in the case of minor subdivisions). 
    Special flood hazard map. The official map designated by the federal insurance administrator to identify floodplain areas having special flood hazards. 
    Staff assistant to the planning commission. The person(s) employed by the local government to assist the planning commission in planning and land use regulation activities. 
    Start of construction. For purposes of subdivision control and alteration of the original surface area of the land, from and after the date of adoption of these regulations. 
    Structure. Anything constructed above or below ground. 
    Subdivider. Any person who (1), having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2), directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development, any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plot in a subdivision or who (3), engages, directly or indirectly, or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plot in a subdivision or who (4), is directly or indirectly controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing. See "subdivision." 
    Subdivision (applies within the corporate limits). Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or other division of less than five acres or of more than five acres, but less than ten acres in size with depths no greater than four times their widths for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. (See Section 13-4-301, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-301].) 
    Subdivision (applies within the planning region but outside of corporate limits) Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided, however, that subdivision does not include a division of any tract or parcel of land into two or more tracts or parcels when such parts parcels are five acres or larger in size. (See Section 13-3-401, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-3-401].) 
    Subdivision agent. Any person who represents or acts for or on behalf of a subdivider or developer in selling, leasing, or developing or offering to sell, lease, or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site, or plot in a subdivision, except in an instance where only legal council is provided. 
    Surety. A performance bond, letter of credit, or other guarantee in a form specified in appendix A, of these regulations. 
    Temporary improvement. Any improvement built and maintained by a subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the surety for completion of required improvements. 
    Twenty-five-year frequency flood. A flood having an average frequency of occurrence of once in 25 years. 
    Water surface elevation. The heights in relation to mean-sea-level expected to be reached by floods of various magnitudes and frequencies at pertinent points in the floodplain. Also the level of natural flows or collectors or water which may be expected to be found above or below surface. 
ARTICLE 7. - ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS AND AMENDMENTS 

7-101. - Original enactment. 
    In order that land shall be subdivided in accordance with the objectives and standards set forth in these regulations, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted this 2nd day of January, 1982, and immediately shall be in full force and effect. Pursuant to Section 13-4-303, Tennessee Code Annotated [T.C.A. § 13-4-303], a public hearing was held on these regulations on November 16, 1981, at 7:00 p.m., at City Hall, in Millersville, Tennessee, notice of which was given by publication in the Sumner County Times, on November 4, 1981. 
/s/  J. E. Crunk       
Chairman January 2, 1982       
Date ATTEST: /s/  Frank B. Fox       
Secretary January 2, 1982       
Date  
APPENDIX A\FORMS 
MILLERSVILLE PLANNING COMMISSION 
Form Number 1 
PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST 
NAME OF SUBDIVISION _____ 
_____1. Two copies of application. _____2. Application fee: received check for $ ____________ . _____3. Seven copies of plat. _____4. Location of property with respect to surrounding property and streets. _____5. Names of all adjoining property owners, or names of adjoining developments. _____6. Names of adjoining streets. _____7. Location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to the nearest 1/100 of a foot. _____8. Location and names of existing streets. _____9. Location of existing easements. _____10. Location of existing water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features, such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches and bridges. _____11. Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots. _____12. Location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. _____13. Date of Plat. _____14. Appropriate true north point. _____15. Scale of plat. _____16. Title of subdivision _____17. Data from which the location, bearing, and length of all lines can be determined and reproduced on the ground. _____18. Location of all proposed monuments. _____19. Names of new streets. _____20. Indication of the use of any lot and all uses other than residential. _____21. Lots numbered. _____22. Explanation of drainage easements. _____23. Explanation of site easements. _____24. Explanation of utility (including overhang) easements. _____25. Explanation of reservations. _____26. Three copies of the construction plans (at a scale of not more than 1? equals 50'), if required. _____a. Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center lines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the center line of the existing road or roads within 100 feet of the intersection shall be shown. _____b. Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets. _____c. If required, where steep slopes exist, cross sections of all proposed streets at 100 foot stations shown at five points as follows: on a line at the right angles to the center line of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center line of the street and points 25 feet inside each property line. _____d. Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section of street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, servitudes, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins. _____e. Location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing and proposed utility systems. _____f. Location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures. _____g. Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities including, but not limited to, existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features, such as swamps, railroads, and buildings. _____h. If the subdivision contains a floodprone area, plans in triplicate and other required data relating to flooding, as required by Subsection 5-105.2, Item 5, of the subdivision regulations. _____i. If the subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary highwater mark of such waterways. _____j. Topography at the same scale as sketch plat, with required contour interval. _____k. Title, name, address, and signature of professional engineer and surveyor. _____l. Date, including revision dates. _____m. Notation of approval.  
Form Number 2 
CHECKLIST FOR FILING OF FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT 
(For Local Government Use Only) 
PLAT NAME _____ 
LOCATION _____ 
OWNER _____ 
_____
1.  Date of Final Approval _____ 
Date(s) of Reapproval _____ 
2.  Bonds: 
Water _____ 
Sewer _____ 
Street _____ 
3.  Reproducible Original: 
Received _____ 
Checked: 
_____a. Signature Block _____b. Owner's Signature _____c. Seal(s) _____d. ____________ _____e. ____________ _____f. ____________  
4.  Instruments Necessary for Public Improvements (checked by chief enforcing officer). 
a.  Off-site (easements, servitudes, agreements, deeds) 
1.  _____
2.  _____
3.  _____
4.  _____
b.  Roads 
1.  _____
2.  _____
3.  _____
4.  _____
5.  _____
c.  Road Widening (City, County, State) 
1.  _____
2.  _____
3.  _____
4.  _____
d.  On-site Drainage (easements) 
1.  _____
2.  _____
3.  _____
4.  _____
e.  Sewer Line (easements) 
1.  _____
2.  _____
f.  Reserved Lands 
1.  _____
2.  _____
g.  Other Right-of-Way 
1.  _____
2.  _____
(Instruments checked above to be recorded immediately) 
Forms of Performance Bond - The form of the performance bond, required by Subsection 2-104.1, item 7, and Chapter [Article] 3 of these regulations, shall be as one of those (Forms Number 3 and 4) reproduced in this section and approved by the city attorney. 
Copies of these forms may be obtained at the office of the chief enforcing officer. 
Form Number 3 
PERFORMANCE BOND 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That We, ____________ , as Principals, ____________ , State of ____________ , and the ____________ INSURANCE COMPANY, a ____________ Corporation authorized to do business in the State of Tennessee, having an office and place of business at ____________ , as Surety, are held and firmly bound unto the City of Millersville as obligee, in the sum of ____________ Dollars ($ ____________ ) lawful money of the United States, for the payment whereof to the Obligee, the Principal and the Surety bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly to these presents: 
SIGNED, SEALED, AND DATED, This ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , 19[20] ____________ . 
WHEREAS, application was made to the Millersville Municipal Planning Commission for approval of a subdivision shown on plat entitled, " ____________ ," filed with the chief enforcing officer of the City of Millersville, on ____________ , 19[20] ____________ , said final plat being approved by the Millersville Municipal Planning Commission upon certain conditions, one of which is that a performance bond amount of ____________ DOLLARS ($ ____________ ) is to be filed with the planning commission and accepted by the local governing body to guarantee certain improvements in the subdivision named above, 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such that if the above named Principal shall within one year from the date hereof (time may be extended for one year only beyond this period by the local governing body upon the recommendation of the planning commission with the consent of the parties) will and truly make and perform the required improvements and construction of public improvements in said subdivision in accordance with the local government specifications and the resolution of ____________ , 19[20] ____________ , then this obligation is to be void; otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
It is hereby understood and agreed that in the event that any required improvements have not been installed as provided by said resolution, within the term of this performance bond, the governing body may thereupon declare this bond to be in default and collect the sum remaining payable thereunder, and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the local government shall install such improvements as covered by this bond and commensurate with the extent of building development that has taken place in the subdivision but not exceeding the amount of such proceeds. 
_____
Principal _____
Principal _____ Insurance Company BY  _____
Attorney-in-Fact BOND NO. _____  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: 
COPARTNERSHIP 
STATE OF TENNESSEE 
(COUNTY OF ____________ )   ss.: 
On this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , 19[20] ____________ , before me personally appeared ____________ , to me known and known to me to be one of the firm of ____________ , described in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and he thereupon acknowledged to me that he executed such instrument as and for the act and deed of said firm. 
_____ 
CORPORATE 
STATE OF TENNESSEE 
(COUNTY OF ____________ )   ss.: 
On this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , 19[20] ____________ , before me personally appeared ____________ , to me known, who, being by me first duly sworn, did depose and say that he resides in ____________ ; that he is the ____________ of ____________ , corporation described in and which executed the foregoing instrument; that he knows the corporate seal of said corporation; that the corporate seal affixed to said instrument is such corporate seal; that it was so affixed by order and authority of the Board of Directors of said corporation, and that he signed his name thereto by like order and authority. 
_____INDIVIDUAL  
STATE OF TENNESSEE 
COUNTY OF ____________ )   ss.: 
On this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , 19[20] ____________ , before me personally appeared ____________ , to me known and known to me to be the individual described in and who executed the foregoing instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same. 
_____ 
Form Number 4 
IRREVOCABLE DOCUMENTARY LETTER OF CREDIT 
1.  DATE OF ISSUE ____________ 
2.  CREDIT NO. OF ISSUING BANK _____ 
3.  CREDIT NO. OF ADVISING BANK _____ 
4.  ADVISING BANK _____ 
5.  ACCOUNTEE _____ 
6.  BENEFICIARY, MAIL TO _____ 
7.  LATEST PERFORMANCE DATE _____ 
8.  LATEST DATE FOR NEGOTIATION _____ 
9.  MAXIMUM AMOUNT _____ 
10.  We hereby issue this documentary letter of credit in your (the beneficiary's) favor which is available against your drafts at drawn on Bank, ____________ , Tennessee," bearing the clause "Drawn under ____________ Bank, ____________ , Tennessee, bearing the clause "Drawn under ____________ Bank, Credit No. ____________ accompanied by the following document: A certificate of default signed under oath by the Chairman of the Millersville Municipal-Regional Planning Commission and the Mayor of the City of Millersville certifying that the accountee has not complied with the terms of the agreement between the planning commission and the accountee and the amount of approximate damage to the local government, which amount shall be identical to the face amount of the accompanying draft. 
11.  SPECIAL CONDITIONS 
We hereby engage with the bonafide holders of all drafts or documents presented under and in compliance with the terms of this letter of credit that such drafts or documents will be duly honored upon presentation to us. 
The amount of each drawing must be endorsed on the reverse of this letter of credit by the negotiating bank. 
The advising bank is requested to advise this letter of credit without engagement of their part. 
_____
Bank _____
Authorized Signature, Issuing Bank _____
Authorized Signature, Issuing Bank  
APPENDIX B 
STREET CONSTRUCTION AND DRAINAGE SPECIFICATIONS 
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 
    To insure the expenditious [expeditious] handling and approval of plans and specifications before construction, two sets of the plans and specifications should be presented to the chief enforcing officer after preliminary approval of the project by the Millersville Planning Commission. Plans shall include a complete plan of the proposed development showing complete contours of an interval no greater than five feet and based on the USGS datum. A north arrow shall be shown on the plan. Profiles of the roadway shall be included and shall show the location of any utilities and drainage tiles in relation to the roadway subgrade. After final approval is granted by the planning commission and the chief enforcing officer, two sets of as-built plans and specifications must be submitted to the chief enforcing officer. 
    The acceptance of the project for maintenance by the City of Millersville will not be granted until the notice of substantial completion has been granted in writing from the city chief enforcing officer. 
    The contractor will be responsible for initiating, maintaining and supervising all safety precautions and programs in connection with the work. He will take all necessary precautions for the safety of, and will provide the necessary protection to prevent damage, injury or loss to: 
a.  all employees on the project and other persons who may be affected thereby, 
b.  all the work and all materials or equipment to be incorporated therein, whether in storage on or off the site, and 
c.  other property at the site or adjacent thereto, including trees, shrubs, lawns, walks, pavements, roadways, structures and utilities not designated for removal, relocation or replacement in the course of construction. 
    The contractor will keep the premises free from accumulations of waste materials, rubbish and other debris resulting from the work, and at the completion of the work he will remove all waste materials, rubbish and debris from and about the premises as well as all tools, construction equipment and machinery, and surplus materials, and will leave the site clean and ready for occupancy by the owner. The contractor will restore to their original condition those portions of the site not designated for alteration by the contract documents. 
    All easements required for the project must be dedicated to the city or county, as appropriate, before final approval of the project is made. 
SECTION B-1. GENERAL 
B-1.01. Jurisdiction. These rules, regulations, and specifications for the construction of streets and drainage are applicable to all areas within the jurisdictional boundary of the Millersville Municipal Planning Commission. All streets and drainage constructed within this boundary shall conform to this document. 
B-1.02. Purpose. The purpose of these specifications is to provide adequate policies in the construction procedures and quality of materials that will be in the best interest of safety, convenience, and durability. 
B-1.03. Approvals. All roadway and drainage plans shall be prepared and submitted to the chief enforcing officer in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. The approval of the construction plans shall be good for a period of two years. If construction has not begun within this time, plans shall be resubmitted for approval of the chief enforcing officer. 
Final inspection for acceptance of streets and drainage system will not be granted until the original two year approval has expired or until 80 percent of the lots are fully developed, whichever is the shorter period of time. 
B-1.04. Roadway definition and classification. For the purpose of these specifications, streets shall be classified as follows: 
a.  Local Residential: A street primarily serving direct access to abutting property in a residential subdivision. 
b.  Residential Collector: A street serving traffic movement between major arterials and local streets and providing a connection through adjacent neighborhoods. 
c.  Commercial and Industrial: A street principally serving direct access to abutting property within commercial and industrial developments. 
Designation of streets as local residential, residential collector, or commercial and industrial shall be made by the planning commission. 
B-1.05. Developer's performance bond. 
    A performance bond as required in section 3-101 of the subdivision regulations in the amount of 100 percent of the construction costs as estimated by the chief enforcing officer or appropriate agency, shall be required to cover the costs of streets and drainage. 
B-1.06. Developer's maintenance bond. 
    A maintenance bond as required in section 3-103, of the subdivision regulations in the amount of ten percent of the completed roadway and drainage costs as estimated by the planning commission shall be required on all subdivisions and shall be retained by the chief enforcing officer. 
    The maximum length of time to retain said maintenance bond shall be two years after construction completion or until 80 percent of the lots are fully developed, whichever is the shorter period of time. 
    Corrective maintenance required under provisions of the maintenance bond shall conform to the following procedures: 
    All necessary repairs required by the chief enforcing officer during the period of time in which the bond is in effect, shall be at the expense of the developer and shall be requested in writing by the chief enforcing officer. Should such requested repairs not be made by the developer, within a reasonable specified time, such work shall be subcontracted by the city or performed by city personnel, with the cost of same being charged against the outstanding maintenance bond. 
B-1.07. Builder's permit bond. 
    The scope of repairs or maintenance required under the provisions of the builder's permit bond shall include driveway tile size and installation, including headwalls, ditches, curb and driveway ramps, damage, disturbance, or relocation of utilities, damage to adjacent properties, and any other damage incurred during the construction of the building for which a permit was issued. 
    A builder's permit bond shall be in the amount of $500.00 for each lot and shall be posted with the chief enforcing officer prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
    Such bond shall remain in effect until the building is 100 percent complete including final grading of the lot, and is to be released only after a written authorization from the chief enforcing officer. 
B-1.08. Laboratory testing. 
    The chief enforcing officer reserves the right to require soil, material, and/or density testing when deemed necessary. All laboratory testing required shall be conducted by a private laboratory licensed by the State of Tennessee at the expense of the developer. 
B-1.09. State highway bond. 
    When a state or federal highway has to be cut for utility installation or other construction purpose, a bond may be required by the planning commission for repair of the highway and for any damages that may be caused by such construction. 
SECTION B-2 - PRELIMINARY WORK 
B-2.01. Location and protection of underground utilities. 
    Prior to beginning excavation or grading the contractor shall determine, insofar as possible, the actual location of all underground utilities in the vicinity of his operations and shall clearly mark their location so that they may be avoided by equipment operators. Where such utility lines or services appear to lie in the path of construction they shall be uncovered in advance to determine the exact location and depth and to avoid damage due to excavation or grading operations. Existing facilities shall be protected during construction or removed and replaced in equal condition, as necessary. 
    Should any existing utility line or service be damaged during, or as a result of the contractor's operations, the contractor shall take such emergency measures as may be necessary to minimize damage and shall immediately notify the utility involved. The contractor shall then repair the damage to the satisfaction of the utility or shall pay the utility for making the repairs. In all cases, the restoration and/or repair shall be such that the damaged structure will be in as good or better condition as before the damage occurred. 
B-2.02. Surveying and staking. 
    The contractor shall be responsible for his own surveys and establish his own grades unless otherwise directed by the chief enforcing officer. 
B-2.03. Removal of obstructions. 
    The contractor shall be responsible for the removal, safeguarding and replacement of fences, walls, structures, culverts, street signs, billboards, shrubs, mailboxes, or other obstructions which must be moved to facilitate construction. Such obstructions must be restored to at least their original condition. 
B-2.04. Clearing and grubbing. 
    The contractor shall be responsible for cutting, removing and disposing of all trees, brush, stumps, roots, and weeds within the construction area. Disposal shall be by means of chippers, landfills, or other approved method not in conflict with state or local ordinances. 
    Care shall be taken to avoid unnecessary cutting or damage to trees not in the construction area. The contractor will be responsible for loss or damage to trees outside the permanent easement or rights-of way. 
B-2.05. Traffic control and safety. 
    The contractor shall provide and maintain access to and from all properties along the line of his work. The contractor shall also provide temporary bypasses and bridges where necessary to route traffic and shall maintain them in a safe and usable condition whenever, in the opinion of the chief enforcing officer, detouring of traffic to parallel routes cannot be done without hardship or excessive increase in travel by the public. 
    Where single-lane bypasses are provided the contractor shall furnish signalmen to control traffic operations and minimize delays. 
    The contractor shall provide, erect, and maintain adequate barricades, warning signs, and lights at all excavations, closures, detours, points of danger, and uncompleted pavement. 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
SECTION B-3 - ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION 
B-3.01. Stripping, stockpiling, and placing topsoil. 
    All topsoil shall be stripped within the street right-of-way and from any other areas designated by the chief enforcing officer. Topsoil shall be stored in stockpiles. All organic matter within the right-of-way shall be stripped and disposed of unless directed otherwise by the chief enforcing officer. 
    A two or three inch layer of topsoil shall be placed where seeding is required or where required by the chief enforcing officer. 
    After the stockpiled topsoil has been placed as specified above, the areas upon which the topsoil was stockpiled shall be neatly graded and dressed. 
B-3.02. Excavation. 
    Excavation shall conform to limits indicated on the plans. Excavation materials shall be removed in such a manner that the slopes may be neatly trimmed. Excavation shall not be made below grade except where rock or stone masonry is encountered or undercutting of unstable material is required. Material removed below grade shall be replaced with approved material thoroughly compacted. 
    Where borrow material is required to complete embankments or fills the contractor shall be responsible for providing it. 
    Rock excavation shall be removed to a minimum depth of 12 inches below the subgrade and backfilled with approved material which shall be thoroughly compacted. 
    Where springs or seepage water are encountered that is not provided for on drainage plans it shall be reported to the chief enforcing officer. 
B-3.03. Fills and embankments. 
    Embankment and fill material shall be free from frost, stumps, trees, roots, sod, or muck. Only material from excavation or borrow pits or other material approved by the chief enforcing officer shall be used. Material shall not be placed on frozen ground. 
    Where excavated materials is used in fill construction and the material consists of earth and various grades of rock, the fills shall be constructed with the larger or hard rock on the bottom followed by the smaller or softer rock and finally the earth fill being careful to provide a well-compacted and void free embankment. 
    All depressions or holes below the natural ground surface, whether caused by grubbing, rock removal, undercutting or otherwise, shall be filled with suitable material and compacted to ground surface before any embankment materials are placed thereon. 
    Backfilling around a structure shall have been completed and thoroughly compacted to ground surface before any embankment materials are placed thereon. 
    Embankments shall be so constructed that adequate surface drainage will be provided at all times. 
    Fill areas shall be compacted by a sheep's foot roller, to a density of not less than 95 percent of optimum density and each lift of fill material shall be rolled until the roller "walk out." 
    The finished grade shall be test rolled with a truck to be selected by the chief enforcing officer. Any areas found to be soft or "pumping" shall be cut out and replaced with suitable material in lifts and each lift compacted until the excavation has been brought back to finish grade. 
    Fill materials shall be placed in eight inch lifts, maximum thickness. Where excavated materials consist mainly of rock too large to be placed in the normal eight inch thickness without crushing or further breaking down the pieces, such materials shall be placed in the fill in layers not exceeding three feet in depth. No rock larger than 18 inches in dimension shall be placed in fill. Care shall be taken to fill all voids between large rock and to assure that fill materials are compacted such that settling is minimized. Compaction of the top six inches of cuts or fills shall be accomplished with pneumatic-tire rollers. 
    Backfill around structures shall be of crushed stone or earth meeting the approval of the chief enforcing officer; and the fill shall be placed and compacted in eight inch lifts and brought up evenly on all sides of the structure. 
B-3.04. Undercutting. 
    This work shall consist of the removal and disposal of unsatisfactory materials below grade in cut sections or areas upon which embankments are to be placed. It shall also include undercutting for pipes and box culverts where required. 
    Known areas to be undercut shall be designated on the materials approved by the chief enforcing officer. The backfill materials shall be placed in eight inch lifts and compacted as specified for fill construction. 
    Disposal of unsatisfactory materials shall be approved by the chief enforcing officer. 
B-3.05. Subgrade construction and preparation. 
    The subgrade shall be prepared in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades as shown on the plans. 
    Grading of subgrade shall be performed in such manner as to provide ready drainage of water. Ditches and drains shall be maintained to provide proper drainage during construction. 
    Hauling over finished subgrade shall be limited to that which is essential for construction purposes, and all ruts or rough places that develop in a completed subgrade shall be smoothed and recompacted. Soft areas shall be removed and replaced with crushed stone or as directed by the chief enforcing officer. 
    The subgrade shall have a six inch crown at the roadway centerline. 
    The subgrade shall be checked and approved by the chief enforcing officer for adherence to the plans before any base materials are placed. 
B-3.06. Shoulders and Slopes. 
    All shoulders and slopes shall be trimmed and shaped to conform with the cross sections shown on the plans and as specified in section B-4.05. Rock cuts shall be sealed of all loose fragments, projecting points, etc., so as to leave a clean and neat appearance. Shoulders shall be completed where required as shown on the plans and shall be double bituminous surface treated, with care being taken to protect the surface and edges of pavement. Shoulder materials shall be placed in uniform layers and compacted by overlapped rolling of both base course and pavement. The finished shoulder shall be firm against the pavement. 
SECTION B-4. ROADWAY SURFACE 
B-4.01. Base stone. 
    The base course of stone shall be placed and compacted in two layers or lifts upon the prepared subgrade to a finish thickness of six inches as described and shown herein and to the grade indicated on the plans. 
    The base course shall be a pugmill mix of material aggregate meeting the State of Tennessee Highway Department Specifications, Section 303, and 903. 
    The aggregate base shall not be spread on a subgrade that is frozen or that contains frost. The base shall be placed and spread in each of two uniform layers, (or lifts) without segregation of size and each layer shall be compacted to a three inch thickness. The stone shall be mixed with graders or other equipment until a uniform mixture is obtained. Each layer shall be compacted by rolling with alternate blading until a smooth, even, and uniformly compacted finish is obtained. 
    The base stone shall be graded and rolled while it is still moist from the pugmill mix. If the chief enforcing officer determines that the mix is too dry, the contractor shall add water with a distributor tank truck while the stone is being graded and rolled. Compaction shall be uniform for the entire width of the roadway until a density of 80 percent of the solid volume has been achieved. Placement and compaction of each layer shall be approved by the chief enforcing officer before materials for the next successive layer are placed. All loose stone shall be graded from the surface before any pavement is placed. No pavement shall be placed until the stone base has been approved by the chief enforcing officer. 
B-4.02. Prime coat. 
    After the base stone has been prepared as outlined above, a bituminous prime coat shall be applied uniformly over the surface of the base by the use of an approved bituminous distributor. The prime coat shall be applied at the rate of the three-tenths grade RC-70 or RC-250, or refined tar grade RT-2, RT-3 or emulsified asphalt, grade AE-P. If, after the bituminous material has been applied, it fails to penetrate before the time that the roadway is to be used by traffic, dry cover material shall be spread at a rate established by the chief enforcing officer, between eight and 12 pounds per square yard to prevent damage to the primed surface. An excess of cover material shall be avoided. No succeeding stage of construction shall be placed upon the prime coat until it has properly cured. Aggregate for cover materials shall be size number 78 or 8. 
B-4.03. Tack coat. 
    A tack coat shall be applied to old or existing pavement surfaces or to a previously prepared base or surface to provide bond for an overlaid course. The tack coat shall be applied at the rate of one-tenth gallon per square yard using tar grade RTCB-5 or RTCB-6; cut-back asphalt, grade RC-70 or RT-250; or emulsified asphalt, SS-1, RS-2 or AE-3. The surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt and other foreign or loose matter prior to the application of the tack coat. All holes and surface failures shall be repaired prior to applying the tack coat. Immediately after cleaning the surface, the tack coat shall be applied with a pressure distributor at the rate specified above. The tacked surface shall be allowed to dry until it is in a proper condition to receive the surface course. The contractor shall protect the tack coat from damage until the surface course is placed. 
B-4.04. Wearing surface. 
    Upon completion of the application of the prime coat, or tack coat, an asphaltic concrete surface (hot mix) shall be applied. The wearing surface shall be Tennessee Highway Department Specification mix at the thickness shown on the detail sheet for that class street. Initial compaction shall be secured with a ten ton roller or as directed by the chief enforcing officer. Rolling shall begin as soon after spreading as it will bear a roller without undue displacement or hair cracking. Rolling shall start longitudinally at the extreme sides of the lanes and proceed toward the roadway pavement and overlapping on successive trips by at least one-half the width or the rear wheel of the roller. The mixture shall be rolled diagonally crossing the lines of the first. Rolling shall proceed at a rate of not more than 150 square yards per hour and shall continue until all roller marks are eliminated. The initial or breakdown rolling shall be followed by additional rolling of as many complete coverages as the chief enforcing officer may direct. Any displacements of the mixture occurring from any cause shall at once be corrected by the use of rakes and fresh mixture where required. Skin patching on an area that has been rolled will not be permitted. Any defective areas of construction shall be cut out and replaced at the contractors expense. Joints shall comply with the same uniformity of texture, density, etc., as the other sections of the surface. The outside edges of the pavement shall be hand tamped and neatly trimmed to line or gutter edge while the course is being finished. 
B-4.05. Shoulders. 
    Shoulder construction shall be completed by blading, moistening as necessary, and by thoroughly compacting. The shoulders shall be the width and thickness shown on the typical section as required herein and covered with double bituminous surface treatment. The surface shall be prepared as directed in advance of the surface construction. Upon completion of the prime coat a double bituminous surface treatment will be applied with the first course being at the rate of between 0.38 and 0.42 gallons per square yard. If the width of application is wider than the distributor, each width of spread shall not be less than one-half the surface to be treated. Areas that are inaccessible to the distributor shall be treated either with hand sprays or pouring pots. Immediately after each application of bituminous materials has been made, it shall be covered uniformly with Size No. 6, mineral aggregate. The aggregate shall be spread at a rate of between 30 and 40 pounds per square yard. The first application shall be allowed to cure for a length of time to be determined by the chief enforcing officer before the second application is begun. 
    The second application of bituminous materials shall be applied in the same manner as for the first application at a uniform rate between 0.30 and 0.35, gallons per square yard. Mineral aggregate Size No. 7, shall then be spread in the same manner as for the first spread at a rate between 20 and 25 pounds per square yard. 
    Immediately after each spread of cover aggregate, uniform coverage shall be achieved by hand brooming. Additional aggregate shall be placed by hand on thin or bare areas. 
    Immediately after spreading and brooming the cover aggregate, the entire surface shall be rolled, beginning at the edges and progressing to the edge of the pavement. Rolling shall begin within 30 minutes after the aggregate has been spread. The same rolling and curing procedures required in making the first application shall be repeated in making the second application. 
SECTION B-5 - DRAINAGE 
B-5.01. Ditching and channelization. 
    This work shall consist of the construction of ditches adjacent to roadway shoulders and feeding to and from culverts under or adjacent to the roadway. All drainage ditches shall be graded in their entirety during the time in which the roadways are being graded and such grading is to be completed prior to final inspection of the roadways. 
B-5.02. Stabilization of ditches. 
    All open ditches shall be stabilized in accordance with the following requirements: 
Size of Nearest 
Culvert (Upstream) Seeding 
Required Sod 
Required To be 
Concrete Lined Grades Grades Grades Exceeding 15? 1.00%-3.00% 3.00%-12.00% 12.00% Grades Grades Grades Exceeding 18? thru 24? 1.00%-1.50% 1.50%-7.00% 7.00% Grades Grades Grades Exceeding 30? thru 36? 1.00%-1.50% 1.00%-4.00% 4.00% Grades Exceeding 42? thru 72? 2.50% or Less 2.50%  
B-5.03. Concrete ditch paving. 
    Concrete ditch paving shall consist of the construction of paved ditches on a prepared subgrade. The subgrade shall be shaped and compacted to a firm even surface. All soft material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material and compacted as directed by the chief enforcing officer. 
    Concrete ditch pavement shall be four inches in thickness throughout and shall be backfilled immediately after the concrete has set and the forms removed. The backfilled material shall be thoroughly compacted. Expansion joints shall be located as directed by the chief enforcing officer. 
B-5.04. Culverts and storm drains. 
    This work shall consist of the construction of pipe culverts and storm sewers as shown on the plans. No metal pipe shall be used without the approval of the chief enforcing officer. Reinforced concrete pipes shall conform to minimum standards for Class III Reinforced Pipe, ASTM C76. 
    Bedding for pipe culverts shall be Class "B" material. Pipes shall be bedded on a six inch thickness of Class "B" material and backfilled to a depth of 30 percent of the diameter of the pipe. Recesses shall be dug in the bedding material to accommodate the fill. Class "B" bedding shall be Size No. 7 as shown in Chart No. 903.23, of the Tennessee Department of Highways Standard Specifications. Culverts and storm drains in existing roadways shall be backfilled to the depth of the cut. 
B-5.05. Headwalls. 
    Concrete headwalls shall be constructed at both ends of cross drains as shown and detailed on the standard drawings included herein. 
B-5.06. Catchbasins. 
    This work shall consist of constructing catchbasins complete within inlets, outlets, and inverts. Tops and inlets shall be constructed to conform to roadway grade so that drainage can easily be caught and no ponding created. Catchbasins shall be constructed as shown and detailed on the standard drawings contained herein. 
B-5.07. Box culverts and bridges. 
    Design of box culverts and bridges shall be submitted to the chief enforcing officer for approval before any construction will be permitted. These designs shall be stamped and signed by a licensed engineer in the State of Tennessee before submittal to the city for approval. 
B-5.08. Curb and gutter. 
    Concrete curbs and gutter shall conform to the standard drawings as detailed herein. Concrete for curbs and gutter shall be Class "A" at 3500 psi. 
    Curbs and gutter shall be to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as designated by the engineer. The final subgrade for curbs and gutter shall be carefully graded and compacted to an even density and shall be smooth and true to grade. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed in sections of uniform length of approximately ten feet unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed by the chief enforcing officer. Expansion joints shall be formed at intervals of approximately 50 feet using three-fourths-inch thick joint filler. 
    The contractor shall backfill behind all curbs. Parallel ditches behind and adjacent to curbs and gutters will not be allowed. 
SECTION B-6 - FINAL DRESSING, SEEDING, AND SODDING 
B-6.01. Final dressing. 
    This work shall consist of dressing all slopes and areas to within reasonable close conformity to the lines and grades indicated on the plans or as directed by the chief enforcing officer. Final dressing shall be performed by hand or machines to produce a uniform finish to all parts of the roadway including embankments, ditches, etc. Rock cuts shall be cleaned of all loose fragments and side slopes shall be laid back to a 3:1 slope and seeded as described in these specifications. 
    The entire right-of-way shall be cleaned of all weeds and brush and all structures both old and new shall be cleared of all brush, rubbish, sediment or other objectionable material. 
B-6.02. Seeding. 
    In all areas damaged or disturbed by the contractor's operation where established ground cover was present before beginning of construction, the contractor shall be responsible for restoring this ground cover after completion of construction. (Unless noted otherwise on drawings). All areas seeded shall be graded smooth prior to seeding and the contractor shall be responsible for maintenance of the smooth finished grade until grass growth is established. 
    After designated areas have been carefully hand graded, soil shall be prepared for fertilizing and seeding. Fertilizer shall be a standard commercial fertilizer grade 15-15-15 or equivalent and applied at a rate of not less than ten lbs. per 1,000 square feet. The fertilizer shall be lightly harrowed, raked or, otherwise incorporated into the soil for a depth of approximately one-half inch. The contractor will be responsible for any regrading or reseeding required to produce an acceptable grass cover. Rutting and washing must be restored by reseeding and strawing or, in areas of extreme erosion, sodding may be required. 
    The seed shall be as follows: 
Name Percent by Weight Lespedeza 20 Sericea Lespedeza 15 Kentucky 31 Fescue 40 English Rye 15 White Dutch Clover 5 Weeping Love Grass 5 Kentucky 31 Fescue 55 Redtop 15 English Rye 20 White Dutch Clover 5 Weeping Love Grass 5  
    The seed shall be sown uniformly at the rate of 11/2 pounds per 1,000 square feet. 
B-6.03. Sodding. 
    Sodding shall consist of furnishing and placing sod at all locations shown on the plans or as directed by the chief enforcing officer. The work will include the furnishing and placing of new sod which shall consist of live, dense, well-rooted growth of permanent grasses free from johnson grass and other obnoxious grasses or weeds, well suited for the soil on which it is placed. All sod shall be cleanly cut in strips having a uniform thickness of not less than 21/2 inches. Sod shall be set when the soil is moist and favorable to growth. No setting shall be done between October 1 and April 1 without permission of the chief enforcing officer. The area to be sodded shall be brought to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed by the chief enforcing officer. 
    The surface of the ground to be sodded shall be loosened to a depth of not less than one inch with a rake or other device. If necessary, it shall be sprinkled until saturated for a minimum depth of one inch and kept moist until the sod is placed. Immediately before placing the sod, fertilizer and lime shall be applied uniformly to the prepared surface of the ground. Fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of eight pounds of grade 15-15-15, or equivalent, per 1,000 square feet. 
    Sod shall be placed as soon as practical after removal from the point of origin, it shall be kept in a moist condition during the interim. The sod shall be carefully placed by hand on the prepared ground surface with the edges in close contact and, as far as possible, in a position to break joints. Each strip of sod laid shall be fitted into place and tamped. Immediately after placing, the sod shall be thoroughly wetted and rolled with an approved roller. On slopes of two to one or steeper, pinning or pegging may be required to hold the sod in place. 
    The sod shall be watered as directed by the chief enforcing officer for a period of two weeks. The contractor shall not allow any equipment or material to be placed on any planted area and shall erect suitable barricades and guards to prevent equipment, labor, or the public from traveling on or over any area planted with sod. 
SECTION B-7 - INSPECTION OF WORK 
B-7.01. Notice of work beginning. 
    Prior to the beginning of construction the contractor shall notify the chief enforcing officer in writing at least 24 hours in advance. 
B-7.02. Precedence. 
    Should the specifications in the contract documents differ from those contained herein, the most stringent shall take precedence unless specified in writing by the chief enforcing officer. 
B-7.03. City representative. 
    The City of Millersville shall have a representative referred to herein as inspector, on the site during construction to insure compliance with the city specifications. The inspector is the agent of the city only and will act as directed by and under the supervision of the chief enforcing officer. He will confer with the chief enforcing officer regarding his actions. His dealings in matters pertaining to on site work shall in general be only with the chief enforcing officer, owner, owner's engineer, and contractor. His dealings with subcontractors shall only be through or with the full knowledge of the contractor or his superintendent. 
GENERAL DESIGN OF ROADS 
ROAD SECTION FOR 
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS 
PLAN FOR DITCHED 
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS 
PLAN FOR CURBED 
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS 
ROAD SECTIONS FOR 
MINOR COLLECTOR STREETS 
ROAD SECTIONS FOR 
MAJOR COLLECTOR STREETS 
PLAN FOR DITCHED 
COLLECTOR STREETS 
PLAN FOR CURBED 
COLLECTOR STREETS 
ROAD SECTIONS FOR 
COMMERCIAL - INDUSTRIAL STREETS 
PLAN FOR DITCHED 
COMMERCIAL - INDUSTRIAL STREETS 
PLAN FOR CURBED 
COMMERCIAL - INDUSTRIAL STREETS 
DETAIL OF CURB 
CUTTER - DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE 
HEADWALL FOR 
INLET END OF DRAIN TILE 
HEADWALL FOR 
OUTLET END OF DRAIN TILE 
DETAIL OF CATCH BASIN 
DETAIL OF DOUBLE CATCH BASIN 
APPENDIX C 
MAPS 
ARTICLE 8. - APPROVAL PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Approval procedures and documents for subdivisions have been established by Res. No. PC 04-01, adopted February 10, 2004. At the direction of the City, Res. No. PC 04-01 has not been included herein, but copies of the following documents contained in said resolution may be obtained at the Office of the Millersville Codes Enforcement Administrator: 
(1) Minor Subdivision Approval Procedures 
(1) Major Subdivision Approval Procedures 
(1) Sketch Plat Checklist 
(1) Preliminary Plat Checklist 
(1) Construction Plans Checklist 
(1) Final Plat Checklist 
(1) Subdivision Development Agreement 
(1) Rezoning Checklist 
(1) Site Plan Checklist 
(1) Residential Design Review Criteria 
(1) Commercial, Multi-Family and Industrial Design Review Criteria 
(1) Underground Utility Ordinance for All Subdivisions of Land 
(1) Sidewalk Ordinance 
(1) Driveway Ordinance 
(1) Plat Border Stipulations 
(1) Planning Commission Calendar of Events 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in the Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification, and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 81-1  8- 4-1981 1 2-31 81-2  8- 4-1981 1 2-211 81-3  7-29-1981 1 2-212 81-5  9- 1-1981 1, 2 62-31, 62-32 81-7 11- 3-1981 1-4 6-31-6-34 81-8 12- 1-1981 1-8 34-31-34-38 81-9 12- 1-1981 1-11 46-31-46-41 81-10 12- 1-1981 1 54-1 81-11 12-15-1981 1-8 26-31-26-38 9-13 26-43-26-47 81-13 12-15-1981 1 78-1 81-14 12-15-1981 1, 2 78-81, 78-82 81-15 12-15-1981 1-3 22-1 4 6-1 82-17  2- 2-1982 2-51 82-21  2- 9-1982 1-3 78-31 82-22  4- 6-1982 1 26-39 82-24  4-16-1982 1 6-71 2-4 6-101-6-103 5 6-74 6 6-104 7 6-75 8 6-105 82-25  4-16-1982 1-4 26-71-26-74 82-26  4-16-1982 1-5 70-71-70-75 82-31  7-16-1982 1 26-39 82-33  8-31-1982 1 2-31 83-37  7-19-1983 1, 2 26-40 83-46 11-25-1983 1 50-1 2, 3 50-31, 50-32 85-69 10-22-1985 1 2-31 85-68 12-17-1985 1 82-206 85-73  1-21-1986 1 6-75 87-86  2-17-1987 1-6 2-171-2-176 87-87  3-17-1987 1, 2 54-31 3 34-101 87-101 10-20-1987 1-3 66-51-66-53 4 66-31 88-112  8-19-1988 1(1.1), 1(1.2) 82-31, 82-32 2(2.1(d))- 
2(2.1(f)) 82-61-82-63 2(2.1) 82-33 2(2.2(a))- 
2(2.2(g)) 82-121-82-127 2(2.3), 
2(2.4) 82-128, 82-129 3(3.1) 82-151 3(3.2(a))- 
3(3.2(c)) 82-152- 
82-154 3(3.2(d))- 
3(3.2(f)) 82-156- 
82-158 4 82-159 5(5.1)-5(5.3) 82-181-82-183 6(6.1)-6(6.8) 82-64-82-71 7(7.1)-7(7.6) 82-91-82-96 8 82-34 9(9.1), 9(9.2) 82-35, 82-36 10(10.1)- 
10(10.4) 82-201- 
82-204 10(10.6)- 
10(10.8) 82-207- 
82-209 11(11.3) 82-37 88-113  8-19-1988 1-7 82-205 89-128 10-17-1989 1 62-31 89-130 10-17-1989 1 6-75 89-133 11- 9-1989 2 82-206 89-132 12-26-1989 1 82-205 89-31 11-21-1989 78-85 89-136  1-16-1990 1, 2 78-61 90-138  1-29-1990 1, 2 2-51 90-143  4- 2-1990 2-6 78-141-78-145 90-142  4-17-1990 1, 2 22-31 90-145  4-17-1990 ch. 1, § 1- 38-1-38-9 ch. 1, § 9 ch. 2, § 1- 70-31-70-39 ch. 2, § 9 ch. 3, § 5 82-155 90-148  7-17-1990 1 82-206 90-156 10-26-1990 1 82-205 90-163  2-19-1991 1-3 2-101 90-164  2-19-1991 2 30-31 93-201 10-19-1993 1 58-31 2 58-33 3-5 58-32-58-34 93-202 11-16-1993 1(2(A)), 1(2(B)) 6-72, 6-73 2 6-101 94-213  2-15-1994 1 2-31 94-214  2-15-1994 1-3 18-91 94-215  2-15-1994 1 6-32 95-269  8-28-1995 7 82-206 95-274 11- 2-1995 1 2-51 95-282  1-11-1996 1, 2 74-1 96-287  5-21-1996 1-5 42-31-42-35 7-12 42-36-42-41 96-286  8-27-1996 1, 2 74-2 96-298  1-21-1997 1-5 2-141-2-145 96-299  6-10-1997 1-10 14-1-14-10 97-301  3-18-1997 1-3 74-61-74-63 4-12 74-31-74-39 13 74-64 14, 15 74-40, 74-41 18 74-42 11 14-15 12-15 14-11-14-14 97-311  7-15-1997 1, 2 26-41 98-321  6-23-1998 1 2-213 98-322  4-20-1999 11-101-11-105 90-1-90-5 11-201- 
11-203 90-6-90-8 11-301- 
11-311 90-9-90-19 11-401 90-461 11-401.1- 
11-401.5 90-462- 
90-466 11-402 90-467 11-403- 
11-407 90-431- 
90-435 11-408.1- 
11-408.8 90-491- 
90-498 11-409 90-521 11-409(A)- 
11-409(D) 90-522- 
90-525 11-409(E)(1), (2) 90-526 11-409(E)(3) 90-527 11-409(F), 
11-409(G) 90-528, 
90-529 11-410- 
11-412 90-436- 
90-438 11-501- 
11-504 90-121- 
90-124 11-505 90-151 11-505.1- 
11-505.6 90-152- 
90-157 11-506 90-181 11-506.1- 
11-506.4 90-182- 
90-185 11-507 90-211 11-507.1 90-212 11-508.1(A)- 
11-508.1(D) 90-231- 
90-234 11-508.2 90-235 11-508.3(A)- 
11-508.3(H) 90-236- 
90-243 11-508.4(A)- 
11-508.4(C) 90-261- 
90-263 11-508.5(A)- 
11-508.5(H) 90-281- 
90-288 11-508.6 90-289 11-509 90-311 11-509.1, 
11-509.2 90-312, 
90-313 11-510.1, 
11-510.2 90-331, 
90-332 11-511 90-356 11-511(A)- 
11-511(E) 90-351- 
90-355 11-512(A), 
11-512(B) 90-381, 
90-382 11-512.1- 
11-512.10 90-383- 
90-392 11-513 90-411 11-513.1 90-412 11-601, 
11-602 90-81, 90-82 11-602.1 90-82 11-603- 
11-607 90-83-90-87 11-701- 
11-705 90-51-90-55 11-707- 
11-709 90-57-90-59 11-709.1 90-60 11-710, 
11-711 90-61, 90-62 11-713 90-63 99-335  4-20-1999 1 6-74 99-340 10-19-1999 1, 2 78-111, 
78-112 99-339 11-16-1999 90-156 99-341 10-19-1999 1 10-61 2, 3 10-81, 10-82 4 10-62 5, 6 10-83, 10-84 7 10-63 11-26-1999 90-122 90-124 90-157 99-346 12-21-1999 1, 2 26-42 99-348 12-21-1999 90-152, 90-153 90-185 90-212 00-351 4-18-2000 1 62-31 00-352 8-15-2000 1, 2 90-182 00-356 8-15-2000 1-3 10-31 18-31 18-121 18-151 18-181 18-211 18-241 18-271 18-301 18-331 34-71 00-357 8-15-2000 14-1 00-360 9-19-2000 1, 2 74-2 00-361 9-19-2000 1 34-1 00-362 9-19-2000 1 78-111 00-364 11-21-2000 1 90-18 00-366 11-21-2000 1-3 18-61 34-71 01-371 2-20-2001 1-5 90-56 01-374 5-15-2001 1-3 74-1 01-378 5-15-2001 1 2-81 01-375 7-17-2001 1(1), (2) 90-154 2(1) 90-155 3(1) 90-156 4(1) 90-157 01-389 8-21-2001 1 90-82 01-391 8-21-2001 art. IV, 
§ 11-413.1 90-553 art. IV, 
§ 11-413.1.1 90-551, 90-552 art. IV, 
§ 11-413.2 90-555 art. IV, 
§ 11-413.3 90-554 01-388 9-18-2001 3 82-206 01-392 9-18-2001 1, 2 18-1 01-395 12-18-2001 1 78-111 01-396 12-18-2001 1-15 86-91-86-105 01-398 12-18-2001 1 2-213 02-403 3-19-2002 1 90-11 2, 3 90-154, 90-155 02-408 5-21-2002 1 26-39 02-409 5-21-2002 1 26-41 02-410 5-21-2002 1, 2 86-61 3, 4 86-62 5, 6 86-63 02-411 6-18-2002 1 90-493 02-412 6-18-2002 1, 2 18-1 02-420 6-3-2003 1-10       Added 70-46 12-29       Added 70-47-70-65 02-442 2-18-2003 1-4 32-31-32-34 03-423 3-18-2003 1-4 2-1 03-424 3-18-2003 1-6       Added 74-3 03-427 4-15-2003 2       Added 90-18(5) 03-428 6-3-2003 1 82-205(d) 03-429 7-15-2003 Adopting Ord., p. ix 03-432 7-15-2003 1-9 82-206 03-434 10-21-2003 90-7       Added 90-171-90-174 Res. of 11-10-2003       Added 74-91-74-95 03-437 12-16-2003       Added 18-2 03-439 1-20-2004 70-61 03-440 1-20-2003 18-1(b)(6) P.C. Res. of 11-10-2003 App. A, § 4-108 PC 04-01(Res.) 2-10-2004       Added App. A, § 4-113 App. A, art. 8 (note) 03-441 2-17-2004 6-75(9) 04-442 4-20-2004 1-5       Added 34-2 04-446 6-15-2004 1-3 2-213(1), (5)a, d 04-447 7-20-2004 1 70-52 04-448 9-21-2004       Added 90-496(1)f.5. 04-449 9-21-2004 1 90-53(b)(2)b.3. 2 90-53(b)(5) 04-451 10-19-2004 1 70-52 05-457 2-28-2005 1       Dltd 90-431(6)       Rnbd 90-431(7), (8)       as 90-431(6), (7) 2 90-7 3       Rpld 90-81-90-87       Added 90-81-90-85 05-460 8-16-2005 1 90-157 2 90-521-90-523 05-461 6-21-2005 1, 2 34-101 05-468 8-16-2005 1 18-31(a), (b) 2 18-61(a), (b) 3       Rpld 18-91 4 18-121(a), (b) 5 18-151(a), (b) 6 18-181(a), (b) 7 18-211(a), (b) 8       Rpld 18-241 9 18-271(a), (b) 10 18-301(a), (b) 11 18-331(a), (b) PC 01-05(Res.) 9-13-2005 1 App. A, §§ 4-108.1, 4-108.2 05-471 9-20-2005 90-18(5) 05-472 9-20-2005       Added 82-210 05-473 10-18-2005 90-82(b)(3) 05-474 11-15-2005 1 90-174(a)(1) 2       Added 90-174(a)(7) 3 90-174(b)(1)c. 4 90-174(b)(2) 05-478 2-21-2006 1 90-212 05-514  9-18-2007 amd. 1 90-174(a)(1) amd. 2 90-174(b)(1)c. amd. 3       Added 90-174(a)(8) 05-515  8-21-2007       Added 82-1 06-480  4-18-2006 1-7       Added Ch. 32, Art. III, §§ 32-66-32-72 06-482  5-16-2006 18-2 06-483  5-16-2006 1, 2 90-332(a), (b) 06-487 12-19-2006 1 90-7 2, 10       Added 90-216 3 90-153(b)(2) 4 90-154(b)(2) 5 90-155(b)(2) 6 90-156(b)(2) 7 90-157(b)(2) 8 90-182(b)(1)a. 9       Added 90-212(b)(1)a.12. 
90-212(b0(2)(i) 06-489  9-19-2006 1       Added Ch. 54, Art. III, §§ 54-51-54-55 06-490  9-19-2006 1, 2 82-206(a), (e) 06-491  9-19-2006 1, 2 90-182(b)(1)a. 06-495 10-17-2006 1 90-553(b)(4) 06-496 11-21-2006 1 38-7 2 38-9 06-497 11-21-2006 1-4 90-7 06-498 11-21-2006 1 90-493(b)(5) 06-501  1-16-2007 1       Added 90-213 06-502  1-16-2007 1 82-206(b) 07-505  2-20-2007 1-4       Added Ch. 78, Art. VI, §§ 78-171-78-174 07-507  3-20-2007 1-11       Added Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6, §§ 2-186-2-197 07-509  8-21-2007 1 90-60(6) 07-511  6-19-2007 90-82(b)(3) 07-513  8-21-2007 1 90-53(b)(5) 07-520 12-18-2007 1 90-182(b)(1)a. 90-182(b)(2) 07-524 10-16-2007 1 90-58(j)(2)b.2. 07-527  1-15-2008 2       Added 6-2-6-10 07-528  1-15-2008 1 90-237 07-529  1-15-2008 1, 2 90-184(b)(2) 08-530  2-19-2008       Added 78-86 08-533  7-15-2008 1 90-7 08-539  7-15-2008 1 70-61(a) 2       Added 70-61(c) 3 70-62 08-534  7-15-2008 1 90-174(a)(6) 2 90-174(b)(1) 3 90-174(b)(1)a. 08-540  8-19-2008 1-3 34-1(c) 4       Added 34-3 08-541  9-16-2008 1 38-2(a) 2       Rpld 38-7       Added 38-7 3       Rpld 38-8       Added 38-8 4 38-9(a) 08-542 10-21-2008 1       Added 26-41(d) 09-550  4-21-2009       Added 78-87 09-553  7-21-2009 90-174(a)(1) 09-555 10-20-2009 1-3       Added 58-1-58-3 09-557 11-17-2009       Added 38-10 10-560  4-20-2010 1 18-31(a), (b) 2 18-61(a), (b) 3 18-121(a), (b) 4 18-151(a), (b) 5 18-181(a), (b) 6 18-211(a), (b) 7 18-271(a), (b) 8       Rpld 18-301 9 18-331(a), (b) 10       Added 18-351 10-561  4-20-2010 34-71 10-562  4-20-2010       Added ch. 19, §§ 19-101-19-116, Apps. A, B 10-568  7-20-2010 1 82-206(a) 10-569  7-20-2010 1 26-39 10-572 10-19-2010 1 26-41(c) 10-573  4-17-2012 1-7       Added ch. 74, art. IV, 
§§ 74-111- 
74-117 10-574 10-19-2010 2       Added 90-314 10-575  2-15-2011 1-5 32-71 11-579  3-15-2011 32-71 11-581  4- 4-2011 2-5       Added 10-101-10-104 6       Rpld 32-71(b) 11-588  6-27-2011 1 90-182(b)(2)1.b. 11-592  9-20-2011 1-3       Added 58-61-58-63 11-593  9-20-2011 1-3       Added 58-4 11-597  2-21-2012 1 90-58(n)(2) 2 90-58(n)(3)b 3 90-58(n)(3)f 4 90-58(n)(3)h 5       Rpld 90-58(n)(3)i 6 90-58(n)(4)c 7 90-58(n)(4)d 8 90-58(n)(4)h 9       Added 90-58(n)(4)i 12-598  2-21-2012       Added 74-4 12-599  3-20-2012 1 90-554(9) 12-600  3-20-2012 1       Added 90-496(3)h 12-601  3-20-2012 90-82(b)(6)a 12-602  4-17-2012 1       Rpld 90-231-90-289       Added 90-231-90-289 12-609  1-15-2013 58-1(1) 58-3(u), (v), (x) ch. 58, 
art. II (tit.) 58-31 58-33(a)       Rpld 58-33(b) 58-34       Added 58-35 13-610  3-19-2013 1 2-81(c) 13-613  3-19-2013 1, 2       Added 2-213(6) 13-618  9-17-2013       Added 78-88 13-620 12-17-2013 1 34-101 13-622 12-17-2013 1 2-193 13-623  1-21-2014 1       Added 2-2 14-624  3-18-2014 90-82(b)(4)b. 14-625  6-17-2014 1 90-7 2       Added 90-152(b)(1)e. 3       Added 90-153(b)(1)h. 4       Added 90-154(b)(1)i. 5       Added 90-155(b)(1)i. 6       Added 90-156(b)(1)f. 7, 9       Added 90-152(b)(6), (b)(6)a. 8, 11       Added 90-154(b)(7), (b)(7)a. 10       Added 90-153(b)(2)a. 12       Added 90-155(b)(2)e. 13       Added 90-156(b)(2)d. 14-626  6-17-2014 1 90-7 2       Added 90-18(6) 3 90-174(b)(1)a. 4       Added 90-174(b)(1)d. 5 90-174(b)(2) 6       Added 90-174(b)(2)c. 14-630 10-21-2014 1       Added 18-1(d) 2       Added 18-1(a)(1) 14-631 11- 5-2014       Added ch. 6, art. IV, §§ 6-106-6-127 14-633 11-24-2015       Rnbd ch. 6, art. IV, §§ 6-106-6-127       as §§ 6-201-6-222 15-635  2-17-2015 1 6-32 15-636  2-17-2015 1 2-213(2)       Added 2-213(6)b.10. 15-641  8-25-2015 1 90-7 2       Added 90-182(b)       Rltd 90-182(b)       as 90-182(c) 90-182(c)(2)1. 15-642  9-15-2015 6-205(3) 6-207(2) 6-212 15-644 11-17-2015 1 82-206(2) 15-649  1-19-2016       Added 19-117-19-131 16-650  2-16-2016 Exh. A 90-7       Rpld 90-155(b)(1)g., 90-156(b)(1)d.       Rpld 90-185(b)(1)c. 90-172(1) 90-174(a)       Added 90-174(b)(1)e. 16-655  4- 4-2016 Att. A 90-57(d) 90-58(h) 90-60(6) 16-663  1-17-2017 Exh. A 70-61(a) 16-664  1-17-2017 Exh. A       Added ch. 34, art. V, 
§§ 34-102- 
34-106 16-665  1-17-2017 1, 2 2-31 17-670  4-18-2017 1(Exh. A) 18-1 17-672  6-20-2017 Exh. A 90-7, 
90-152-90-156       Added 90-182(c)(2)2., 
90-184(b)(2)b. 17-675  8-15-2017 1       Added 22-32 17-678  8-15-2017 Exh. A 90-434 17-681  9-19-2017 Exh. A 90-8(5)o., 
90-213(b)(2) 17-687 11-21-2017 Exh. A 90-60, 90-124(b)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Tennessee Code Annotated. 
T.C.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-3-102 1-2 1-3-104 1-2 1-3-104(a) 1-2 1-3-104(c) 1-2 1-3-105(12) 1-2 1-3-105(15)- 
1-3-105(17) 1-2 1-3-105(21), 
1-3-105(22) 1-2 1-3-105(27) 1-2 1-3-105(29) 1-2 1-3-106 1-2 4-21-602 42-33 6-19-101 Ch. 46, Art. II 6-19-101(22) 54-1 6-19-101(29) 1-9 6-19-104 2-213 6-20-207 2-31 6-20-215(a) 2-51 6-21-102 46-32 6-21-103 26-73 6-21-501 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 6-21-502 26-40 6-21-505 26-37 6-22-121 2-211 6-54-306 1-9 6-54-501(3) 54-1 78-1 6-54-501(3)(A) 54-1 78-1 6-54-502 1-1 6-54-502(a) 54-1 78-1 6-54-508, 
6-54-509 1-1 6-56-304 2-213 7-4-503 22-32 9-4-101- 
9-4-111 2-212 9-4-401- 
9-4-409 2-212 9-4-501- 
9-4-523 2-212 10-3-101 et seq. 50-1 10-7-504 2-2 tit. 12, ch. 3, pt. 10 2-213 tit. 13 App. A, § 1-112 App. A, § 6-102 tit. 13, ch. 3 App. A, § 1-112 13-1-101 et seq. 62-32 13-2-101 et seq. App. A, § 1-112 App. A, § 6-102 13-3-101- 
13-3-411 App. A, § 1-112 13-3-102 App. A, § 6-102 13-3-201 App. A, § 6-102 13-3-301, 
13-3-302 App. A, § 6-102 13-3-402 App. A, § 6-102 13-4-101 62-31 13-4-301 App. A, § 6-102 13-4-301- 
13-4-309 App. A, § 1-102 13-4-302 App. A, § 1-102 App. A, § 1-112 App. A, § 6-102 13-4-303 App. A, § 1-102 App. A, § 1-107 App. A, § 7-101 13-4-304 App. A, § 2-101 App. A, § 2-103 
App. A, § 2-104 13-4-306- 
13-4-308 App. A, § 1-112 13-7-107 90-7 13-7-201- 
13-7-210 90-231 13-7-205 90-56 13-7-206 90-58 13-7-208 90-82(7) 13-24-102 90-7 39-13-511 10-63 39-17-901(10) 10-63 39-17-1351 58-3 40-24-105(d)(1) 26-42 47-14-121 26-42 50-1-102- 
50-9-113 2-81 50-3-101- 
50-3-2019 2-81 54-20-101- 
54-20-205 38-10 55-1-101- 
55-52-106 78-1 55-7-401 et seq. 78-31 55-8-153(c) Ch. 78, Art. III, 
Div. 2 55-9-602 78-61 55-50-801 et seq. 78-31 tit. 57, ch. 4 6-3 57-4-202 6-6 57-4-301 6-8 57-5-101(b) 6-101 57-5-108 6-31 57-5-108(d) 6-73 57-5-301 6-75 62-2-401- 
62-2-406 App. A, § 6-102 62-2-501 App. A, § 6-102 62-2-801 App. A, § 6-102 62-18-101- 
62-18-126 App. A, § 6-102 62-1803 App. A, § 6-102 64-2701- 
64-2722 App. A, § 2-101 App. A, § 6-102 64-2721 App. A, § 2-101 66-27-101- 
66-27-123 App. A, § 2-101 App. A, § 6-102 66-27-121 App. A, § 2-101 tit. 67 22-32 67-4-501- 
67-4-507 22-31 67-5-701- 
67-5-705 54-52 68-8-101- 
68-8-114 14-2 68-8-111 14-7 68-22-108 34-101 68-102-101 et seq. 34-38 68-102-108 34-38 ch. 126 90-7  
