THE
NEWPORT
MUNICIPAL
CODE
Prepared by the
March 2008
ii
CITY OF NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
MAYOR
Connie Ball
VICE MAYOR
Freddy Gregg
ALDERMEN
John Bugg
Luke Goddard
Kenny Morgan
Dennis Thornton
RECORDER/FINANCE DIRECTOR
Amanda White
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
VACANT
iii
PREFACE
The Newport Municipal Code contains the codification and revision of the
ordinances of the City of Newport, Tennessee. By referring to the historical
citation appearing at the end of each section, the user can determine the origin
of each particular section. The absence of a historical citation means that the
section was added by the codifier. The word "modified" in the historical citation
indicates significant modification of the original ordinance.
The code is arranged into titles, chapters, and sections. Related matter
is kept together, so far as possible, within the same title. Each section number
is complete within itself, containing the title number, the chapter number, and
the section of the chapter of which it is a part. Specifically, the first digit,
followed by a hyphen, identifies the title number. The second digit identifies the
chapter number, and the last two digits identify the section number. For
example, title 2, chapter 1, section 6, is designated as section 2-106.
By utilizing the table of contents and the analysis preceding each title
and chapter of the code, together with the cross references and explanations
included as footnotes, the user should locate all the provisions in the code
relating to any question that might arise. However, the user should note that
most of the administrative ordinances (e.g. Annual Budget, Zoning Map
Amendments, Tax Assessments, etc...) do not appear in the code. Likewise,
ordinances that have been passed since the last update of the code do not appear
here. Therefore, the user should refer to the city's ordinance book or the city
recorder for a comprehensive and up to date review of the city's ordinances.
Following this preface is an outline of the ordinance adoption procedures,
if any, prescribed by the city's charter.
The code has been arranged and prepared in loose-leaf form to facilitate
keeping it up to date. MTAS will provide updating service under the following
conditions:
(1) That all ordinances relating to subjects treated in the code or which
should be added to the code are adopted as amending, adding, or deleting
specific chapters or sections of the code (see section 7 of the adopting ordinance).
(2) That one copy of every ordinance adopted by the city is kept in a
separate ordinance book and forwarded to MTAS annually.
(3) That the city agrees to pay the annual update fee as provided in the
MTAS codification service charges policy in effect at the time of the update.
When the foregoing conditions are met MTAS will reproduce replacement
pages for the code to reflect the amendments and additions made by such
ordinances. This service will be performed at least annually and more often if
iv
justified by the volume of amendments. Replacement pages will be supplied
with detailed instructions for utilizing them so as again to make the code
complete and up to date.
The able assistance of the codes team: Hannah Kraemer, Program
Resource Specialist; and Linda Winstead, Nancy Gibson, and Doug Brown,
Administrative Specialists, is gratefully acknowledged.
Steve Lobertini
Codification Consultant
The charter for the City of Newport does not provide specific ordinance 1
adoption procedures.
v
ORDINANCE ADOPTION PROCEDURES PRESCRIBED BY THE
CITY CHARTER1




C-1
CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF NEWPORT, TENNESSEE1
CHAPTER NO. 76
SENATE BILL NO. 2397
By Southerland
Substituted for: House Bill No. 2413
By Yokley, Litz
AN ACT to amend Chapter 104 of the Acts of 1903; as amended by Chapter 343
of the Acts of 1905; Chapter 354 of the Acts of 1907; Chapter 477 of the
Acts of 1907; Chapter 221 of the Private Acts of 1917; Chapter 369 of the
Private Acts of 1919; Chapter 272 of the Private Acts of 1921; Chapter
292 of the Private Acts of 1921; Chapter 221 of the Private Acts of 1921;
Chapter 231 of the Private Acts of 1925; Chapter 497 of the Private Acts
of 1927; Chapter 589 of the Private Acts of 1927; Chapter 710 of the
Private Acts of 1929; Chapter 628 of the Private Acts of 1931; Chapter
551 of the Private Acts of 1933; Chapter 761 of the Private Acts of 1933;
Chapter 421 of the Private Acts of 1935; Chapter 814 of the Private Acts
of 1935; Chapter 496 of the Private Acts of 1939; Chapter 497 of the
Private Acts of 1939; Chapter 495 of the Private Acts of 1939; Chapter
400 of the Private Acts of 1945; Chapter 515 of the Private Acts of 1949;
Chapter 516 of the Private Acts of 1949; Chapter 573 of the Private Acts
of 1951; Chapter 530 of the Private Acts of 1951; Chapter 474 of the
Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 231 of the Private Acts of 1953; Chapter
430 of the Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 472 of the Private Acts of 1953;
Chapter 539 of the Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 473 of the Private Acts
of 1953; Chapter 143 of the Private Acts of 1957; Chapter 17 of the
1Priv. Acts 2005, ch. 76, is the current basic charter act for the City of
Newport, Tennessee. The text of the basic charter act set out herein includes
all its amendments through the 2017 session of the Tennessee General
Assembly. Sections of the charter which have been amended contain at the end
of those sections the citation to the official act or acts constituting the
amendment or amendments. No other changes have been made to the charter
except the addition of a table of contents to facilitate its use. A list of all the
acts including the basic charter appears at the end of the charter.
Acts of a temporary nature with no general or continuing application,
such as bond authorization and validation acts have not been included in this
compilation.
C-2
Private Acts of 1959; Chapter 4 of the Private Acts of 1959; Chapter 264
of the Private Acts of 1961; Chapter 253 of the Private Acts of 1965;
Chapter 292 of the Private Acts of 1967; Chapter 234 of the Private Acts
of 1967; Chapter 70 of the Private Acts of 1969; Chapter 131 of the
Private Acts of 1971; Chapter 132 of the Private Acts of 1971; Chapter
202 of the Private Acts of 1974; Chapter 49 of the Private Acts of 1975;
Chapter 259 of the Private Acts of 1978; Chapter 277 of the Private Acts
of 1978; Chapter 278 of the Private Acts of 1978; Chapter 279 of the
Private Acts of 1979; Chapter 271 of the Private Acts of 1980; Chapter 32
of the Private Acts of 1993; Chapter 120 of the Private Acts of 1994 and
Chapter 146 of the Private Acts of 2002; and any other acts amendatory
thereto, relative to the charter of the City of Newport.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1. Deletion of Private Acts 1903, ch. 104 and all amendments
thereto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-3
1. Incorporation, name, general powers, and boundaries . . . . . C-3
2. Miscellaneous powers enumerated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-4
3. Regular elections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-9
4. City hall voting precinct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-9
5. Voting qualifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-9
6. Qualifications of mayor and aldermen -- Vacancies . . . . . . . C-10
7. Certificates of election . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-10
8. Oaths of office . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-10
9. Duties of the mayor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-10
10. City Administrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-10
11. City Recorder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-12
12. Police Civil Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-12
13. Fire Civil Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-22
14. Powers of board with respect to ordinance violators . . . . . . C-32
15. Street paving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-32
16. Registration of voters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-33
17. General powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-33
18. Newport Utilities Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-33
19. Waterworks and sewers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-35
20. Sewer charges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-36
21. Process and arrest powers of policemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-36
22. Absence or disability of recorder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-36
23. Duties of the Vice Mayor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-37
C-3
SECTION PAGE
2. Severability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-37
3. Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-37
4. Effective date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-37
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF
TENNESSEE:
SECTION 1. Chapter 104 of the Acts of Tennessee for 1903, as amended
by Chapter 343 of the Acts of 1905; Chapter 354 of the Acts of 1907; Chapter 477
of the Acts of 1907; Chapter 221 of the Private Acts of 1917; Chapter 369 of the
Private Acts of 1919; Chapter 292 of the Private Acts of 1921; Chapter 221 of the
Private Acts of 1921; Chapter 272 of the Private Acts of 1921; Chapter 231 of the
Private Acts of 1925; Chapter 497 of the Private Acts of 1927; Chapter 589 of the
Private Acts of 1927; Chapter 710 of the Private Acts of 1929; Chapter 628 of the
Private Acts of 1931; Chapter 551 of the Private Acts of 1933; Chapter 761 of the
Private Acts of 1933; Chapter 421 of the Private Acts of 1935; Chapter 814 of the
Private Acts of 1935; Chapter 496 of the Private Acts of 1939; Chapter 497 of the
Private Acts of 1939; Chapter 495 of the Private Acts of 1939; Chapter 400 of the
Private Acts of 1945; Chapter 515 of the Private Acts of 1949; Chapter 516 of the
Private Acts of 1949; Chapter 573 of the Private Acts of 1951; Chapter 530 of the
Private Acts of 1951; Chapter 474 of the Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 231 of the
Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 430 of the Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 472 of the
Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 539 of the Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 473 of the
Private Acts of 1953; Chapter 143 of the Private Acts of 1957; Chapter 4 of the
Private Acts of 1959; Chapter 17 of the Private Acts of 1959; Chapter 264 of the
Private Acts of 1961; Chapter 253 of the Private Acts of 1965; Chapter 234 of the
Private Acts of 1967; Chapter 292 of the Private Acts of 1967; Chapter 70 of the
Private Acts of 1969; Chapter 132 of the Private Acts of 1971; Chapter 131 of the
Private Acts of 1971; Chapter 202 of the Private Acts of 1974; Chapter 49 of the
Private Acts of 1975; Chapter 277 of the Private Acts of 1978; Chapter 278 of the
Private Acts of 1978; Chapter 259 of the Private Acts of 1978; Chapter 279 of the
Private Acts of 1979; Chapter 271 of the Private Acts of 1980; Chapter 32 of the
Private Acts of 1993; Chapter 120 of the Private Acts of 1994 and Chapter 146
of the Private Acts of 2002; and any other acts amendatory thereto, is amended
by deleting such chapter, as amended, in its entirety and by substituting instead
the following language to be the charter of the City of Newport:
Section 1. Incorporation, name, general powers, and boundaries.
The municipality of Newport, in the County of Cocke, and the
inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted a body politic and corporate
C-4
by the style and name of "City of Newport" and shall have perpetual
succession by the corporate name; may sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded; grant, receive, purchase and hold real, mixed and personal
property; may sell, lease, or dispose of the same for benefit of the
municipality; and may do all other acts authorized by municipal, state
and federal law as the stated and implied powers of a municipality; and
may have and use a corporate seal and change it at its pleasure.
The boundaries of Newport shall be those fixed by Chapter 104 of
the Acts of 1903, as amended, and as extended and contracted by
ordinances of the City passed under the general law of the state
governing annexations and contractions; and as further amended
pursuant to the general laws of the State of Tennessee, and any
subsequent annexations or detachments of territory made pursuant to
law.
Section 2. Miscellaneous powers enumerated.
The City of Newport may exercise the following powers:
(1) Assess, levy, and collect taxes for all general and special
purposes on all subjects or objects of taxation and privileges taxable by
law for state, county or city purposes;
(2) Adopt such classifications of the subjects and objects of
taxation as may not be contrary to law;
(3) Make special assessments for local improvements;
(4) Contract and be contracted with;
(5) Incur debts by borrowing money or otherwise, and to give
any appropriate evidence thereof, in the manner hereinafter provided;
(6) In accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 9,
Chapter 21, issue and give, sell, pledge or in any manner dispose of,
negotiable or nonnegotiable interest-bearing or noninterest-bearing
bonds, warrants, promissory notes or orders of the city, upon the credit
of the city or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the city
or solely upon the credit of income derived from any property used in
connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city, or solely
upon the credit of the proceeds of special assessments for local
improvements, or upon any two (2) or more such credits;
C-5
(7) Expend the money of the city for all lawful purposes;
(8) Acquire or receive and hold, maintain, improve, sell, lease,
mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of property, real or personal, and
any estate or interest therein, within or without the city or state;
(9) Condemn property, real or personal or any easement,
interest, or estate or use therein, either within or without the city, for
present or future public use; such condemnation to be made and effected
in accordance with the terms and provisions of state law;
(10) Take and hold property within or without the city or state
upon trust; and to administer trusts for the public benefit;
(11) Acquire, construct, own, operate, and maintain, or sell,
lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of public utilities or any
estate or interest therein, or any other utility of service to the city, its
inhabitants, or any part thereof;
(12) Grant to any person, firm, association, or corporation
franchises for public utilities and public services to be furnished the city
and those therein. Such power to grant franchises shall embrace the
power hereby expressly conferred, to grant exclusive franchises, and
whenever an exclusive franchise is granted, it shall be exclusive not only
as against any other person, firm, association, or corporation, but also as
against the city itself. Franchises may be granted for the period of
twenty-five (25) years or less, but not longer. The city may prescribe in
each grant of a franchise, the rate, fares, charges, and regulations that
may be made by the grantee of the franchise. Franchises may by their
terms apply to the territory within the corporate limits of the city at the
date of the franchises, and as the corporate limits thereafter may be
enlarged; and to the then existing streets, alleys, and other thoroughfares
that thereafter may be opened;
(13) Make contracts with any person, firm, association or
corporation, for public utilities and public services to be furnished the city
and those therein. Such power to make contracts shall embrace the
power, expressly conferred, to make exclusive contracts; and when an
exclusive contract is entered into, it shall be exclusive not only against
any other person, firm, association, or corporation, but also as against the
city itself. Such contracts may be entered into for the period of twentyfive
(25) years or less, but not longer. The city may prescribe in each such
contract entered into, the rates, fares, charges, and regulations that may
be made by the person, firm, association, or corporation with whom the
C-6
contract is made. Such contracts may by their terms apply to the territory
within the corporate limits of the city at the date of the contract, and as
the corporate limits thereafter may be enlarged; and to the then existing
streets, alleys, and thoroughfares and to any other streets, alleys and
other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened;
(14) Prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the construction,
maintenance, equipment, operation and service of public utilities and
compel, from time to time, reasonable extensions of facilities for such
services, but nothing herein shall be construed to permit the alteration
or impairment of any of the terms or provisions of any exclusive franchise
granted or of any exclusive contract entered into under subdivisions (12)
and (13) of this section, or those powers previously granted to the
Newport Utilities Board by private acts passed by the legislature of the
State of Tennessee and signed into law by the governor of the State of
Tennessee;
(15) Establish, open, relocate, vacate, alter, widen, extend, grade,
improve, repair, construct, reconstruct, maintain, light, sprinkle, and
clean public highways, streets, boulevards, parkways, sidewalks, alleys,
parks, public grounds, and squares, wharves, bridges, viaducts, subways,
tunnels, sewers, and drains within or without the corporate limits and to
regulate the use thereof within the corporate limits, and property may be
taken and appropriated therefor under the provisions of state law, or in
such other manner as may be provided by general laws;
(16) Construct, improve, reconstruct and reimprove by opening,
extending, widening, grading, curbing, guttering, paving, graveling,
macadamizing, draining, or otherwise improving any streets, highways,
avenues, alleys or other public places within the corporate limits, and to
assess a portion of the cost of such improvements upon the property
abutting upon or adjacent to such streets, highways or alleys;
(17) Assess against abutting property within the corporate limits
the cost of planting shade trees, removing from sidewalks all
accumulations of snow, ice, and earth, cutting and removing obnoxious
weeds and rubbish; street lighting, street sweeping, street sprinkling,
street flushing, and street oiling; the cleaning and rendering sanitary or
removal, abolishing, and prohibiting of closets and privies, in such
manner as may be provided by general law or by ordinance of the city;
(18) Acquire, purchase, provide for, construct, regulate, and
maintain and do all things relating to all marketplaces, public buildings,
bridges, sewers and other structures, works and improvements;
C-7
(19) Collect and dispose of drainage, sewage, ashes, garbage,
refuse or other waste, or to license and regulate such collection and
disposal, and the cost of such collection, regulation or disposal may be
funded by taxation or special assessment to the property owner;
(20) License and regulate all persons, firms, corporations,
companies, and associations engaged in any business, occupation, calling,
profession, or trade not forbidden by law;
(21) Impose a license tax upon any animal, thing, business,
vocation, pursuit, privilege, or calling not prohibited by law;
(22) Define, prohibit, abate, suppress, prevent, and regulate all
acts, practices, conduct, business, occupations, callings, trades, use of
property and all other things whatsoever detrimental, or liable to be
detrimental, to the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience, or
welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and to exercise general police
powers;
(23) Prescribe limits within which such business occupations and
practices liable to be nuisances or detrimental to the health, morals,
security or general welfare of the people may lawfully be established,
conducted or maintained;
(24) Inspect, test, measure, and weigh any article for
consumption or use within the city, and to charge reasonable fees
therefor; and to provide standards of weights, tests and measures in such
manner as may be provided by general law;
(25) Establish, regulate, license, and inspect weights and
measures in such manner as may be provided by general law;
(26) Regulate the location, bulk, occupancy, area, lot, location,
height, construction and materials of all buildings and structures in
accordance with general law, and to inspect all buildings, lands and
places as to their condition for health, cleanliness and safety, and when
necessary, prevent the use thereof and require any alteration or changes
necessary to make them healthful, clean, or safe;
(27) Provide and maintain charitable, educational, recreative,
curative, corrective, detentive, or penal institutions, departments,
functions, facilities, instrumentalities, conveniences, and services;
C-8
(28) Purchase or construct, maintain, and establish a correctional
facility, for the confinement and detention of persons who violate laws
within the corporate limits of the city, or to contract with the county to
keep such persons in the correctional facility of the county;
(29) Enforce any ordinance, rule or regulation by fines,
forfeitures, and penalties, and by other actions or proceedings in any
court of competent jurisdiction;
(30) Establish schools, determine the necessary boards, officers,
and teachers required therefor, and fix their compensation, to purchase
or otherwise acquire land for schoolhouses, playgrounds and other
purposes connected with the schools; to purchase or erect all necessary
buildings and to do all other acts necessary to establish, maintain, and
operate a complete educational system within the city;
(31) Regulate, tax, license or suppress the keeping or going at
large of animals within the city; to impound the same and in default of
redemption to sell or kill the same;
(32) To extend and construct its streets, alleys and sidewalks
over, through, across and under the rights-of-way, tracks, sidetracks,
switchyards, depot buildings and grounds, and other property of any
railway corporation, or other corporation or person that is now or may
hereafter be owning or operating a railway through or within the
boundaries of the City of Newport, Tennessee; and through, over, across
and under rights-of-way, tracks, sidetracks, switchyards, depot buildings
and grounds, and other property of the lessees of such railway and other
corporations, and of any other person, firm or other corporation;
(33) To lay, construct, extend and maintain water pipelines,
surface sewers and drain sewers, over, through, across and under the
rights-of-way, tracks, sidetracks, switchyards, depot buildings, grounds
and other property of any railway corporation, or other corporation that
is now, or may hereafter be, owning or operating a railway through, or
within the boundaries of the City of Newport, Tennessee, and through,
over, under and across the rights-of-way, tracks, sidetracks, switchyards,
depot buildings and grounds, and other property of the lessees of such
railway and other corporations, and of any other person, firm or
corporation that may be in possession of, using or controlling all or any
part of the rights-of-way and properties of such railway corporation or
other corporations;
C-9
(34) Exercise the powers of eminent domain, and to condemn and
take the property, buildings, depot buildings, privileges, rights-of-way,
rights and easements of such railway corporation, and other corporations,
their lessees, and of any other person, firm or corporation that may be in
possession of, using or controlling all or any part of the rights-of-way and
properties of such railway corporation, or other corporations, in the
manner, mode, and upon the terms provided in Tennessee Code
Annotated, Title 29, Chapters 16 and 17;
(35) Call elections as hereinafter provided; and
(36) Have and exercise all powers which now or hereafter it
would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate, as fully
and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated
herein.
Section 3. Regular elections. The election commissioners of Cocke County
after ten (10) days notice shall hold elections in conjunction with the regular
November election in 1994 and every four (4) years thereafter for the purpose
of electing five (5) persons to serve as aldermen and one (1) for mayor. Each such
officer shall serve a term of four (4) years or until his successor is duly elected
and qualified. Elections shall be held at the usual polling place and shall be in
conformity to the election laws of this state.
Section 4. City hall voting precinct.
A new voting precinct shall be and is hereby created and established
inside the corporate limits of the City of Newport, so as to comprise all that part
of such city lying north of the Main Line of the Southern Railway. The polling
place of such new precinct shall be the City Hall of such City of Newport, and
the precinct shall be called "City Hall".
Section 5. Voting qualifications.
Persons living within the bounds of such corporation who would be
qualified to vote for the members of the General Assembly of this state shall be
entitled to vote for mayor and aldermen for such corporation. In addition, in
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, Section 2-2-107(3), no more than
two (2) persons who own an interest in real, taxable property within the bounds
of the corporation, shall be entitled to vote based upon the ownership of an
individual tract of property regardless of the number of property owners.
C-10
Section 6. Qualifications of mayor and aldermen - Vacancies.
No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor or aldermen unless he
is a citizen of the City of Newport as hereunder incorporated. In case of death,
removal or resignation of any of the officers of such corporation, the mayor and
aldermen shall have the power to fill such vacancy for the unexpired time.
Section 7. Certificates of election.
The several persons qualified as aforesaid, having the highest number of
votes at any election held, shall be taken as duly elected, and the commissioners
of election shall within five (5) days thereafter, give to the five (5) aldermen and
mayor, a certificate of their election. Elected officials shall take office on the first
Monday of December after the election. [as amended by Priv. Acts 2015, ch. 20,
§ 1]
Section 8. Oaths of office.
The mayor and aldermen of such city shall before entering upon the
duties of their office, take an oath before any officer authorized to administer
oaths to support the Constitution of the United States and the State of
Tennessee, and to faithfully, uprightly and honestly discharge their duties as
such officers, during their term of office.
Section 9. Duties of the mayor.
It shall be the duty of the mayor to preside at all meetings of the board
of mayor and aldermen, to see that all the ordinances and bylaws of the city are
duly observed and enforced, to call special meetings of the board of mayor and
aldermen whenever he may deem it expedient, to make such suggestions and
give such instructions with reference to the action of such board as in his
judgment will be most conducive to the interests of the city, to employ counsel
on behalf of the city in any case in which such city may be interested, when, in
his judgment, the same may be necessary, and to perform such other duties as
may be incumbent and binding upon him by the bylaws and ordinances of such
city. The Mayor shall not vote except to break a tie. [as amended by Priv. Acts
2015, ch. 20, § 2]
Section 10. City Administrator.
The board of mayor and aldermen shall appoint and fix the salary of a city
administrator, who shall serve at the will of the board of mayor and aldermen.
The city administrator shall be appointed by virtue of experience and/or
educational qualifications for this position. Residence in the city at the time of
C-11
appointment of a city administrator shall not be required as a condition of the
appointment, but the city administrator must become a resident of Cocke
County, Tennessee, within ninety (90) days after reporting for work.
In the temporary absence or disability of the city administrator, the
assistant city administrator, if such position is established, or any other
department head designated by the city administrator shall serve as acting city
administrator. If and when the city administrator's absence exceeds thirty (30)
consecutive days, the board of mayor and aldermen shall have the right to
appoint another department head or another city employee as the acting city
administrator.
The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city.
The city administrator shall be responsible to the board of mayor and aldermen
for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this
charter. The city administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To appoint and, when deemed necessary for the good of the
service, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive officers
provided for by or under this charter, with exceptions as provided in
Sections 12 and 13 of this charter, and in accordance with the personnel
rules adopted pursuant to this charter.
(2) To direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise
provided by this charter or by law.
(3) To attend all board of mayor and aldermen meetings and
have the right to take part in discussion, but may not vote.
(4) To see that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the
board of mayor and aldermen, subject to enforcement by the city
administrator or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are
faithfully executed.
(5) To prepare and submit the annual budget and an annual
capital budget update to the board of mayor and aldermen at the
appropriate time.
(6) To submit to the board of mayor and aldermen and make
available to the public a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the city as of the end of each month and at the
end of the fiscal year.
C-12
(7) To make such other reports as the board of mayor and
aldermen may require concerning the operations of city departments,
offices and agencies subject to the city administrator’s direction and
supervision.
(8) To keep the board of mayor and aldermen fully advised as
to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such
recommendations to the board of mayor and aldermen concerning the
affairs of the city as he deems desirable.
The board of mayor and aldermen may not remove these powers and
duties from the city administrator but may require the city administrator to
perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required
by the board of mayor and aldermen.
The board of mayor and aldermen and its members shall deal with the
administrative services of the city only through the city administrator, except
for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the board of mayor and aldermen nor any
member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city
administrator. The city administrator shall take instructions from the board of
mayor and aldermen when they are sitting in a duly convened meeting of the
board of mayor and aldermen.
The city administrator shall not be removed from office, other than for
misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days following the
beginning of a new term of office next succeeding any general municipal election
held in the city, at which election a new member of the board of mayor and
aldermen is elected, or when a new member is appointed. The purpose of this
provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the board of
mayor and aldermen to observe the actions and ability of the city administrator
in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of
the ninety (90) day period aforementioned, the city administrator may be
removed only by a majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen present and
voting. Abstentions shall be counted neither as a yes nor a no vote. [as amended
by Priv. Acts 2015, ch. 20, § 3]
Section 11. City Recorder.
The City Administrator shall appoint a city recorder who may also serve
as treasurer or finance director.
Section 12. Police Civil Service
C-13
(a)(1) There is hereby created a system of Civil Service for the City of
Newport Police Department. A Civil Service Board, hereafter referred to
as "the Board" to consist of three (3) members is hereby created to
administer the system of Civil Service. One (1) member shall be
appointed by the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport,
one (1) member of the Board shall be elected by the members of the
Classified Service, and one (1) member shall be elected by the two (2)
members of the Board already appointed.
(2) The three (3) members thus appointed to the Board shall
serve as Board members for a period of three (3) years, or until their
successors are appointed and qualified. On or before the expiration of the
term of each Board member, his successor shall be selected in the same
manner as the prior selection of the Board member whose term expires,
to the end that the successor to the member appointed by the board of
mayor and aldermen shall likewise be appointed by such body, the
successor to the member elected by the Classified Service shall also be
appointed by such Classified Service, and the successor to the member
appointed by the two (2) other Board members shall be appointed by the
two (2) other Board members. Each term shall expire on December 31. All
current appointments expire December 31, 2006. When the charter
change becomes effective, the existing Board members will draw lots: 1,
2 and 3. The number drawn will signify the year(s) until December 31
remaining for that individual's term. Thereafter appointments shall be
for three (3) year terms.
(3) No member of the Classified Service, or of the board of
mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport, may be a member of the
Board. The Board members shall receive for their services the fee
designated by the board of mayor and aldermen. The Board members so
appointed shall be a citizen of the United States, a resident of the City of
Newport and eligible to vote in City elections. Prior to appointment,
candidates are to be contacted to confirm they are willing to serve on the
Board.
(4) Any member of the Board may be removed from office by the
board of mayor and aldermen of Newport for incompetence, dereliction of
duty, malfeasance in office or upon conviction of any crime involving
moral turpitude. Provided, however, that no member of the Board shall
be removed until charges shall have been preferred in writing, due notice
given, and a full public hearing is held before the board of mayor and
aldermen of the City of Newport; provided further, that such removal
shall be for a period of ten (10) days, during which time a member so
removed shall have the right of appeal to the Chancery Court of Cocke
C-14
County, Tennessee, which court shall thereupon proceed to hear and
determine such appeal. However, the hearing shall be confined to the
determination of whether the order of removal made by the board of
mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport was or was not made in good
faith for proper cause, and no appeal to such court shall be taken except
upon such grounds. The decision of the Court shall be final.
(5) The members of the Board shall devote due time and
attention to the performance of the duties hereinafter specified and
imposed upon them by this Section. Two (2) members of the Board shall
be sufficient for the decision of all matters and the transaction of all
business to be decided or transacted by the Board under and by virtue of
the provisions of this Section. However, due notice of all meetings shall
be given so that all three (3) members may have an opportunity to be
present. The Board shall transact no business and make no decisions
until and except while all three (3) Board members have taken office and
remain qualified to act.
(b) The provisions of this Section shall apply to all current members
of the Classified Service of the Newport Police Department. Newly hired officers
shall be required to complete a probationary period of six (6) months. At the
completion of the probationary period the officer shall be included under Civil
Service upon notification by the Chief of Police.
(c)(1) The minimum standards for each position in the department are
as follows:
(A) Written test, given by the Civil Service Board for the
Police Department.
(B) Interview with the Civil Service Board for the Police
Department.
(C) Assessment center: interview with a board of their
peers, consisting of one (1) captain, one (1) lieutenant and one (1)
sergeant.
(D) Interview with the Chief of Police.
(2) The evaluation process provided for in this Section shall be
based upon the following system:
(A) Ten percent (10%) of the evaluation shall be based on
education (specialized schooling as well as degree or military);
C-15
(B) Twenty-five percent (25%) of the evaluation shall be
based on the results of a written test;
(C) Twenty percent (20%) of the evaluation shall be based
on seniority, which shall also be used in the event of a tie between
candidates;
(D) Twenty percent (20%) of the evaluation shall be based
on the interview with the Board;
(E) Twenty percent (20%) of the evaluation shall be based
on the assessment center interview; and
(F) Five percent (5%) of the evaluation shall be based on
the Chief's evaluation of the candidate.
(3) The board of mayor and aldermen shall adopt an
organizational structure for the Newport Police Department, by defining
the rank structure as well as the number of positions of each rank within
each division. The divisions shall be as follows:
(A) Administrative Division;
(B) Patrol Division;
(C) Detective Division.
(4) The Chief of Police shall be selected from within the
Classified Service, if a suitable candidate can be chosen. All members of
the Classified Service, in good standing, are eligible to apply for the
position of Chief of Police should a vacancy in the office occur. When a
vacancy occurs, the Civil Service Board shall certify the names of all
persons eligible to fill the vacancy. If an eligible candidate is not chosen
from the Classified Service, the Civil Service Board may accept
applications from outside the Classified Service and the appointing
authority shall appoint one of the persons so certified.
(d)(1) The Board shall organize by electing one of its members as
chairman and shall hold regular meetings at least once a month and such
additional meetings as may be required for the proper discharge of its
duties. The Board shall appoint a secretary who shall keep its records,
preserve all reports made to it, superintend and keep a record of all
examinations and perform such other duties as the Board may prescribe.
C-16
(2) It shall be the duty of the Board to make suitable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
(A) Such rules and regulations shall provide in detail the
manner in which examinations may be held and appointments,
transfers, demotions, reinstatements, suspensions and discharges
shall be made, and may also provide for any other matters
connected with the general subject of personnel administration.
Such rules and regulations shall include the methods used in
determining the standard for each job classification in the
Classified Service.
(B) These rules and regulations shall include provisions
so that seniority may not be lost by persons holding a position in
the Classified Service, if such persons leave the Classified Service
to enter the United States military pursuant to the laws of the
United States and the State of Tennessee that govern military
leave on the part of employees; provided that such persons return
to the Classified Service within the time prescribed by such laws
following their honorable discharge or release from such service.
In such cases, the period of military service shall be included in the
period of seniority of such persons to the extent required by law.
(3) The Board shall conduct investigations and report on all
matters regarding the enforcement and effect of the provisions of this
Section, and the rules and regulations prescribed hereunder. The Board
shall also inspect all institutions and employment affected by the
provisions of this Section, and ascertain whether this Section and such
rules and regulations are being complied with. Such investigations shall
be made by the Board on its own motion and may also be made on a
petition of complaint stating that irregularities or abuses exist, or by
setting forth the necessity for such investigation in writing. In the course
of such investigation, the Board shall have the power to administer oaths,
issue subpoenas, require the attendance of witnesses, and require the
production of books, papers, documents, and accounts pertaining to the
investigation. The failure upon the part of any person to comply with
such subpoena or demand shall be deemed to be in violation of this
Section.
(4) All hearings and investigations before the Board shall be
governed by the provisions of this Section and by the rules of practice and
procedure to be adopted by the Board. The Board, or its designated
hearing officer, shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. No
informality in any procedure in a hearing shall invalidate any order,
C-17
decision, rule or regulation made or approved by the Board, however no
decision shall be binding unless concurred in by a majority of the Board
members.
(5) The Board shall hear and determine appeals of complaints
relative to the allocation of positions, the determination of job changes,
the furnishing of rosters and the position of members of the Classified
Service, and of applicants on such roster, and any other such matters
relating to the administration of this Section which may be referred to the
Board.
(6) The Board shall ensure that job classifications, the standard
for filling such classifications and the roster of eligible appointees within
each classification are kept continuously up to date.
(7) The Board shall make provisions for persons, including
probationers, who are laid off as a result of the curtailment of
expenditures and like causes. Such layoffs shall proceed in order of the
person's appointment to the respective department of the Classified
Service. Rules and regulations shall provide that persons who are laid off
shall be reinstated before any new appointments to such department
shall be made.
(8) The Board shall keep such records as may be necessary for
the proper administration of this Section.
(e) All persons holding positions in the Police Department, including
the Police Chief who, upon the effective date of this Section, have served in such
position for a period of at least six (6) months previous thereto, shall be included
in the system of Civil Service in the office, position or employment in which such
persons held at the time the Section was enacted. Such persons shall be subject,
however, to removal, demotion or suspension upon the same terms as any other
person inducted permanently into Civil Service following the effective date of
this act.
(f)(1) Applicants for a Civil Service position of any kind under the
Classified Service must be citizens of the United States.
(2) Applicants must provide a copy of a high school diploma or
General Equivalency Degree, a valid Tennessee Driver License, must be
twenty-one (21) years of age and must provide a copy of a birth certificate.
Applicants who have served in the military must also provide a copy of
their military discharge.
C-18
(3) Applicants for positions in the Classified Service must meet
the minimum standards as set by the Tennessee Training and Peace
Officers Commission (POST), in addition to minimum standards
established by the Board.
(4) Applicants shall be required to participate in an assessment
process including, but not limited to, a written exam and interviews, as
well as any other assessment process deemed worthy by the Board. A
hiring list shall then be assembled based on the assessment.
(5) Applicants for positions in the Classified Service must, in
addition to such minimum standards as are stated by the Board, be of
ordinary good health, of good moral character and of temperate and
industrious habits; these facts to be ascertained in such manner as the
Board may deem advisable.
(6) In the event of a vacancy for the position of Police Officer,
the board of mayor and aldermen shall be provided with the top two (2)
names on the hiring list for consideration. In the event of two (2)
vacancies, the board of mayor and aldermen shall be provided with the
top three (3) names.
(f)(1) The tenure of everyone holding office, place, position or
employment under the provisions of this Section, shall be for and only
during good behavior. Any such person may be removed or discharged,
suspended without pay, demoted or reduced in rank, or deprived of
vacation privileges for any of the following reasons only:
(A) Dishonesty, intemperance, immoral conduct,
insubordination, or any other act of omission or commission
tending to injure the public service; or any other willful failure on
the part of an employee to conduct themselves properly; or any
willful violation of the provisions of this Section or the rules and
regulations to be adopted hereunder.
(B) Conviction of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude or a misdemeanor reflecting upon the ability to
perform public service.
(C) Any other act or failure to act which, in the judgment
of the Board, is sufficient to show the offender to be an unsuitable
and unfit person to be employed in the Classified Service.
C-19
(2) Any person who shall have served for a period of four (4)
years as Chief of Police or assistant Chief of Police or a combination of
both shall not be demoted from rank except on changes as provided in
this Section.
(g)(1) No person in the classified Civil Service who shall have been
permanently appointed or inducted into Civil Service under the
provisions of this Section shall be removed, suspended or discharged
except for cause, and only upon the written accusation of the appointing
power. A written statement regarding such accusation shall be served
upon the accused and a duplicate filed with the Board. The Chief of the
Police Department may suspend a member of the Department pending
the confirmation of the suspension by the regular appointing power under
this Section, which shall occur within ten (10) days of the suspension.
Any person so removed suspended or discharged may, within twenty (20)
days from the time of the person's removal, suspension or discharge, file
with the Board a written demand for an investigation, whereupon the
Board shall conduct such investigation. The investigation shall be
confined to the determination of whether such removal, suspension or
discharge was or was not made for political reasons and was or was not
made in good faith for cause. After such investigation, the Board may
affirm the removal or, if it shall find that the removal or suspension was
made for political reasons or not made in good faith for cause, shall order
the immediate reinstatement or reemployment of such person in the
office, place, position or employment from which such person was
removed, suspended, or discharged. The reinstatement shall, if the Board
so provides in its discretion, be retroactive, and entitle such person to
receive monetary compensation from the time of such removal,
suspension or discharge. The Board shall have the discretion, in lieu of
affirming or reversing the removal, suspension or discharge, to modify the
order by directing a suspension without pay for a given period and
subsequent restoration of duty, grade or pay. The findings of the Board
shall be certified in writing to the appointing power and shall be
forthwith enforced by such authority.
(2) All investigations made by the Board pursuant to the
provisions of this Section shall be by public hearing, after reasonable
notice to the accused of the time and place of such hearing. The accused
shall then be afforded the opportunity of appearing in person and with
council present a defense. At any such hearing, the testimony of all
witnesses shall be taken in writing and a record made of all proceedings.
From any order adverse to the accused, the accused may appeal to the
Chancery Court of Cocke County, Tennessee. Such appeal shall be made
by serving the Board, within ten (10) days after the entry of such order,
C-20
a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof, and demanding
that a certified transcript of the record and of all papers on file in the
office of the Board affecting or relating to such order be filed by the Board
in such Court. The Board shall make, certify and file the transcript with
the Chancery Court within twenty (20) days after the filing of such notice.
The Court shall thereupon proceed to hear and determine such appeal;
provided, however, that such hearing shall be confined to the
determination of whether the order of removal, discharge or suspension
made by the Board was or was not made in good faith for cause. No
appeal to the Court shall be heard except upon such ground, or grounds,
and the decision of the Court shall be final.
(h) Leave of absence, without pay may be granted by the Board upon
the recommendation of the Chief of the Police Department, and the Board shall
give notice of such leave to the board of mayor and aldermen. A leave of absence
may not be granted for any other employment opportunity, excluding military
service.
(i)(1) No Board member or any other person shall:
(A) Defeat or deceive any person in respect to that
person's right of examination or registration according to the rules
and regulations of this Section;
(B) Falsely mark, grade, estimate or report upon the
examination or proper standing of any person examined, registered
or certified pursuant to the provisions of this Section or in so doing,
make any false representation concerning the same or concerning
the person examined;
(C) Furnish any person special or secret information for
the purpose of improving or injuring the prospects or chances of
any person so examined, registered or certified; or
(D) Persuade, permit or assist any person to impersonate
another person in connection with any examination, registration
or application, or otherwise persuade, permit or assist any person
in their application or request to be examined or registered.
(j)(1) No person shall be appointed or promoted to, or demoted or
dismissed from, any position in the Classified Service or in any way
favored or discriminated against with respect to their employment in the
Classified Service because of political or religious affiliation, however all
C-21
employees must take an oath to support the Constitution of the United
States.
(2) No person shall seek or attempt to use any political
endorsement in connection with any appointment to a position in the
Classified Service.
(3) No person shall use or promise to use, directly or indirectly,
any official authority or influence, whether possessed or anticipated, to
secure or attempt to secure an appointment or advantage in the
appointment process for any person to a position in the Classified Service.
Nor shall such authority or influence be used to secure or attempt to
secure an increase in pay or other advantage in employment in any
position for the purpose of influencing the vote or political action of any
person, or otherwise.
(4) No employee in the Classified Service and no member of the
Board shall solicit or otherwise take part in soliciting any assessment,
subscription or contribution for any political purpose, while on duty or
acting in an official capacity.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Board to supervise the execution
of the provisions of this Section and the rules made hereunder. It shall be
the duty of all persons subject to the provisions of this Section to comply
with such rules and to aid in their enforcement.
(k) The members of the Classified Service shall be enrolled in the
Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System (TCRS) until and unless the TCRS
ceases to exist, in which case a comparable replacement shall be provided. The
members of the Classified Service shall have a mandatory retirement age of
sixty-five (65) years of age. In the event the member is not Medicare eligible at
age sixty-five (65) and has thirty (30) years of service for the City, the City may
provide medical insurance until the member is Medicare eligible, provided the
member works until the mandatory retirement date.
(l) The Board shall be authorized to employ such clerical or
administrative help as is necessary in carrying out the duties assigned to it, and
shall also be authorized to retain legal counsel and engage actuarial experts to
the extent necessary in carrying out the functions assigned to the Board.
(m) The failure on the part of the Board, or any member thereof, or on
the part of the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport, or any
member thereof, to comply within the terms of this Section, shall be considered
a violation of this Section.
C-22
(n) The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport shall
provide the Board with suitable and convenient rooms and accommodations and
cause the same to be furnished, heated and lighted and supplied with all office
supplies and equipment necessary to carry on the business of the Board and
shall either provide directly or provide the funds for the payment of such
necessary clerical, administrative actuarial legal assistance as may be employed
by the Board under the provisions of this Section. Failure of the board of mayor
and aldermen to make such provisions shall be considered a violation of the
Section.
(o) The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport shall have
authority to appropriate from the general funds of the City a sum sufficient to
carry out the purposes of this Section, and shall make such appropriation.
Under the provisions of this Section, it shall be the duty of the board of mayor
and aldermen of the City of Newport to appoint and create the Board as
provided in subsection (a) of this Section within thirty (30) days following the
effective date of this act. Failure of the board of mayor and aldermen, or any of
its members to do so shall be deemed a violation of this Section.
(p) It shall be the duty of the Board appointed subject to the provisions
of this Section to organize immediately and to ensure that the provisions herein
are carried into effect, and to make suitable rules and regulations to effect said
purposes. Failure of the Board, or any individual member thereof, to do so shall
be deemed a violation of this Section.
Section 13. Fire Civil Service.
(a) There is created a system of fire civil service of the City of Newport.
A civil service board, hereafter referred to as "the board" to consist of three (3)
members, is hereby created to administer the system of fire civil service. One (1)
member of the board shall be elected by the board of mayor and aldermen of the
City of Newport, one (1) member shall be elected by the members of the
classified service, of the fire department, and the person receiving a majority of
the votes of the members of the classified service shall become one (1) member
of the board. The person selected by the board of mayor and aldermen of the
City of Newport and the person selected by the majority vote of the classified
service shall then select a third person within ten (10) days after their
appointment and selection and the person agreed upon by those two (2) so
appointed and elected shall constitute the third member of the board. If the two
(2) members appointed and selected shall fail to agree within ten (10) days after
their appointment, the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport
shall appoint four (4) citizens to meet and confer with four (4) other citizens
appointed by the members of the classified service. Such joint committee of eight
C-23
(8) shall meet within ten (10) days of their appointment, and appoint a person
who shall constitute the third member of the board.
The three (3) members thus appointed to the board shall serve as board
members for a period of three (3) years, or until their successors are appointed
and qualified. On or before the expiration of the term of each board member, the
successor shall be selected in the same manner as the prior selection of the
board member whose term thus expires, to the end that the successor to the
member appointed by the board of mayor and aldermen shall likewise be
appointed to the board, the successor to the member elected by the classified
service shall likewise be elected by the members of the classified service, and the
successor to the member appointed by the two (2) other board members shall
likewise be appointed by the two (2) other board members.
The members of this board shall receive for their services an amount to
be determined by the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport for
each day's attendance upon sessions of the board, to be paid out of the general
fund of the City of Newport. No person shall be appointed a member of such
board who is not a citizen of the United States, a resident of the City of Newport
for at least one (1) year immediately preceding such appointment, and an elector
of Cocke County. No member of the classified service, or any councilman of the
City of Newport, may be a member of the board.
Any member of the board may be removed from office by the board of
mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport for incompetency, dereliction of
duty, malfeasance in office or upon conviction of any crime involving moral
turpitude. However, no member of the board shall be removed until charges
shall have been preferred in writing, due notice given and a full public hearing
had before the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport. Such
removal shall be for a period of ten (10) days, during which time any member so
removed shall have the right to appeal to the chancery court of Cocke County,
which court shall thereupon proceed to hear and determine such appeal. On
appeal, the hearing shall be confined to the determination of whether the order
of removal made by the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport was
or was not made in good faith for proper cause, and no appeal to such court shall
be taken except upon such grounds, and the decision of such court shall be final.
The members of the board shall devote due time and attention to the
performance of the duties hereinafter specified and imposed upon them by this
section. Two (2) members of the board shall be sufficient for the decision of all
matters and the transactions of all business to be decided or transacted by the
board under and by virtue of the provisions of this section. Due notice of all
meetings shall be given so that all three (3) board members may have an
opportunity to be present. The board shall transact no business and make no
C-24
decisions until and except all three (3) board members shall have taken office
and remain qualified to act.
(b) Those subject to fire civil service. The provisions of this section
shall apply to all member personnel working on a full-time basis in the fire
department in the City of Newport, and the chief of the department. All such
persons together shall be known as the classified service. All other city
employees shall be known as the unclassified service.
(c) Appointments, promotions, discharges, how made. All future
appointments to and promotions in the classified service, except as otherwise
provided in this section, shall be made on the basis of seniority, fitness and
efficiency, which shall be determined by the following method:
Subject to the other standards set forth in this section, the following
minimum standards shall be set by the chief of the fire department and the
board: mental ability, physical conditions, experience, education, personality,
and specified training for each job classification in the department up to and
including the position of chief of the fire department. Such standards when set
shall remain in effect until altered by action of the board. After the enunciation
of such standards, a roster shall be kept by the board of all full-time personnel
in the classified service indicating what job classifications within the respective
department such personnel are eligible to fill. A roster shall also be kept on all
applicants to become members of the classified service with appropriate
indication of what job classifications such applicants are eligible to fill.
After the enunciation of the standards, no vacancy shall be filled except
by a person on the roster of persons having the requisite qualifications to fill
such vacancy. If any vacancy shall occur within any branch of the classified
service, the vacancy shall be offered first to that member of the same branch
qualified on the roster who shall have the greatest seniority and so on, in
descending order. However, if a vacancy occurs in the office of chief of the fire
department, the vacancy shall be filled by the board of mayor and aldermen of
the City of Newport from among all the qualified names on the roster without
necessary regard to seniority. No person shall be reinstated in, or transferred,
suspended or discharged from any place, position, or employment in the
classified service contrary to the provisions of this section.
(d) Function and duties of the civil service board. The board shall
organize by electing one (1) of its members as chairman and shall hold regular
meetings at least once a month, and such additional meetings as may be
required for the proper discharge of its duties, not to exceed three (3) days in
any one (1) month.
C-25
The board shall appoint a secretary who shall keep its records, preserve
all reports made to it, superintend and keep a record of all examinations and
perform such other duties as the board may prescribe.
It shall be the duty of the board:
(1) To make suitable rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this section. Such rules and regulations shall provide in
detail the manner in which examinations may be held and appointments,
promotions, transfers, demotions, reinstatements, suspensions and
discharge shall be made, and may also provide for any other matters
connected with the general subject of personnel administration. The rules
and regulations shall include the methods used in determining the
standard for each job classification in the classified service. The rules and
regulations may be changed from time to time by the board and shall be
printed or mimeographed for free public distribution.
(2) The rules and regulations shall include provisions so that
seniority may not be lost by any person holding a position in the classified
service if such person leaves the classified service to enter the military
service of the United States, if such person returns to the classified
service within six (6) months following his honorable discharge from such
service. In such cases the period of military service shall be included in
the period of seniority of such person.
(3) The board shall make investigations and report upon all
matters touching the enforcement and effect of the provisions of this
section, and the rules and regulations prescribed hereunder, inspect all
institutions and employment affected by this section, and ascertain
whether the section and all such rules and regulations are being obeyed.
Such investigations shall be made by the board on its own motion and
must also be made on petition of any citizen duly verified stating that
irregularities or abuses exist, or setting forth in writing the necessity for
such investigation. In the course of such investigation, the board shall
have the power to administer oaths, subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses, and require the production of books, papers, documents and
accounts appertaining to the investigation. The failure upon the part of
any person to comply with such subpoena or demand shall be deemed a
violation of this section and be punishable as such.
(4) All hearings and investigations before the board shall be
governed by this section and by the rules of practice and procedure to be
adopted by the board. The board, or its designated hearing officer, shall
not be bound by technical rules of evidence. No formality in any procedure
C-26
or hearing shall invalidate any order, decision, rule or regulation made
or approved by the board.
No decision shall be binding unless concurred in by at least two (2)
of the board members.
(5) To hear and determine appeals to complaints relative to the
allocation of positions, the determination of job changes, the furnishing
of rosters and the position of members of the classified service, and of
applicants on such roster, and such other matters relating to the
administration of this section as may be referred to the board.
(6) To prepare a standard schedule of pay and hours based
generally upon presently applicable salary rates and hours worked for
each class of positions in the classified service. Such pay plan shall
include a minimum and maximum and such intermediate rates as may
be deemed desirable for each class of position. In increasing or decreasing
items in budgets, the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport
shall not increase or decrease any individual salary item, but shall act
solely with respect to classes of positions as established in the
classification and pay plan. In no event shall the board of mayor and
aldermen reduce the salary of a class below the minimum or raise it
above the maximum salary established by the pay plan except by
amendment of the same. In establishing the pay plan, the board shall not
set the minimum rate for the chief of the fire department below two
hundred dollars ($200) a month, and such minimum figure shall not be
lowered, except by the unanimous vote of the board. Nothing in this
section shall limit the hours to be worked in event of riot, dangerous fire
or other bona fide emergency. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
chief of the fire department from being assigned additional duties as he
has customarily performed prior to the enactment of this section.
(7) To see that the job classifications, the standard for filling
classifications and the roster of eligible appointees for each classification
are kept continuously up to date, and posted in the fire department. The
rosters shall show name, rank and number in their proper order by
reason of seniority established by continuous service in the department.
Terms of leaves of absence granted by the board hereby created upon
recommendation of the chief of the fire department shall not forfeit the
rights of the member granted leave under this section nor be charged
against such member in his order of seniority.
(8) To make provisions that men laid off because of curtailment
of expenditures, reduction in force, and for like causes, shall be the last
C-27
man, or men, including probationers, that have been appointed in the
classified service. Rules and regulations shall provide that men so laid off
shall be reinstated before any new appointments to the classified service
shall be made.
(9) To keep the appointing authority notified of the person
highest on each eligible list for appointment to each vacancy that may
occur.
(10) To keep such records as may be necessary for the proper
administration of this section.
(e) Adoption and induction of incumbents into civil service. All persons
holding positions in the fire department when the civil service for the fire
department was initially enacted pursuant to Chapter 202 of the Private Acts
of 1974, including the chief thereof, who shall have served in such position for
a period of at least two (2) months previous thereto, are hereby inducted into
civil service in the office, position or employment which such persons
respectively held on such date, subject, however, to removal, demotion, or
suspension upon the same terms as any other person inducted permanently into
civil service after the enactment of Chapter 202 of the Private Acts of 1974.
(f) Applicants.
(1) Citizenship. An applicant for a civil service position of any
kind under the classified service must be a citizen of the United States,
who can read and write the English language.
(2) Character and Fitness. Every applicant for a position in the
classified service must, in addition to such minimum standards as are
stated by the board, also be of ordinary good health, of good moral
character and of temperate and industrious habits, such fact to be
ascertained in such manner as the board may deem advisable.
(g) Tenure of office of employees in the classified service. The tenure
of everyone holding office, place, position or employment under the provisions
of this section shall be for and only during good behavior. Any such person may
be removed or discharged, suspended without pay, demoted or reduced in rank,
or deprived of vacation privileges or other special privileges for any of the
following reasons, but for no other reasons:
(1) Dishonesty, intemperance, immoral conduct,
insubordination, or any other act of omission or commission tending to
injure the public service; or any other willful failure on the part of the
C-28
employee to conduct himself properly; or any willful violation of the
provisions of this section or the rules and regulations to be adopted
hereunder.
(2) Conviction of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or a misdemeanor reflecting upon ability to perform public
service or one for which a jail sentence is or may be imposed.
(3) Any other act or failure to act which, in the judgment of the
board, is sufficient to show the offender to be an unsuitable and unfit
person to be employed in the classified service.
(h) Removal. No person in the classified civil service who shall have
been permanently appointed or inducted into civil service under the provisions
of this section shall be removed, suspended or discharged except for cause and
only upon the written accusation of the appointing power, or any citizen or
taxpayer, a written statement of which accusation shall be served upon the
accused, and a duplicate filed with the board. The chief of the fire department
may suspend a member of the department pending the confirmation of the
suspension by the regular appointing power under this section which must be
within ten (10) days. Any person so removed, suspended or discharged may
within twenty (20) days from the time of his removal, suspension or discharge,
file with the board a written demand for an investigation, whereupon the board
shall conduct such investigation. The investigation shall be confined to the
determination of whether such removal, suspension or discharge was or was not
made for political reasons and was or was not made in good faith for cause. After
such investigation, the board may affirm the removal, or if it shall find that the
removal or suspension was made for political reasons, or was not made in good
faith for cause, shall order the immediate reinstatement or reemployment of
such person in the office, place, position or from which such person was
removed, suspended or discharged, which reinstatement shall, if the board so
provides in its discretion, be retroactive, and entitle such person to pay or
compensation from the time of such removal, suspension or discharge. The board
in its discretion in lieu of affirming or reversing the removal, suspension or
discharge, may modify the order by directing a suspension without pay of a
given period and subsequent restoration of duty, grade or pay; and the findings
of the board shall be certified in writing to the appointing power and shall be
forthwith enforced by such authority.
All investigations made by the board pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be by public hearing, after reasonable notice to the accused of the
time and place of such hearing, at which hearing the accused shall be afforded
an opportunity of appearing in person and by counsel and presenting his
defense. At any such hearing the testimony of all witnesses shall be taken in
C-29
writing and a record made of all proceedings. From any order adverse to the
accused, the latter may appeal to the chancery court of Cocke County. Such
appeal shall be taken by serving the board, within ten (10) days after the entry
of such order, a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof, and
demanding that a certified transcript of the record and of all papers on file in
the office of the board affecting or relating to such order be filed by the board in
such court. The board shall within twenty (20) days after the filing of such
notice, make, certify and file such transcript with such court. The chancery court
shall thereupon proceed to hear and determine such appeal. On appeal, the
hearing shall be confined to the determination of whether the order of removal,
discharge or suspension made by the board was or was not made in good faith
for cause, and no appeal to such court shall be taken except upon such ground,
or grounds, and the decision of the court shall be final.
(i) Duties of all officers and employees to assist the board. It shall be
the duty of all officers and employees of the City of Newport to aid in all proper
ways in carrying out the provisions of this section, and such rules and
regulations as may, from time to time be prescribed by the board thereunder
and to afford the board, its members and employees, all reasonable facilities and
assistance in the inspection of all books, papers, documents, and accounts
applying or in any way appertaining to any and all offices, places, positions,
papers, documents and accounts relevant to the duties of the board, and to
attend and testify whenever required so to do by the board or any member
thereof.
(j) Appointments to vacant positions: certification from lists.
Whenever a position in the classified service becomes vacant, the board of mayor
and aldermen of the City of Newport shall make requisition upon the board for
the name and address of those persons eligible for appointment thereto. The
board shall certify the name of the person highest on the eligible list willing to
accept employment, except in cases where the person who would be certified is
not at the time of certification employed in the classified service, in which cases
the board shall certify the two (2) names highest on the appropriate list, and the
board of mayor and aldermen shall appoint one (1) of the persons so certified.
In the case of a vacancy in the office of chief of the fire department, the board
shall certify the names of all persons eligible to fill the vacancy, and the
appointing authority shall appoint one (1) of the persons so certified. If more
than one (1) vacancy is to be filled, an additional name shall be certified for such
additional vacancy.
Whenever requisition is to be made, or whenever a position is held by a
temporary appointee and an eligible list for the class of such position exists, the
board of mayor and aldermen shall forthwith appoint the person, or, in the
proper case, from among the persons so certified to such position.
C-30
The board of mayor and aldermen of the city, as to the chief of the fire
department, and the chief of the fire department with the approval of the board
of mayor and aldermen, as to all other personnel shall, notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section, upon proper certification by the board of the
eligibility of an applicant for any position in the classified service, be empowered
to appoint such person to such position for a period of six (6) months, during
which time such applicant shall be on probation and subject to removal for just
cause shown at any time during such six (6) month period; or if the board of
mayor and aldermen shall in its discretion deem such person on probation unfit
and unsatisfactory for such position, then such person on probation may be
dismissed or transferred to another classification on probation, without
prejudice to such applicant. Whatever action may be taken by the board of
mayor and aldermen with respect to such applicant or probationer shall not be
reviewable by the board. In the event of dismissal of such applicant or
probationer for reasons satisfactory to the board of mayor and aldermen of the
City of Newport, then the board shall certify the name of the next person, or in
the proper case, persons on the eligible list as the same shall appear from the
records of the board.
(k) Leave of absence. Leave of absence, without pay, may be granted
by the board upon the recommendation of the chief of the fire department, and
the board shall give notice of such leave of absence to the board of mayor and
aldermen. All temporary employment caused by leaves of absence shall be made
from the eligible list of classified civil service of the department concerned.
(l) False marking, grading, prohibited. No board member or any other
person, shall, alone, or in cooperation with one (1) or more persons, defeat or
deceive any person in respect of the person’s right of examination or registration
according to the rules and regulations of this section, or falsely mark, grade,
estimate or report upon the examination or proper standing of any person
examined, registered or certified pursuant to the provisions of this section or aid
in so doing, or make any false representation concerning the same or concerning
the person examined, or furnish any person any special or secret information for
the purpose of improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any person so
examined, registered or certified, or persuade any other person, or permit or aid
in any manner any person to impersonate any other person, in connection with
any examination or registration or application or request to be examined or
registered.
(m) Political activities prohibited.
(1) No person shall be appointed or promoted to, or demoted or
dismissed from, any position in the classified service, or in any way
favored or discriminated against with respect to the employment in the
C-31
classified service because of his political or religious opinions, but all
employees must take an oath to support the Constitution of the United
States.
(2) No person shall seek or attempt to use any political
endorsement in connection with any appointment to a position in the
classified service.
(3) No person shall use or promise to use, directly or indirectly,
any political or official authority or influence, whether possessed or
anticipated, to secure or attempt to secure for any person an appointment
or advantage in appointment to a position in the classified service or an
increase in pay or other advantages in employment in any such position
either for the purpose of influencing the vote of political action of any
person, or for any consideration, or otherwise.
(4) It shall be the duty of the board to supervise the execution
of the foregoing civil service provisions of this section and the rules made
thereunder, and it shall be the duty of all persons under the provisions
of this section and in the service of the fire departments to comply with
such rules and to aid in their endorsement.
(n) Authority of board to obtain assistance. The board shall be
authorized to employ such clerical or administrative help as is necessary in
carrying out the duties assigned to it, and shall also be authorized to retain legal
counsel and engage actuarial experts to the extent necessary in carrying out the
functions assigned to the board.
(o) Compliance with section required. The failure on the part of the
board, or any member thereof or on the part of the board of mayor and aldermen
of the City of Newport, or any member thereof, to comply with the terms of this
section shall be considered a violation of this section and shall be punishable as
such.
(p) Facilities for administration required. The board of mayor and
aldermen of the City of Newport shall provide the board with suitable and
convenient rooms and accommodations and cause the same to be furnished,
heated and lighted and supplied with all office supplies and equipment
necessary to carry on the business of the board and shall either provide directly
or provide the funds for the payment of such necessary clerical, administrative,
actuarial and legal assistance as may be employed by the board under the
provisions of this section and the failure on the part of the board of mayor and
aldermen to do so shall be considered a violation of this section and shall be
punishable as such.
C-32
(q) Authority to appropriate funds for administration. Appointment of
board required. The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport shall
have authority to appropriate from the general funds of Newport a sum
sufficient to carry out the purposes of this section and shall make such
appropriation. It shall be the duty of the board of mayor and aldermen of the
City of Newport, subject to the provisions of this section, to appoint and create
the board, and failure upon the part of the board of mayor and aldermen, or any
member of it so to do, shall be deemed a violation of this section and shall be
punishable as such.
(r) Organization of board. It shall be the duty of the board appointed
subject to the provisions of this section to organize immediately and see that the
provisions thereof are carried into effect, and to make suitable rules and
regulations to effect such purposes; and the failure upon the part of the board,
or any individual member thereof so to do, shall be deemed a violation of this
section and shall be punishable as such.
(s) Violation of this section. The failure on the part of any person to
comply with the provisions of this section, shall be considered a violation of this
section and punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
(t) Effect on other laws. This section shall have no effect on the police
civil service system, but is in addition thereto.
Section 14. Powers of board with respect to ordinance violators.
The board of mayor and aldermen of Newport shall have the power and
authority within the city to provide for the enforcement of the ordinances of the
city, and they shall have full power and authority to erect a correctional facility
for the safekeeping of prisoners, and when any person or persons violate any
ordinance of the corporation, and fails or refuses to pay or secure to be paid the
fines and costs accruing thereon, the board of mayor and aldermen may provide
by ordinance for the punishment of such persons for contempt or as otherwise
provided by law.
Section 15. Street paving.
The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport shall have full
authority to lay off and open up new streets, lanes and alleys in the city, and
extend the old ones for the convenience of the inhabitants thereof in the manner
and mode prescribed in general law, and may by ordinance, or otherwise,
require owners of business houses to place good and substantial pavements of
brick or stone in front of their houses. The board of mayor and aldermen of the
City of Newport may, by ordinance or otherwise, require the owners of real
C-33
estate within the corporate limits of the city to place good and substantial
pavements adjacent to their real estate wherever the same may abut or touch
any street within the corporate limits of the city, and to maintain the same
when placed, such pavements to be built under the direction of the board of
mayor and aldermen and in accordance with specifications to be furnished by
the board.
Section 16. Registration of voters.
The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport shall have the
right to provide by ordinance for the registration of all persons who are entitled
to vote in the various municipal elections in accordance with general law.
Section 17. General powers.
The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport shall have all
the powers and be subjected to all the limitations and restrictions provided for
municipalities in general law.
Section 18. Newport Utilities Board.
For the purpose of operating and administering the waterworks plant and
system and the electric distribution system of the City of Newport, Tennessee,
and such other public utilities including the sewerage system, as may now be
owned or hereafter acquired by the City of Newport, Tennessee, there is hereby
created an administrative body to be known as "Newport Utilities Board." The
Board shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be a qualified voter
of Newport, Tennessee. This Board shall be reduced to six (6) members in April
of 2017 when a Board member's term is up and that position is not filled. The
Board shall be reduced to five (5) members in April of 2019 when a Board
member's term is up and that position is not filled. Each member shall serve for
a term of six (6) years and be elected by majority vote of the board of mayor and
aldermen of the City of Newport, Tennessee.
The Newport Utilities Board shall operate as a separate unit of municipal
government. The Board shall be free from the jurisdiction, direction, and control
of any city or county officers and of the board of mayor and aldermen, except
through the powers of the election described in this section. No current or
retired employee of Newport Utilities shall be eligible to serve as a Board
Member. No member of the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport
or member of the Cocke County Legislative Body shall serve on the Newport
Utilities Board while a member of either legislative body.
C-34
Any vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled for the
unexpired term by majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen.
Compensation for members of the Newport Utilities Board shall be set by the
board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport. In the meetings of the
Board, when the Board consists of seven (7) or six (6) members, four (4)
members shall constitute a quorum and all actions of the board shall be
approved by a majority vote of those members present at such meeting. When
the Board consists of five (5) members, three (3) members shall constitute a
quorum. The board shall take the oath of office prescribed for judges of the State
of Tennessee. Members of the board shall be removable from office only by
general ouster proceedings for the causes appropriate to such proceedings. The
Newport Utilities Board created by this section shall elect one (1) of its members
as chairman and shall appoint a secretary, who may, if desired, be one (1) of the
members of the board. The board shall fix a place and time at which its regular
meetings are to be held and may adopt such rules and bylaws for the conduct of
its business as it deems fit and proper. The Newport Utilities Board shall have
complete charge and control of the waterworks plant and system and electric
distribution system, and all other public utilities including the sewerage system,
as may now be owned or hereafter acquired by the City of Newport, Tennessee,
and to that end may employ a superintendent and other employees, and fix
rates, and enter into contracts and generally operate and administer such public
utilities before mentioned, completely free from the control or supervision of the
board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport, Tennessee, provided only
that in the operation of such utilities and the fixing of rates, the Newport
Utilities Board shall observe all covenants and agreements entered into or made
by the board of mayor and aldermen under the provisions hereof at the time of
the authorization of bonds. The Newport Utilities Board shall possess the
powers, rights and privileges and perform the same duties and functions as the
present "Board of Public Utilities."
The Newport Utilities Board shall have all the powers, rights, privileges
and perform the same duties and functions as "The Board of Public Utilities"
created by Chapter 497 of the Private Acts of the General Assembly of the State
of Tennessee for the year 1939, it being the intention of the Legislature that one
(1) board, to wit, Newport Utilities Board, shall operate and administer the
waterworks plant system and electric distribution system of the City of
Newport, Tennessee.
The operation of the waterworks plant and system of the City of Newport
and the operation of any other utility owned by the city and the rates imposed
for services rendered and water furnished by the system or utilities shall not be
subject to regulation by the Tennessee Regulatory Authority or by any other
state regulatory or administrative board. [as amended by Priv. Acts 2015, ch. 20,
§§ 4, 5, 6, and 7]
C-35
Section 19. Waterworks and sewers.
The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport is hereby
authorized to provide for a system of waterworks and sewers within the city. For
that purpose, the board may levy and collect a special tax to create a sinking
fund for the payment of the principal and interest of any bonds which may be
issued by the board of mayor and aldermen for the purpose of building a system
of waterworks and sewers for the city, such special levy to be in addition to any
levy otherwise authorized by this Charter.
The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport, Cocke County,
shall have the power and right to condemn pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, Title 29, Chapters 16 and 17, any spring or springs, running
streams, or other watercourse and the water thereof, or such portion of the same
as may be necessary to use in supplying the board of mayor and aldermen of the
City of Newport, Cocke County, or the inhabitants thereof, with water; and shall
have the power and right to condemn a right-of-way for the laying of any and all
such pipes as may be necessary in piping such water from any such spring or
springs, running streams, or other watercourse, to a suitable pumping station,
or to its reservoir or reservoirs, or to the corporate limits of the city; and to
condemn any and all land necessary for reservoir purposes, approaches thereto,
rights of ingress and egress, either within or without the corporate limits of the
city.
Just compensation shall be made by the board of mayor and aldermen of
the City of Newport, Cocke County, in exercising the right of eminent domain
under the provisions of this section to the owners of such spring or springs,
running streams, or other watercourses, for the water thus taken, and to all
riparian owners for damages resulting to them from taking such water, and to
the owners of land taken for rights-of-way for pipelines for the value of such
rights-of-way, and to the owners of land thus condemned for pumping stations
or sites for reservoir or reservoirs, and for all land also condemned for
approaches thereto, rights of ingress and egress, either within or without the
corporation limits of the city, for the damages resulting to them for such taking.
In the event the board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport,
Cocke County, desire to exercise the right of eminent domain herein by this
section conferred, are unable to agree with the owner or owners of any such
spring or springs, running streams, or other watercourse, or with any riparian
owner or owners of any such land necessary for rights-of-way for pipelines, or
lands necessary for pumping station or reservoir sites, approaches thereto,
rights of ingress and egress to and from same, as to the amount of compensation
that shall be paid, as herein provided, the proceedings for condemning such
spring or springs, running streams, or other watercourses, or such riparian right
C-36
or such right-of-way for pipelines, pumping stations, sites for reservoir or
reservoirs, either within or without such corporate limits, and for fixing such
compensation, shall be the same in all respects as provided by any and all other
general laws of the State of Tennessee which have been or which may be
hereafter enacted governing the exercise of the rights of eminent domain.
Section 20. Sewer charges.
The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport, Tennessee, be
and are hereby authorized to impose a monthly rental charge of not to exceed
one dollar ($1.00) per month on all present and future users connected with the
sewage system and that, in addition, if it be deemed necessary by the board of
mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport, Tennessee, in order to retire any
bonds issued under Chapter 864, Private Acts of 1947, on schedule and keep the
interest thereon paid as due, the board of mayor and aldermen shall be
empowered and authorized to levy a special tax, or charge, for making
connections to the sewage system, which tax shall not exceed the sum of twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) per connection, and which shall be levied against all new
users connected with the system or all present users connected therewith, or
both, as the board may deem necessary and advisable. In the event either or
both of the sources of revenue set out in this section are adopted by the board
of mayor and aldermen, then a special fund shall be set up as a repository for
such rents or connection charges, or both.
The board of mayor and aldermen of the City of Newport may in its
discretion levy and collect a sewerage charge and may pledge the net revenues
from such charge as additional security for the payment of principal of and
interest on bonds authorized under Chapter 473, Private Acts of 1953.
Section 21. Process and arrest powers of policemen.
The police officers shall have all authority to execute warrants and
process for the corporation in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, Title
6, Chapter 54, Part 3 and other provisions of general law.
Section 22. Absence or disability of recorder.
In the absence of the recorder or in case of incompetency or disability on
the recorder’s part to discharge any of the duties of the office, the same may be
discharged by the city administrator or his/her designee.
C-37
Section 23. Duties of the Vice Mayor.
The position of vice mayor shall be filled by the alderman receiving the
most votes in the general election. The vice mayor shall chair all meetings of the
board of mayor and aldermen in the absence of the mayor. The vice mayor shall
temporarily assume the duties of the mayor during any short-term absences due
to incapacitation. [as added by Priv. Acts 2015, ch. 20, § 8]
SECTION 2. If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of the act which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to that end the provisions of this act are declared
to be severable.
SECTION 3. This act shall have no effect unless it is approved by a twothirds
(2/3) vote of the legislative body of the City of Newport within 120 days
of its signing by the governor of this state. The office of city recorder will
continue until such time as the current city recorder resigns or until completion
of the existing term of office of the Newport City Recorder, which runs until the
election in November of 2006, at which time such office will be abolished as
provided in this act. Its approval or nonapproval shall be proclaimed by the
presiding officer of the City of Newport and certified to the secretary of state.
SECTION 4. For the purpose of approving or rejecting the provisions of
this act, it shall be effective upon becoming a law, the public welfare requiring
it. For all other purposes, it shall become effective as provided in Section 3.
PASSED: May 26, 2005
________________________________
JOHN S. WILDER
SPEAKER OF THE SENATE
________________________________
JIMMY NAIFEH, SPEAKER
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
APPROVED this 22nd day of June 2005
_______________________________
PHIL BREDESEN, GOVERNOR
C-38
ACTS COMPRISING THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF
NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
YEAR CHAPTER SUBJECT
2005 76 Basic charter act.
2015 20 Amended § 7 certificates of
election; § 9 duties of mayor; § 10
city administrator; § 18 Newport
Utilities Board; and added § 23
duties of the vice mayor.
1-1
Charter references 1
See the charter index, the charter itself, and footnote references to the
charter in the front of this code.
Municipal code references
Building, plumbing, electrical and gas inspectors: title 12.
Fire department: title 7.
Utilities: titles 18 and 19.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Zoning: title 14.
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION1
CHAPTER
1. ORDINANCES.
2. MAYOR.
3. RECORDER.
4. CITY ATTORNEY.
5. CODE OF ETHICS.
CHAPTER 1
ORDINANCES
SECTION
1-101. Quorum for passage of ordinances.
1-102. To be in writing; copies.
1-103. Passage on two separate days.
1-104. Reading of ordinance.
1-105. Voting procedure.
1-106. Veto by mayor.
1-107. Passage over the mayor's veto.
1-101. Quorum for passage of ordinances. No ordinance shall be
passed on any reading unless at least a majority of the aldermen are present at
the meeting. (1973 Code, § 2-26)
1-102. To be in writing; copies. When any proposed ordinance is
presented to the board of mayor and alderman, it shall be presented in writing
and individual copies thereof shall be made available for the mayor and each
alderman. (1973 Code, § 2-27)
1-2
1-103. Passage on two separate days. Each ordinance adopted by the
board of mayor and aldermen must be presented to the board of mayor and
aldermen on two (2) separate days and passed on each presentation by a
majority vote of the members of the board of mayor and aldermen present.
(1973 Code, § 2-28)
1-104. Reading of ordinance. On each presentation of an ordinance
proposed to be adopted, the caption thereof shall be read or its substance stated,
but it shall not be necessary to read the proposed ordinance in full. (1973 Code,
2-29)
1-105. Voting procedure. Votes of the members of the board of mayor
and aldermen on a proposed ordinance shall be taken by counting the "ayes" and
"noes". The mayor shall not vote except to break a tie. (1973 Code, § 2-30)
1-106. Veto by the mayor. The mayor may veto any ordinance adopted
by the board of mayor and aldermen by endorsing on the ordinance his reasons
therefor and transmitting the ordinance back to the board of mayor and
aldermen at its next regular meeting. (1973 Code, § 2-31)
1-107. Passage over the mayor's veto. The board of mayor and
aldermen may pass any ordinance over the mayor's veto by reading it one (1)
additional time and passing it by a majority vote of all the board of mayor and
aldermen. (1973 Code, § 2-32)
1-3
Charter references 1
Duties: § 1.9.
Oath of office: § 1.8.
Qualifications: § 1.6.
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR1
SECTION
1-201. Generally supervises city's affairs.
1-202. Executes city's contracts.
1-201. Generally supervises city's affairs. The mayor shall have
general supervision of all affairs of the city and may require such reports from
the various officers and employees of the city as he may reasonably deem
necessary to carry out his executive responsibilities. (1973 Code, § 2-53)
1-202. Executes city's contracts. The mayor shall execute all
contracts authorized by the board of mayor and aldermen. (1973 Code, § 2-54)
1-4
Charter reference 1
City administrator to appoint: § 1.11.
CHAPTER 3
RECORDER1
SECTION
1-301. To keep minutes of meetings of board of mayor and aldermen.
1-302. Ordinance book.
1-303. Tax books and records.
1-304. License book.
1-305. Itemized record of revenues and expenditures.
1-306. Clerical functions.
1-307. Issuance of process against ordinance violators.
1-308. Docket.
1-309. Contempt of recorder's court.
1-301. To keep minutes of meetings of board of mayor and
aldermen. The recorder shall keep a complete minute record of all proceedings
at meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen. (1973 Code, § 2-60)
1-302. Ordinance book. The recorder shall keep an ordinance book in
which he shall keep the original copy of all ordinances passed by the board of
mayor and aldermen. (1973 Code, § 2-61)
1-303. Tax books and records. The recorder shall keep such tax books
and records as will enable him to lawfully and efficiently administer and
account for the assessment and collection or delinquency of all taxes imposed by
the city. (1973 Code, § 2-62)
1-304. License book. The recorder shall keep a permanent record of all
licenses issued by him. The record shall be kept in a well-bound book provided
for that purpose and shall reflect to whom each license has been issued, the
amount of each license fee collected and such other pertinent information as the
recorder may elect to include. (1973 Code, § 2-63)
1-305. Itemized record of revenues and expenditures. The recorder
shall keep an itemized, permanent record of all the revenues and expenditures
of the city. (1973 Code, § 2-64)
1-306. Cl erical functions. The recorder shall perform all clerical duties
for the board of mayor and aldermen and for the city which are not expressly
1-5
assigned by the charter or this code to another corporate officer; he shall also
have custody of and be responsible for, maintaining all corporate bonds, records
and papers. (1973 Code, § 2-65)
1-307. Issuance of process against ordinance violators. When an
apparently valid complaint is made under oath to the recorder that some person
has violated a provision of this code or other ordinance of the city, the recorder
shall immediately issue a warrant for that person's arrest or shall subpoena the
person to answer the complaint before the recorder at a specified time. (1973
Code, § 2-66)
1-308. Docket. The recorder shall keep a docket book record of all cases
coming before him in his judicial capacity; he shall enter therein, among other
things, the name of each defendant, the offense, the date of the offense and/or
arrest, the date of the trial, the amount of the fine assessed and whether the fine
was paid. (1973 Code, § 2-67)
1-309. Contempt of recorder's court. It shall be unlawful for any
person to ignore or fail to comply with a summons or other process issued by the
recorder or to otherwise be guilty of any misconduct before the recorder's court.
(1973 Code, § 2-68)
1-6
CHAPTER 4
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION
1-401. Office created; appointment; qualifications.
1-402. Term of office.
1-403. Specific duties; general compensation.
1-404. Additional duties; special compensation.
1-405. Additional counsel.
1-401. Office created; appointment; qualifications. There is hereby
created the office of city attorney. The board of mayor and aldermen shall, at its
first regular meeting following its election and induction into office, elect an
attorney at law who is regularly engaged in and duly licensed to practice the
profession of law in all the courts of the state, to the office of city attorney.
However, a failure of the board of mayor and aldermen to elect a city attorney
at its first regular meeting shall not deprive it of the power to make such
election at any subsequent regular meeting. (1973 Code, § 2-74)
1-402. Term of office. The attorney shall hold his office for two (2)
years from the date of his election by the board of mayor and aldermen and until
his successor is elected and qualified. (1973 Code, § 2-75)
1-403. Specific duties; general compensation. (1) The city attorney
shall have the following specific duties: (a) To regularly attend the
meetings of the board of mayor and aldermen;
(b) To advise the board of mayor and aldermen and the other
officials of the city in connection with all legal matters and questions that
shall arise pertaining to the affairs of the city;
(c) To prepare all ordinances and resolutions of the board of
mayor and aldermen for passage;
(d) To supervise the keeping of the minutes of board of mayor
and aldermen meetings;
(e) To appear for and represent the city in all cases appealed
from the recorder's court;
(f) To render such miscellaneous legal services out of court as
the affairs of the city may require.
(2) For those services enumerated in subsection (1), the city attorney
shall receive and be paid a salary as established from time to time by the board
of mayor and aldermen, payable in monthly installments. (1973 Code, § 2-76)
1-404. Additional duties; special compensation. For services
rendered by the city attorney by direction of the board of mayor and aldermen,
1-7
but which are not included in the enumeration of his specific duties in this
division, such as for services rendered in the prosecution or defense of lawsuits
brought by or against the city or its officials in their official capacity in any of
the state or federal courts and not involving cases before or appeals from the
recorder's court; for services rendered in the collection of delinquent taxes, street
assessments and other moneys due the city and requiring his services for their
collection; for services rendered in connection with bond issues and city
improvements not of a routine nature; and for other services of an unusual
character, the city attorney shall be paid such reasonable additional
compensation as is commensurate with the nature of the service rendered. The
additional compensation may be fixed by independent contract when the
occasion for such service shall arise, by agreement after the service shall have
been rendered or by the court in which the service in rendered. (1973 Code,
§ 2-77)
1-405. Additional counsel. Nothing in this division shall be construed
to deprive the mayor of the power and authority that he now has under the
charter to employ special or additional counsel or the authority of the city to act
in conjunction with or independently of the regular city attorney whenever, in
the judgment of the mayor, it shall be for the interests of the city to do so, either
for the purpose of bringing and prosecuting suits authorized by law or a
resolution of the board of mayor and aldermen or for the purpose of defending
suits brought against the city. (1973 Code, § 2-78)
1-8
State statutes dictate many of the ethics provisions that apply to 1
municipal officials and employees. For provisions relative to the following, see
the Tennessee Code Annotated (T.C.A.) sections indicated:
Campaign finance: Tennessee Code Annotated, title 2, ch. 10.
Conflict of interests: Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-107, 108; 12-4-
101, 102.
Conflict of interests disclosure statements: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 8-50-501 and the following sections.
Consulting fee prohibition for elected municipal officials: Tennessee Code
Annotated, §§ 2-10-122, 124.
Crimes involving public officials (bribery, soliciting unlawful
compensation, buying and selling in regard to office): Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 39-16-101 and the following sections.
Crimes of official misconduct, official oppression, misuse of official
information: Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 39-16-401 and the following
sections.
Ouster law: Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 8-47-101 and the following
sections.
CHAPTER 5
CODE OF ETHICS1
SECTION
1-501. Applicability.
1-502. Definition of "personal interest."
1-503. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote.
1-504. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters.
1-505. Acceptance of gratuities, etc.
1-506. Use of information.
1-507. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc.
1-508. Use of position or authority.
1-509. Outside employment.
1-9
Masculine pronouns include the feminine. Only masculine pronouns have 1
been used for convenience and readability.
1-510. Ethics complaints.
1-511. Violations.
1-501. Applicability. This chapter is the code of ethics for personnel of
the municipality. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed
officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any
separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other
instrumentality appointed or created by the municipality. The words
"municipal" and "municipality" include these separate entities. (Ord. #2006-7,
Sept. 2006)
1-502. Definition of "personal interest." (1) For purposes of §§ 1-503
and 1-504, "personal interest" means:
(a) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the
subject of a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state
statutes on conflicts of interests; or
(b) Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a
matter to be regulated or supervised; or
(c) Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the
official’s or employee’s spouse, parent(s), step parent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren), or step child(ren).
(2) The words "employment interest" include a situation in which an
official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible
employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that
is to be regulated or supervised.
(3) In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of
interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
1-503. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. An
official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the
meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the
minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable
person to infer that it affects the official’s vote on the measure. In addition, the
official may recuse himself from voting on the measure. (Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 1
2006)
1-504. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters. An
official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other
than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects
1-10
or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the
discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the
interest on a form provided by and filed with the recorder. In addition, the
official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or
policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter.
(Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
1-505. Acceptance of gratuities, etc. An official or employee may not
accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, or other consideration
or favor of any kind from anyone other than the municipality:
(1) For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of
an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the
regular course of his duties; or
(2) That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence
his action, or reward him for past action, in executing municipal business.
(Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
1-506. Use of information. (1) An official or employee may not disclose
any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that
is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law.
(2) An official or employee may not use or disclose information
obtained in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to
result in financial gain for himself or any other person or entity. (Ord. #2006-7,
Sept. 2006)
1-507. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc. (1) An official or
employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities,
equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to himself.
(2) An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal
time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to any
private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or lease
that is determined by the governing body to be in the best interests of the
municipality. (Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
1-508. Use of position or authority. (1) An official or employee may
not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the
name of the municipality.
(2) An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his position
to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized
by the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the municipality.
(Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
1-509. Outside employment. An official or employee may not accept
or continue any outside employment if the work unreasonably inhibits the
1-11
performance of any affirmative duty of the municipal position or conflicts with
any provision of the municipality’s charter or any ordinance or policy.
(Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
1-510. Ethics complaints. (1) The city attorney is designated as the
ethics officer of the municipality. Upon the written request of an official or
employee potentially affected by a provision of this chapter, the city attorney
may render an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this chapter
and other applicable law.
(2) (a) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the city
attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed
official or employee charging any violation of this chapter, or may
undertake an investigation on his own initiative when he acquires
information indicating a possible violation, and make recommendations
for action to end or seek retribution for any activity that, in the attorney’s
judgment, constitutes a violation of this code of ethics.
(b) The city attorney may request the governing body to hire
another attorney, individual, or entity to act as ethics officer when he has
or will have a conflict of interests in a particular matter.
(c) When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this
chapter is lodged against a member of the municipality’s governing body,
the governing body shall either determine that the complaint has merit,
determine that the complaint does not have merit, or determine that the
complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the
governing body determines that a complaint warrants further
investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the city attorney or
another individual or entity chosen by the governing body.
(3) The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances
would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics.
(4) When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation
of a personnel policy, rule, or regulation or a civil service policy, rule, or
regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a violation of the personnel or
civil service provisions rather than as a violation of this code of ethics.
(Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
1-511. Violations. An elected official or appointed member of a
separate municipal board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or
other instrumentality who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
punishment as provided by the municipality’s charter or other applicable law,
and in addition is subject to censure by the governing body. An appointed
official or an employee who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
disciplinary action. (Ord. #2006-7, Sept. 2006)
2-1
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.
CHAPTER 1
RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION
2-101. Created.
2-102. Members; compensation and terms.
2-103. Vacancies.
2-104. Powers.
2-101. Created. The Newport Recreation Advisory Board is created to
advise the board of mayor and aldermen on the recreation needs of the
community. (Ord. #92-5, May 1992)
2-102. Members; compensation and terms. (1) This board will
consist of five (5) members.
(2) The members of this board shall serve without pay.
(3) The terms of the members are as follows:
Member #1- 1 year term
Member #2 - 1 year term
Member #3 - 2 year term
Member #4 - 2 year term
Member #5 - 3 year term (Ord. #92-5, May 1992)
2-103. Vacancies. Vacancies that occur due to resignation or other
means other than by expiration of term shall be filled only for the unexpired
term, and such appointment shall be filled by the board of mayor and aldermen.
(Ord. #92-5, May 1992)
2-104. Powers. This board will only serve in an advisory capacity. It
shall not and will not be responsible for the supervision of staff, the hiring or
dismissal of staff, the expenditure of public funds or the creation or enforcement
of the rules and regulations governing parks and recreation facilities or
programs. Although, this board may advise the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of Newport, Tennessee on any of these matters and may act on behalf
of the board of mayor and aldermen, on a case by case basis, if so authorized by
the board of mayor and aldermen. (Ord. #92-5, May 1992)
3-1
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER
1. CITY JUDGE.
2. COURT ADMINISTRATION.
3. WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS.
4. BONDS AND APPEALS.
CHAPTER 1
CITY JUDGE
SECTION
3-101. Appointment.
3-102. Qualifications.
3-103. Judge ProTem.
3-104. Jurisdiction.
3-101. Appointment and Term. Designated by the Charter to handle judicial matters
within the City shall be appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to serve a four (4) year
term. (Ordinance 2013-08, April 2013) Permanent vacancies in the office of the City Judge
arising from resignation, disqualification or for any other reason whatsoever shall be filled in the
same manner and for the same term prescribed for the appointment of the City Judge. (Ordinance
#1999-01, March 1999)
3-102. Qualifications. The City Judge shall be a minimum of twenty-six (26) of age, be
licensed by the State of Tennessee to practice law, and maintain his/her primary law office in
Cocke County, Tennessee. If the City Judge for any reason removes his/her primary law office
location from Cocke County, Tennessee after his/her appointment, the removal of his/her
primary law office shall automatically create a vacancy in the office of city judge. (Ordinance
#1999-01, March 1999)
3-103. Judge Pro Tem. During the absence (consisting of 30 days or less) of the City
Judge from his/her duties for any reason or at any time the office of the City Judge is vacant, the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen may appoint a City Judge pro tem to serve until the City Judge
3-2
returns to his/her duties or the office of City Judge is no longer vacant. The City Judge pro tem
shall have all the qualifications required, and powers, of the city judge. (Ordinance #1999-01,
March 1999)
3-104. Jurisdiction. The City Judge shall have the authority to try persons charged with
the violation of municipal ordinances, and to punish persons convicted of such violations by
levying a civil penalty not to exceed $500. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
3-3
CHAPTER 2
COURT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION
3-201. Maintenance of Docket.
3-202. Imposition of Fines, Penalties and Costs.
3-203. Disposition and Report of Fines, Penalties and Costs.
3-204. Disturbance of Proceedings.
3-201. Maintenance of Docket. The City Judge shall keep a complete docket of all
matters coming before him/her in his/her judicial capacity. The docket shall include for each
defendant such information as his/her name; warrant and/or summons numbers; alleged offense;
disposition; fines, penalties and costs imposed and whether collected; and all other information
which may be relevant. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
3-202. Imposition of Fines, Penalties and Costs. All fines, penalties and costs shall be
imposed and recorded by the City Judge on the city court docket in open court.
In all cases heard and determined by him/her, the City Judge shall tax in the bill of costs
the same amounts and for the same items allowed in courts of general sessions for similar work
in state cases.
The City Judge shall impose an offender based fee per paid violation to offset the
installation, maintenance and support fee for the Municipal Court system. (Ordinance #1999-01,
March 1999, Ordinance #2017-11 July 2017)
3-203. Disposition and Report of Fines, Penalties and Costs. All funds coming into the
hands of the City Judge in the form of fines, penalties, costs, and forfeitures shall be recorded by
him and paid over daily to the city. At the end of each month he shall submit to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen a report accounting for the collection or non-collection of all penalties and
costs imposed by his/her court during the current month and to date for the current fiscal year.
(Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
3-204. Disturbance of Proceedings. It shall be unlawful for any person to create any
disturbance of any trial before the city court by making loud or unusual noises, by using
indecorous, profane or blasphemous language, or by any distracting conduct whatsoever.
(Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
3-4
CHAPTER 3
WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS
SECTION
3-301. Issuance of arrest warrants.
3-302. Issuance of summonses.
3-303. Issuance of subpoenas.
3-301. Issuance of Arrest Warrants. The City Judge shall have the power to issue
warrants for the arrest of persons charged with violating municipal ordinances. (Ordinance
#1999-01, March 1999)
3-302. Issuance of Summonses. When a complaint of an alleged ordinance violation is
made to the city judge, the judge may in his/her discretion, in lieu of issuing an arrest warrant,
issue a summons ordering the alleged offender personally to appear before the city court at a
time specified therein to answer to the charges against him/her. The summons shall contain a
brief description of the offense charged but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the
municipal code or ordinance alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear
before the city court as commanded in a summons lawfully served on him/her, the cause may be
proceeded with ex parte, and the judgment of the court shall be valid and binding subject to the
defendant's right of appeal. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
3-303. Issuance of Subpoenas. The City Judge may subpoena as witnesses all persons
whose testimony he believes will be relevant and material to matters coming before his/her court,
and it shall be unlawful for any person lawfully served with such a subpoena to fail or neglect to
comply therewith. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
3-5
CHAPTER 4
BONDS AND APPEALS
SECTION
3-401. Appearance bonds authorized.
3-402. Appeals.
3-403. Bond amounts, conditions, and forms.
3-401. Appearance Bonds Authorized.
(1) Deposit Allowed. Whenever any person lawfully possessing a chauffeur's or
operator's license theretofore issued to him by the Tennessee Department of Safety, or under the
driver licensing laws of any other state or territory or the District of Columbia, is issued a
citation or arrested and charged with the violation of any city ordinance or state statute regulating
traffic, except those ordinances and statutes, the violation of which call for the mandatory
revocation of a operator's or chauffeur's license for any period of time, such person shall have the
option of depositing his/her chauffeur's or operator's license with the officer or court demanding
bail in lieu of any other security required for his/her appearance in the city court of this/her city
in answer to such charge before said court. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
(2) Receipt to be Issued. Whenever any person deposits his/her chauffeur's or operator's
license as provided, either the officer or the court demanding bail as described above, shall issue
the person a receipt for the license upon a form approved or provided by the department of
safety, and thereafter the person shall be permitted to operate a motor vehicle upon the public
highways of this state during the pendency of the case in which the license was deposited. The
receipt shall be valid as a temporary driving permit for a period not less than the time necessary
for an appropriate adjudication of the matter in the city court, and shall state such period of
validity on its face. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
(3) Failure to Appear - Disposition of License. In the event that any driver who has
deposited his/her chauffeur's or operator's license in lieu of bail fails to appear in answer to the
charges filed against him/her, the clerk or judge of the city court accepting the license shall
forward the same to the Tennessee Department of Safety for disposition by said department in
accordance with the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-50-801, et seq. (Ordinance
#1999-01, March 1999)
3-402. Appeals. Any person dissatisfied with any judgment of the city court against him
may, within ten (10) days next after such judgment is rendered, appeal to the next term of the
circuit court upon posting a proper appeal bond. Tennessee Code Annotated, § 16-18-307, et
seq. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
3-6
3-403. Bond Amounts, Conditions, and Forms. An appearance bond in any case before
the city court shall be in such amount as the City Judge shall prescribe and shall be conditioned
that the defendant shall appear for trial before the city court at the stated time and place. An
appeal bond in any case shall be in such sum as the City Judge shall prescribe two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00) for such person's appearance and the faithful prosecution of the appeal,
and shall be conditioned that if the circuit court shall find against the appellant the fine or penalty
and all costs of the trial and appeal shall be promptly paid by the defendant and/or his/her
sureties. An appearance or appeal bond in any case may be made in the form of a cash deposit or
by any corporate surety company authorized to do business in Tennessee or by two (2) private
persons who individually own real property within the county. No other type bond shall be
acceptable. (Ordinance #1999-01, March 1999)
4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
CHAPTER
1. PERSONNEL.
2. CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
3. COMPENSATION PLAN.
4. RECRUITMENT AND EMPLOYMENT.
5. BENEFITS.
6. MISCELLANEOUS POLICIES.
7. SEPARATIONS AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
8. AMENDMENT OF PERSONNEL RULES.
CHAPTER 1
PERSONNEL
Section
4-101. Purpose and Objectives.
4-102. Coverage.
4-103. Administration.
4-101. Purpose and Objectives. The primary purpose of these policies is to establish an
understanding, cooperation and efficiency in local government operations by establishing good
personnel practices. The objectives of these policies are to promote and increase efficiency,
provide fair and equal opportunities, develop a process of recruitment and selection of employees
and promote high morale among employees.
It is the policy of the City of Newport to apply and foster a sound program of personnel
administration to ensure the legal employment and placement of applicants, the establishment of
a classification and compensation program, the establishment of an employee relations system
and the provision of employee development and training and record retention. (Ordinance
#2001-01, February 2011)
4-102. Coverage. These rules and regulations shall cover all employees in the city
service unless specifically exempt by this document, the Charter and/or the ordinances of the city
without regard to race, religion, national origin, political affiliation, sex, age, or physical
handicap.
For the purpose of coverage by the City of Newport’s Personnel Policy, all offices and
positions of the city government are divided into non-exempt and exempt service. Non-exempt
employees shall include all regular full-time and regular part-time positions in the City's service
unless specifically placed in the exempt service. The following positions are exempt from the
City of Newport’s Personnel Policies: all elected officials, City Judge, members of appointed
boards and commissions, consultants, advisers, and legal counsel rendering temporary
professional service, City Attorney, independent contractors, volunteer personnel appointed
4-2
without compensation, and persons employed by the City for not more than three (3) months
during the fiscal year. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-103. Administration. These rules shall be administered by the City Administrator
under the direction of the Board and Mayor of Alderman and in conformity with the ordinance
establishing a personnel system. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-3
CHAPTER 2
CLASSIFICATION PLAN
Section
4-201. Purpose.
4-202. Composition of the Classification Plan.
4-203. Use of Class Titles.
4-204. Use of Job Descriptions.
4-205. Use of the Classification Plan.
4-206. Administration of the Classification Plan.
4-207. Allocation of Positions.
4-208. Request for Reclassification.
4-201. Purpose. The classification plan, as approved by the Board of Mayor &
Aldermen, provides a complete inventory of all positions in the City’s service and an accurate
description for each employment class. The plan standardizes titles, each of which is indicative
of a definite range of duties and responsibilities and has the same meaning throughout the City
service. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-202. Composition of the Classification Plan. The classification plan shall consist of: a
grouping of classes of positions that are approximately equal in difficulty and responsibility that
call for the same general qualification, and that can be equitably compensated within the same
range of pay under similar working conditions; class titles descriptive of the work of the class
that identifies the class; written job descriptions for each position; and physical standards for
performance of the duties of the position. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-203. Use of Class Titles. Class titles are to be used in all personnel, accounting, budget
appropriation, and financial records of the City. No person will be appointed or employed in a
classified position under a title not included in the classification plan. (Ordinance #2011-01,
February 2011)
4-204. Use of Job Descriptions. Job descriptions are to be interpreted in their entirety
and in relation to others in the classification plan. Particular phrases or examples are not to be
isolated and treated as a full definition of the class. Job descriptions are deemed to be descriptive
and explanatory of the kind of work performed and not necessarily inclusive of all duties
performed. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-205. Use of the Classification Plan. The classification plan is to be used: as a guide in
recruiting and examining candidates for employment, in determining lines of promotion and
developing employee training programs, in determining wages or salaries to be paid for various
types of work, in determining personal service items in departmental budgets, and in providing
uniform job terminology understandable by all City officers and employees and by the general
public. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-4
4-206. Administration of the Classification Plan. The City Administrator is charged
with maintaining the classification plan of the City so that it will reflect the duties performed by
each employee in the service of the City and the class to which each position is allocated. It is the
duty of the City Administrator to examine the nature of the position classes, make such changes
in the classification plan as are deemed necessary by changes in the duties and responsibilities of
existing positions, and periodically review the entire classification plan and recommend to the
Board of Mayor & Aldermen appropriate changes in allocations or in the classification plan
itself. The City Administrator may delegate any or all of these duties and responsibilities to the
Human Resources Director or another designee. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-207. Allocation of Positions. Whenever a new position is established or duties of an
old position change, the respective department director shall submit in writing a comprehensive
job description listing in detail the duties of such a position. The City Administrator shall
investigate, or shall cause the Human Resources Director, or another designee to investigate the
actual or suggested duties, and shall recommend to the Board of Mayor & Aldermen the
appropriate class allocation or the establishment of a new class. The Board of Mayor &
Aldermen shall then consider approving such recommendations. (Ordinance #2011-01, February
2011)
4-208. Request for Reclassification. Any employee who considers his or her position to
be improperly classified shall submit his or her request to the immediate supervisor who shall
review the justification for the request. If the department director or supervisor finds that there is
merit in the request, he or she shall immediately transmit his or her recommendation to the City
Administrator. If the department director/supervisor finds the request is not justified, he or she
shall advise the employee of his or her decision and also the employee’s right to forward the
request to the City Administrator. The City Administrator’s decision regarding a request for
reclassification may be appealed to the Employee’s Review Board in accordance to the grievance
procedures. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-5
CHAPTER 3
COMPENSATION PLAN
Section
4-301. Purpose.
4-302. Composition of the Pay Plan.
4-303. Maintenance of the Pay Plan.
4-304. Use of the Pay Ranges.
4-305. Rates of Pay.
4-306. Minimum Wages.
4-307. Call Back.
4-308. Overtime Pay and Compensatory Leave.
4-309. Schedule of Pay Plan.
4-301. Purpose. The pay plan, as approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, is
intended to provide fair wage and salary compensation for all classes in the classification plan in
consideration of pay ranges for other classes, general pay rates for similar employment in private
establishments and other public jurisdictions in the area, including the Cocke County
government and State of Tennessee, municipalities of comparable population, cost of living data,
the financial condition of the City, and other factors. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-302. Composition of the Pay Plan. The pay plan for the City shall include minimum and
maximum pay rates for each existing pay grade (position classification). (Ordinance #2011-01,
February 2011)
4-303. Maintenance of the Pay Plan. The City Administrator shall every two (2) years
make, or shall cause the Human Resources Director or other designee, from time to time to
make, comparative studies of all factors affecting the level of pay ranges and will recommend to
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen such changes in the pay ranges as appear to be in order. Such
adjustments will be made by increasing or decreasing the pay ranges. The pay rate for each
employee will be adjusted in conformity with the pay range for that class as approved by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-304. Use of the Pay Ranges. Pay ranges are intended to furnish administrative flexibility
in recognizing individual differences among positions allocated to the same class and to provide
employee incentives. The minimum rate established for a class is the normal hiring rate except
in those cases where unusual circumstances (such as inability to fill the position at the hiring
rate or exceptional qualifications of an applicant) appear to warrant employing an individual at a
higher rate in the pay range. Any department director desiring to appoint an applicant to start at
a rate of pay above the minimum must submit a written justification to the City Administrator
for approval. Written authorization from the City Administrator must be obtained by the
4-6
personnel/finance department before any applicant may be appointed at a starting rate of pay
above the minimum for the corresponding position’s pay range. (Ordinance #2011-01, February
2011)
4-305. Rates of Pay. The City Administrator shall establish, within the classification and
pay plans approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, all rates of pay paid by the City. Due
consideration shall be given to duties performed, responsibilities, technical knowledge and
skills required to perform the work satisfactorily, the labor market, and availability of people
having the desired qualifications. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-306. Minimum Wages. In accordance with the FLSA, no employee shall be paid less
than the federal minimum wage unless they are expressly exempt from the minimum wage
requirement by FLSA regulations. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-307. Call Back. Employees not exempt from the overtime pay provisions of the FLSA
who are called back to work after the normal work shift has ended and after having left the work
premises to perform previously unscheduled work for the City shall be guaranteed pay for a
minimum of four (4) hours, all of which shall count as time worked for purposes of calculating
overtime. No such guaranteed minimum shall be provided to employees who are exempt from
the overtime provisions of the FLSA and who are called back to work. . (Ordinance #2011-01,
February 2011)
4-308. Overtime Pay and Compensatory Leave. Employees who are not exempt from the
overtime pay provisions of the FLSA shall be compensated at a rate of one and one-half (1-½)
times the employee’s regular rate of pay for any overtime work. Overtime work for non-exempt
employees of the City is any time worked for the City over and above the FLSA overtime
threshold. Except for shift personnel of the fire and police departments, overtime is paid for any
time worked over 40 hours during the seven day workweek. Shift personnel of the fire
department are paid overtime for any time worked in excess of 212 hours per 28-day work
period. Shift personnel of the police department are paid overtime for any time worked in excess
of 171 hours per 28-day work period. Leave with pay other than sick leave and compensatory
leave taken during a particular work period is included in time worked during that same work
period for purposes of computing overtime. No other form of leave taken during a particular
work period is included in time worked during that same work period for purposes of computing
overtime. Overtime work must be authorized in advance by the employee’s supervisor or
department director or the City Administrator. Overtime worked by these same employees may
alternatively be paid with compensatory leave, accrued at a rate of one and one-half (1-½) times
the overtime worked, according to the employee’s preference expressed to his or her supervisor
prior to working the overtime and subject to the supervisor’s approval. No more than 240 hours
of unused compensatory leave may be accumulated by any non-exempt employee. (Ordinance
#2011-01, February 2011)
4-7
4-309. Schedule of Pay Plan. A system of merit (performance) pay is established to
provide just compensation to employees based upon individual job performance within the
current classification. Annually, a budget appropriation shall be made for merit adjustments if
fiscal conditions allow. Recommendations for fair and equitable distribution of merit funds shall
be made by the City Administrator, or designee. Evaluations will be completed by the
employee’s supervisor/director on a semi-annual basis, in November and May respectively. A
report on the evaluations will be submitted to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to determine the
dollar amount and effective date of merit funds to be provided for the employees in the fiscal
year budget. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-8
CHAPTER 4
RECRUITMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
Section
4-401. Edibility.
4-402. Notification/Advertising.
4-403. Acceptance of Applicants.
4-404. Physical Examinations.
4-405. Minimum Age.
4-406. Types of Employees.
4-407. Appointments, Promotions, Demotions and Transfers.
4-408. Probationary Period.
4-409. Hours of Work.
4-410. Outside Employment.
4-411. Attendance.
4-412. Business Interests.
4-413. Political Activity.
4-401. Eligibility. Individuals shall be recruited from a geographic area as wide as is
necessary to assure obtaining well-qualified applicants for the various types of employment
positions. Recruitment, therefore, shall not be limited to residents of the City of Newport. In
cases where residents and non-residents are equally qualified for positions presently vacant, the
resident may receive first consideration in filling such vacancies. (Ordinance #2011-01, February
2011)
4-402. Notification/Advertising. The City Administrator, or designee, shall prepare
recruiting notices to publicize vacancies and to secure applicants for vacant positions. Such
various media of publicity shall be used as might be expected to bring notice of vacancies to as
many qualified positions as possible. Vacancies or new positions shall first be advertised to
present city employees. Local advertising shall follow. Regional or national advertising may be
conducted as appropriate for the position. Minimum qualifications as required by the nature of
the work to be performed will be included in all notices. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-403. Acceptance of Applicants. Applications for employment shall be accepted when
vacancies exist. As a result of a single application, an applicant shall be considered for all
classes of positions in which his/her principal qualifications might profitably be used. Such
information may be required as is deemed necessary in order to judge the applicant's fitness.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-404. Physical Examinations. Every prospective employee may be given a physical
examination by a licensed physician designated by the City Administrator prior to the time
4-9
he/she is hired, to determine if he/she meets necessary physical fitness standards. The cost of
this physical examination shall be borne by the City. Applicants determined to be physically or
mentally unfit for service shall not be considered for appointment. All employees of the City
may, during the period of their employment, be required by their Department Director and with
the approval of the City Administrator, or designee, to undergo periodic medical examinations to
determine their physical and mental fitness to perform the work of the position in which they are
employed. This periodic medical examination shall be at no expense to the employee.
Determination of physical or mental fitness will be by a physician designated by the City
Administrator. When an employee of the City is reported by the examining physician to be
physically or mentally unfit to perform work in the position for which he/she is employed, the
employee may, within five (5) days from the date of his/her notification of such determination,
indicate in writing to the City Administrator his/her intention to submit the question of his/her
physical or mental unfitness to a physician of his/her own choice. In the event there is a
difference of opinion between the examining physician and the physician chosen by the
employee, a physician shall be mutually agreed upon and designated by the examining physician
and the physician chosen by the employee. The third physician's decision shall be final and
binding as to the physical or mental fitness of the employee. The City government shall pay its
physician, the employee shall pay his/her physician, and the third physician shall be paid by the
party whose contentions shall not have been upheld. An employee determined to be physically or
mentally unfit to continue in the position in which he/she is employed may be demoted in
accordance with these rules or separated from the City's service. (Ordinance #2011-01, February
2011)
4-405. Minimum Age. The Fair Labor Standards Act requires that employees of State and
local governments be at least sixteen (16) years of age for most non-farm jobs, and at least
eighteen (18) to work in non-farm jobs declared hazardous by the Federal Secretary of Labor.
The City of Newport’s standards require that an applicant for Police Officer must be 21 years of
age. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-406. Types of Employees.
1. Full Time Employee (per hour) - A regular full-time employee is a person paid an annual
rate and who is subject to all conditions of employment and receiving all benefits.
Regular employees serve a six (6) month probationary period, during which time they
may be dismissed without recourse.
2. Part Time Employee - Regular part-time employees work part-time hours on a regular
basis. Part-time employees are not eligible for City benefits. Part- time employees
receive no benefits except coverage under Worker's Compensation.
Temporary Employee and/or Part Time Employee - A temporary employee is an employee who
works full-time but not exceeding twelve (12) months per term of employment and who is paid
on a per day or per hour basis. Temporary employees are not subject to all the conditions of
employment but shall be fully capable of performing the assigned duties, although they receive
4-10
no benefits except coverage under Worker's Compensation. (Ordinance #2011-01, February
2011)
4-407. Appointments, Promotions, Demotions and Transfers. The City Administrator
has the authority to appoint, promote, demote, transfer, suspend, and remove all non-exempt
officers and employees of the City of Newport. All vacancies in the City's government service
shall be filled by original appointment, re-employment, promotional appointment, provisional
appointment, transfer or demotion.
Appointments to positions with the City government fall into three categories. They are:
1. Original Appointment - When a non-employee passes all the tests of employability
and is offered employment.
2. Provisional Appointment - When the city is unable to fill a vacancy because of an
insufficient number of applicants, the City Administrator may authorize the
Department Director to fill the vacancy by a provisional appointment. Provisional
appointments require the prior approval of the City Administrator, and no payment
shall be made for services rendered by the appointee prior to the appointment.
3. Emergency Appointments - The City Administrator may authorize the appointment
of any qualified person to a position to prevent the stoppage of public business or
loss or serious inconvenience to the public. Emergency appointments shall be
limited to a period not to exceed ninety (90) days in any twelve (12) month period.
A promotion is an assignment of employee from one position to another which has a
higher maximum rate of pay, rank and responsibility. Vacancies in positions above the lowest
rank in any category in the classified service shall be filled as far as practical by the promotion of
employees in the service. Promotions in every case must involve a definite increase in duties and
responsibilities and shall not be made merely for the purpose of affecting an increase in
compensation. When an employee in one classification is promoted to a position in another
classification and the employee's current rate of pay is less than the minimum rate for the new
position, the employee's salary shall be raised to that minimum rate. When the employee's salary
falls above the new minimum rate, a percentage increase as determined by the City
Administrator shall be given. When an employee desires to transfer from one department to
another, it must be agreeable to both departments involved and approved by the City
Administrator. An employee who transfers from one municipal government department to
another will retain and carry forward all benefits earned or accrued or both as of the date of
transfer. As a general rule lateral transfers require no increase in compensation.
A demotion is an assignment of an employee from one position to another which has a lower
maximum rate of pay, rank and responsibility. An employee may be demoted for any of the
following reasons:
1. Because his/her position is being abolished and he/she would otherwise be laid off;
2. Because his/her position is being reclassified to a higher grade and the employee
lacks the necessary skill to successfully perform the job,
3. Because there is a lack of work;
4. Because there is a lack of funds;
5. Because another employee, returning from authorized leave granted in accordance
with the rules on leave, will occupy the position to which the employee is currently
assigned;
4-11
6. Because the employee does not possess the necessary qualifications to render
satisfactory service to the position he/she holds;
7. Because the employee voluntarily requests such a demotion and it is available.
When an employee in one classification is demoted to a position in a lower classification and the
employee rate of pay is higher than the minimum rate for the new position, the employee's salary
shall be reduced to the classification rate. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-408. Probationary Period. The probationary or working test period, is an integral part
of the examination process, and shall be utilized for the following:
1. Closely observing the employee's work.
2. Securing the most effective adjustment of a new or promoted employee to his/her
position.
3. Rejecting any employee whose performance does not meet work standards.
The probationary period for all regular appointments shall be for a period of six (6) months.
Department Directors may request an extension of any employee's probationary period with the
prior approval of the City Administrator. In no event may a probationary period be extended
beyond twelve (12) months. During the probationary period the City Administrator shall require
the Department Director to report the observations of the employee's work and his/her judgment
of the employee's willingness and ability to perform the duties assigned. During the
probationary period the supervisor will inform the employee when his/her performance is
unsatisfactory and not meeting the probationary test requirements. (Ordinance #2011-01,
February 2011)
4-409. Hours of Work. The Department Director with the approval of the City
Administrator or designee shall establish hours of work per week for each position in the City’s
service which shall be determined in accordance with the needs of service and which shall take
into account the reasonable needs of the public who may be required to do business with various
city departments. The Department Director and City Administrator must always consider FLSA
regulations when establishing hours of work. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-410. Outside Employment. The City Administrator and Department Director shall not
grant authorization for outside employment if the work is likely to interfere with the satisfactory
performance of the officer's or employee's duties, or is incompatible with his/her City
employment, or is likely to cast discredit upon or create embarrassment for the City. (Ordinance
#2011-01, February 2011)
4-411. Attendance. Punctual and regular attendance is necessary for the efficient operation
of the City. Employees unavoidably late or absent from work due to illness or other cause, must
notify their supervisor as early as possible explaining the reason for the absence and, if possible,
an anticipated return to work date. Failure to notify one's supervisor of absences may result in
disciplinary action. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-12
4-412. Business Interests. No officer or employee of the City shall have any financial
interest in the profits of any contract, service, or other work performed by the City; or shall
personally profit directly or indirectly from any contract, purchase, sale, or service between the
City and any person or company; or personally, or as an agent, provide any surety, bail, or bond
required by law or subject to approval by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. No officer or
employee shall accept any free or preferred services, benefits, or concessions from any person or
company. Any official or employee who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
misconduct. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-413. Political Activity. An employee may individually exercise his/her right to vote and
privately express their political views as citizens. However, no employee shall solicit political
campaign contributions or engage in or actively participate in any City political campaign.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-13
CHAPTER 5
BENEFITS
Section
4-501. Sick Leave Policy.
4-502. Vacation Leave.
4-503. Holidays.
4-504. Bereavement Leave.
4-505. Jury Duty.
4-506. Court Witness.
4-507. Military Leave.
4-508. Maternity Leave.
4-509. Family Medical Leave Policy.
4-510. Retirement System.
4-511. Hospitalization/Life Insurance.
4-512. Death.
4-513. Occupational Disability/Worker’s Compensation.
4-514. Educational Incentive.
4-515. Retirement Bonus.
4-516. Retirement Hospitalization Insurance.
4-517. Longevity Pay.
4-501. SICK LEAVE POLICY. Sick leave benefits are based annually for the period of
December 1 through November 30th. All newly hired employees shall be temporary employees
for a period of 90 days and will not accumulate any hours of sick leave benefits during the 90
day period. After a temporary employee is hired as a full-time employee by council, then
employee will acquire 10 hours (14 hours for fire department employees that work a 24 hour
shift) of sick leave benefits for each full month worked following the full-time hire date. Newly
hired Police Officers have a 180 day probationary period. However, they shall begin
accumulating 10 hours of sick leave benefit for every full month worked after 90 days from their
initial employment date. Newly hired Fire Fighters have a 180 day probationary period.
However, they shall begin accumulating 14 hours of sick leave benefit for every full month
worked after 90 days from their initial employment date.
After 1 full year of service, full time employees will receive 120 hours of sick leave on
December 1 of each year. The fire department employees that work a 24 hour shift with one full
year of service will receive 168 hours on December 1 of each year. In all occurrences of sick
leave, the employee is required to notify his/her Department Head of his/her absence at the
beginning of the employee’s shift. Sick leave must be taken in four hour increments. Sick leave
benefits will commence on the first day of such absence and shall continue for as long as sick
leave credit remains.
Generally, employees become eligible to use sick leave when: employees are
incapacitated by sickness or non-job related injury, for medical, dental, or optical diagnosis and
treatment; for necessary care and attendance of a member of the employee's immediate family
(as defined below) when such care is unavailable from other sources and when approved by the
4-14
Department Head. The necessity for this care may require substantiation from a physician.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: husband/wife, father/mother/step-parents, brother/sister, son/daughter,
father-in-law/mother-in-law, grandfather/grandmother, and legal foster parents and children.
After exposure to a contagious disease, when certified by a qualified doctor's certificate, that
the employee may jeopardize the health of others.
To prevent the abuse of the sick leave policy, the City Administrator/Department
Directors are required to satisfy themselves that the employee is genuinely ill before approving
sick leave. Any absence may require a doctor's certificate, and any absence in excess of 24 hours
may also require a doctor's certificate to return to work, (if, in the opinion of the City
Administrator/Department Directors, deems that such action is appropriate.)
At the end of November any unused sick time will be handled as follows: All unused sick
time totaling 80 hours or fewer will be carried over and held in reserve (accumulated) for future
use. The remainder of the unused 120 hours, greater than 80 hours will be paid to the employee
at his/her base hourly rate.
EXAMPLES:
hours used hours paid to employee hours accumulated
0 40 80
8 32 80
16 24 80
24 16 80
32 8 80
40 0 80
48 0 72
56 0 64
64 0 56
72 0 48
80 0 40
88 0 32
96 0 24
104 0 16
112 0 8
120 0 0
***NOTE***
UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCE SHOULD TIME PAID EXCEED ONE WEEK’S
SALARY.
The maximum total of sick time that an employee will be allowed to accumulate will be 240
hours and can only be used after his/her 120 hours for that year have been exhausted. Any and all
usage of accumulated sick time must be accompanied by a doctor's certificate deeming medically
necessary or approved by the City Administrator. After the accumulative reserve maximum of
240 hours has been reached, then any future carryover time will be accumulated by the same
method and applied toward service credit upon retirement. In accordance with title 8, section 34
through 37 of the Tennessee code annotated. (This permits employees, upon retirement, who
have any unused accumulated sick leave to be credited with such accrued leave as creditable
service.) In the event of confirmed serious illness or injury the employee's 240 hours of reserve
4-15
time is used up, the employee may borrow days from those already set aside for service time
credit. This must be recommended by the Department Director and is subject to review by the
Board of Mayor and Alderman. Employees may not borrow from future sick leave, nor can they
transfer sick days from another employee. An employee, upon exhausting all available sick
leave must use available Vacation time or take leave without pay. If at any time the employee
does use his/her reserve sick time in whole or in part, any future carryover days will be applied
to the sick pay accumulative reserve plan until it once again reaches the maximum of 240 hours
before any carryover time begins again to accumulate for service time credit upon retirement.
After an employee is on sick leave for a minimum of nine (9) consecutive weeks, and has
exhausted all available sick time, he/she will be placed on special leave without pay. Should
he/she be able to return to work within one year of the date that he/she was put on leave without
pay, upon presentation of certification by a doctor, he/she will return to work at the same
position, pay and rank as was held before his/her leave began.
Female employees, who have been employed full-time for at least one (1) year with the
City of Newport and who gives at least three (3) months advance notice of her anticipated date of
departure, length of maternity leave, and intention to return to full-employment, will be allowed
to take available sick leave, time not to exceed 240 hours. If additional time is necessary, she
may take any available vacation time or take time off without pay. Maximum maternity leave
shall not exceed three (3) months.
Employees who are terminated from City employment shall not be paid for any accrued
sick leave and shall lose all accrued sick leave credit. In all other circumstances of separation of
City employment (resignation, lay-off, or retirement) the employee will receive payment of the
unused 120 hours. Greater than 80 hours for that year, pro-rated to the number of months worked
in that year. All accumulative sick time and accumulated time set aside for retirement will be
forfeited. If at any time the sick leave policy is revised disallowing for the plan of accumulation
of sick time for future use, then all unused-accumulated sick time in reserve (240) hours
maximum shall automatically be added to those accumulated and set aside for service credit
upon retirement. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-502. Vacation Leave. All covered employees shall be credited with earned vacation
leave in accordance with the following schedule.
Completed Service Annual Vacation Credit:
1 year 40 hours (1 week)
2 years 80 hours (2 weeks)
5 years 120 hours (3 weeks)
10 years 160 hours (4 weeks)
15 years 200 hours (5 weeks)
20 years 240 hours (6 weeks)
The above schedule and credits are for uninterrupted service computed from the most recent date
of continuous employment. An employee shall not be entitled to take vacation until he/she has
completed six (6) months of service. Vacation leave may be taken as earned subject to the
approval of the Department Director who shall schedule vacations so as to meet the operational
requirements of the department. Employees leaving the City's employment for any reason will
4-16
receive any vacation credit earned as of the last day of employment. Temporary employees shall
not be entitled to vacation or sick leave. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-503. Holidays. The following legal holidays shall be observed by the City's full-time
employees (employees under 90-day temporary status are not eligible for holiday benefits):
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
President's Day
Good Friday (Friday before Easter)
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veteran’s Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving (Added 9 Sept 2006 – Res 2006-27)
Christmas Eve (Added 9 Sept 2006 – Res 2006-27)
Christmas Day
Employee's Birthday
Or any such other days as may be designated by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. When
a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed. When a holiday falls on a
Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed. If employee works on a holiday they are paid
for time worked, plus eight hours holiday pay. The police & fire department employees whose
shift falls on a holiday shall receive straight time for his regular shift, plus eight (8) hours holiday
pay at straight time. When a holiday falls during an officer's days off he/she shall receive eight
(8) hours at straight time holiday pay. Holiday pay is paid in December. Employees eligible for
any holiday benefits must be in a pay status (not away on leave without pay or scheduled shift
after a holiday in order to receive compensation for the holiday. Employees whose regular day
off falls on an observed holiday shall be compensated at a double time rate of pay. It shall be the
Department Heads' responsibility to report to the City Recorder the names, hours and dates of
employees who work holidays. This reporting shall be done as soon as possible but in no case
later than three workdays after the holiday. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-504. Bereavement Leave. A maximum of three (3) days paid leave will be granted to an
employee as the result of the death of a: parent, step-parent, legal guardian, parent-in-law,
grandparent, spouse, child or stepchild, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, grandchild.
and/or nephew/niece. Additional time taken will be charged to vacation leave. (Ordinance
#2011-01, February 2011)
4-505. Jury Duty. Leave with pay shall be authorized in order that a covered employee
may serve required jury duty, provided that such leave is reported in advance to the department
supervisor. In order to receive pay for such leave, the employee must pay over to the City the
4-17
money he or she receives for jury duty. Also, if the employee's services are not required by the
court and the employee is dismissed by the court for the remainder of the day, then said
employee will report to work as scheduled. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-506. Court Witness. If an employee is subpoenaed to court as a witness on a City matter
no leave time will be charged. If subpoenaed as a witness in a private matter, the employee must
use his/her vacation time or take the time off without pay or take compensatory time. (Ordinance
#2011-01, February 2011)
4-507. Military Leave. The City of Newport actively supports and encourages participation
of employees in the military reserve, state and National Guard programs. The following Rules
and Regulations apply to all employees who participate in the state, National Guard or reserve
armed forces program.
A. Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA). Passed by
Congress in October 1994 (and significantly updated in 1996 and 1998), Chapter 43 of Title 38,
U.S. Code. The Department of Labor is the enforcement authority for USERRA, and it processes
all formal complaints of violations of the Federal law. No law, policy, practice, etc. that would
diminish the rights established in USERRA takes precedence over the provisions of USERRA.
Conversely, USERRA does not supersede, nullify, or diminish any federal or state law, or
company policy, union agreement, practice or contract that provides greater rights or benefits to
service members.
The following is a brief summary of USERRA rights, benefits, and responsibilities.
1. Placing a 5-year limit on the cumulative length of time a person may serve in the
military and remain eligible for reemployment rights with the pre-service employer;
2. Requiring an individual to give written or verbal notice to their employer prior to
departure for military service;
3. Establishing time limits for reporting back to work, based on the length of time in the
uniformed service, rather than on the type of service, and requiring documentation of
such service, if available;
4. Providing for the continuation of employer provided health insurance (at the service
member's request) for an 18-month period, with payment of up to 102 percent of the
full premium by the service member;
5. Requiring that an employee's military service not be considered a break in
employment for pension benefit purposes, and providing that the person's military
service must be considered service with an employer for vesting and benefit accrual
purposes;
6. Providing that the U.S. Department of Labor Veterans' Employment and Training
Service (VETS) shall assist all employees, including federal government workers.
B. Significant changes in military leave of absence management include:
1. An employee no longer requests permission to be absent for military leave but rather
provides notification of pending military service.
2. There is no longer any differentiation between voluntary and involuntary service.
3. An employee cannot be required to use earned vacation or similar leave days for
4-18
military leave of absence.
4. Military service will not be counted as time away from the employer for retirement
purposes.
The Act seeks to ensure that members of the uniformed services are entitled to return to their
civilian employment upon completion of their service. They should be reinstated with the
seniority, status, and rate of pay they would have obtained had they remained continuously
employed by their civilian employer. The law also protects individuals from discrimination
in hiring, promotion, and retention on the basis of present and future membership in the
armed services.
C. Definitions. Section 4303 contains a number of definitions. "Service" includes active or
inactive duty under federal authority, but does not include state call-ups of members of the
Army or Air National Guard "Uniformed services" includes the active and Reserve
components of the Armed Forces, the Army and Air National Guard, the Commissioned
Corps of the Public Health Service, and any other category of persons designated by the
President in time of war or emergency.
D. Discrimination. USERRA prohibits discrimination in hiring, retention, promotions, or other
benefits of employment against a person because that person "is a member of, applies to be a
member of, performs, has performed, applies to perform, or has an obligation to perform
service in a uniformed service." Employees are protected from reprisal for exercising
USERRA rights or anyone who assists in the exercise of those rights by testifying or
otherwise participating in an investigation, even if that person has no military connection.
E. Eligibility. In order to qualify for reemployment rights following military service, the
employee must meet the following five eligibility criteria:
1. The Employee must have left a city full time job or a part time job that is continuous in
nature;
2. The Employee must have given notice that they were leaving to perform military service;
3. The Employee cumulative period of service must not have exceeded five years;
4. The Employee must have been released from service under honorable or general
conditions; and,
5. The Employee must have reported back to work or applied for reemployment within time
constraints prescribed by law.
i. If active duty is less than 31 days, the employee must report for the beginning of
the next full calendar work day after adequate “safe transportation time plus eight
hours rest” from the location of the release from active duty.
ii. If active duty time was 31 to 180 days, the employee must report back to work
within 14 days of release from active duty.
iii. If active duty service time was over 181 days, the employee must report for work
within 90 days of release from active duty.
The above times can be extended for up two years if the employee has a service
connected injury or illness and is hospitalized for or convalescing during that time period.
Medical evidence of status is required for extension.
Employees are NOT required to wait the time periods listed above for reinstatement.
They will be reinstated to active city employment at any time they report for work up to
the limits listed above.
F. Notice. Under USERRA, the employee (or an officer from the employee’s command) must
give the immediate supervisor advance notice (either written or verbal) of upcoming military
4-19
service of any type. The only exceptions to the notification requirement would be if the
giving of notice is precluded by military necessity (e.g. a classified recall) or if it is otherwise
impossible or unreasonable to give notice. These exceptions to the notice requirement are
expected to be very rare. Employees are requested to give as much advance notice as
possible.
G. Five-year limit. USERRA sets a 5-year cumulative limit on the amount of military leave an
employee can perform and retain reemployment rights with a given employer. There are
some important exceptions to the 5-year limit. If you are unable to obtain release or if service
is required to complete an initial period of obligated service, that time of service is exempt
(examples: An initial enlistment may last more than 5 years, such as for nuclear power
training. In this case, an employee retains reinstatement rights with the employer. If an
employee was hospitalized for or is convalescing from an illness or injury incurred in, or
aggravated during military service, the limit may be extended up to an additional 2 years.)
Drills (inactive duty training), annual training, involuntary active duty extensions (including
training certified as necessary), and recalls due to a war or national emergency are not
counted in the 5-year cumulative total.
USERRA establishes that reemployment protection does not depend on the timing,
frequency, duration, or nature of an individual's service. USERRA clarifies that while an
individual is performing military service, he or she is deemed to be on a furlough or leave of
absence and is entitled to the non-seniority rights accorded other individuals on nonmilitary
leaves of absence. If you were employed by the same employer both before and after
USERRA's effective date of December 12, 1994, duty that you performed under the previous
law will count against the USERRA 5-year limit.
H. Reemployment position. Employees returning from military service must be reemployed in
the job that they would have attained had they not been absent for military service (the longstanding
'escalator' principle) and with the same seniority, status and pay, as well as other
rights and benefits determined by seniority. Reasonable efforts must be made to enable
returning employees to refresh or upgrade their skills to enable them to qualify for
reemployment. If refresher training is not successful, USERRA provides that the employee
must be reinstated in a position that most nearly approximates that position originally held.
Employees who are disabled (temporarily or permanently) due to military service must also
be accommodated in a position most nearly approximating the original position.
I. Reemployment entitlements. Following a period of military service, if city employees meet
the eligibility criteria listed herein, employees have a number of specific entitlements.
1. They are entitled to prompt reemployment.
2. They are entitled to seniority, seniority-related benefits (including pension), status, and
rate of pay as if you were continuously employed during the military absence.
3. They are entitled to immediate reinstatement of health insurance for the employee and
previously covered dependents, with no waiting period and no exclusion of preexisting
conditions, except conditions determined by the Government to be service-connected.
4. They are entitled to training or retraining by the city if that is necessary to qualify the
employee for the reemployment. If the employee was disabled while on military duty, or a
disability is aggravated by military service, the city must make reasonable efforts to
accommodate the disability.
5. If their period of service was 181 days or more, city employees are protected from
discharge, except for cause, for one year.
4-20
6. If the service was for 31-180 days, the period of protection from discharge is 180 days.
J. Documentation. Following a period of service of 31 days or more, the employee must
provide documentation which establishes that:
1. Application for reemployment was timely;
2. The employee has not exceeded the cumulative 5-year limit; and,
3. The character of the employee’s service was "honorable" (i.e., you did not receive a
punitive type of discharge).
4. If the documentation is not readily available, or doesn't exist, the city will not deny
reemployment, but if documentation later becomes available that shows the employee did not
qualify for reemployment, the city may immediately terminate the employee. Forms of
documentation include a DD-214, endorsed orders, or a letter from the employee’s
command.
K. Health Care. If the period of service is 30 days or less, the employee pays the normal
employee cost, if any, for the coverage. USERRA provides that the employee may elect to
continue city-provided health insurance for a period up to the first 18 months of military
service. If the period of service is 31 days or more, the employee will be required to pay up
to 100 percent of the total premium. In addition to this special entitlement, employees are
also entitled to any non-seniority-related benefits that the city offers to employees on
nonmilitary leaves of absence (e.g. jury duty).
L. Pensions. Under USERRA, all pension plans in which benefits are earned for length of
service are protected.
M. Vacations. For a period of military service, the employee MAY ELECT to use any personal
vacation accrued with the city. The city will NOT require an employee to use vacation.
N. Assistance and enforcement. If an employee is a Reserve component member and experience
employment problems because of your military obligations, you should first talk with your
immediate supervisor. If that does not resolve the problem, notify your department director
or chief. If you continue to have problems, you may request a joint meeting between
yourself, your immediate supervisor, your department director or chief and the City
Administrator. If an issue remains unresolved, the city will contact the local ESGR
Ombudsman for mediation resolution.
In accordance with (USERRA) and local support for employees in military service, the
following specific benefits and responsibilities are established for City of Newport
reservists, state and national guard personnel.
A. Training & State Activations. Any full-time employee who is a member of the United States
Army Reserve, Navy Reserve, Air Force Reserve, Marine Reserve, National Guard, or any of
the Armed Forces of the United States, or a member of the Tennessee State Guard will be
granted military leave for any field training or active duty required (excluding extended
active duty) pursuant to provisions in TCA 8-33-109. Such leave will be granted upon
presentation of the employee's official order to the City Administrator. Pay differential
compensation for such leave will be for a period not exceeding one-hundred-sixty (160) work
hours in any one (1) calendar year plus such additional days as may result from any call to
active state duty pursuant to TCA 58-1-106. Military leave with pay shall NOT be charged
against the employee's accrued sick leave, vacation, or compensatory credits.
B. Approval of Military Leave of Absence. All employees activated for military service are
4-21
entitled to a military leave of absence from the City for such period necessary to perform
military service. The City Administrator will approve military leave without pay when the
employee presents official military orders; a copy of which will be placed in the personnel
file, submitted to payroll, and submitted to the department director, respectively.
C. Un-Used Military Leave Pay. When activated for regular military service (a reserve call-up
to active duty), the employee will be paid for all unused military leave (not exceeding one
hundred sixty (160) work hours in any one (1) calendar year) after submission of all
approved leave forms to payroll.
D. Pay Differential Make-up. If an employee is making less on bottom line based on a weekly
base pay from all sources of military pay than as a City employee the city will make up the
difference in pay up to 160 hours for 40 hour week employees and 224 hours for 56 hour
work week employee for fire department.
E. Holiday Pay. The employee will be paid for all accrued holiday pay earned to date of military
leave, after submission of all approved leave forms to payroll.
F. Vacation Pay. The employee, at his option, may elect to be paid for all, some, or none of his
accrued vacation leave. If requested by the employee, the employee will be paid for all
accrued vacation leave earned to date of military leave after submission of all approved leave
forms to payroll. This election must be made within the first thirty (30) days of placement on
the military leave of absence. Should the employee decide not to be paid, the balance of
accrued vacation leave remaining will be available for use by the employee upon
reinstatement to City payroll.
G. Accrual of Vacation Leave and Sick Leave After Placement on Military Leave of Absence:
Vacation and sick leave accrual shall continue to all personnel placed on a military leave of
absence for a period in excess of thirty (30) days, provided that the employee meets the
requirements of USERRA and requests reinstatement of employment upon release from
active duty in a timely manner.
H. Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System (TCRS): The City will re-establish TCRS
service credit on behalf of the employee within six (6) months of confirmation by TCRS
consistent with City policy, such service credit will be established upon return of the
employee to City service without cost to the employee.
I. Reinstatement. All employees returning from military service will be promptly reinstated to
City employment with such longevity, seniority, status, rank, and rate of pay as if
continuously employed throughout the period of military leave. Although not on City payroll
during the period of military service, all personnel will be reinstated to the rate of pay that
would include applicable cost-of-living adjustments, merit pay adjustments and other forms
of compensation authorized by the City Council.
J. Promotional Rosters. Employees on a departmental promotional roster at time of placement
on military leave of absence will be eligible for promotion although on military leave as long
as the promotional roster remains valid. Should the employee be promoted, the promotion
and applicable rate of pay will become effective upon the employees reinstatement to City
service.
K. Vacation Usage Upon Reinstatement. The City will allow the employee to utilize accrued
vacation leave upon reinstatement to City employment provided the employee complies with
reinstatement requirements outlined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment
Rights Act of 1994, as amended in 1996 and 1998 and such leave is approved
by the department head.
4-22
L. Medical Insurance. All employees activated will be maintained on the City’s group medical
insurance program for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. After that time frame, the
employee may choose to continue, at his own expense, COBRA health benefits for a period
not to exceed eighteen (18) months. This COBRA election must be made within sixty (60)
days of the effective date of military leave. Upon reinstatement of employment, group health
insurance is in immediate effect.
M. Group Life Insurance. The City will maintain at the City’s expense group life insurance on
all activated personnel for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The employee may have
the opportunity to convert such insurance to a private plan after that period, if that option is
available.
N. Responsibilities of Service Member. Responsibilities of the service member include:
a) COPY OF ANNUAL TRAINING SCHEDULE. Provide a copy of the unit’s annual
training schedule as soon as it is available to the employee’s immediate supervisor so that
work shift schedules can be established with minimum disruption to the department.
b) COPY OF ORDERS. Provide the immediate supervisor a copy of all orders of active
duty so that a copy can be placed in the employee’s personnel folder and proper pay and
benefits established.
c) SERVE WITH HONOR. Serve with honor while on active duty in accordance with
USERRA and meet the other employee responsibilities outlined in USERRA as listed
herein.
d) REPORT FOR REINSTATEMENT WITHIN TIME FRAMES LISTED IN USERRA.
(Resolution #2014-01, January 2014)
4-508. MATERNITY LEAVE.
TENNESSEE MATERNITY LEAVE ACT
Maternity/paternity leave is granted to employees for a maximum of sixteen (16) weeks,
with the first twelve (12) weeks of leave falling under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
and the remaining four (4) weeks as TN Maternity/paternity leave. Eligible employees must be
employed full-time for at least twelve (12) months (and 1250 hours) to receive
maternity/paternity leave.
The employee must provide at least four to six (4-6) weeks advance notice of his/her
anticipated date of departure, except in those cases where medical emergency prevents this
notice. The employee should state the length of his/her requested leave and detail the intention
to return to fulltime employment after the leave.
Employees may be required to use accrued leave (annual, sick, comp) during maternity/paternity
leave. Accrued leave and maternity/paternity leave are used at the same time—employees do not
take accrued leave first and then take maternity/paternity leave.
The purpose of this leave is to provide time off for pregnancy, childbirth, nursing, and/or
bonding with the infant. If the City finds that the employee pursued other employment
opportunities or worked part-time or full-time for another employer during the period of
maternity/paternity leave, then the City does not have to reinstate the employee at the end of the
leave period.
These four months includes the 12-weeks allowable under FMLA.
Leave Position Maximum Time Allowed
FMLA 12 weeks
4-23
TN Maternity Act 4 weeks
TOTAL 16 weeks
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-509. FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY.
Purpose – The purpose of this policy is to provide a family and medical leave policy in
compliance with Public Law 103-3, titled Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993. The
policy also provides the changes to FMLA that come as part of the National Defense
Authorization Act of 2008.
Eligibility - The Family and Medical leave policy is applicable to both male and female
employees who have worked at least 12 months for the City and who have worked at least 1,250
hours during the preceding 12-month period. Such employees are eligible for a maximum of 12-
26 weeks leave under the act. Special rules apply for husbands and wives employed by the same
employer, for highly compensated employees, and for local educational agencies. People who
are not covered include elected officials, political appointees, volunteers, independent
contractors, and legal advisors.
FMLA Circumstances - Employees may be eligible for Family and Medical Leave for one or
more of the following reasons:
1. For the birth and care of the newborn child of the employee
2. For placement with the employee of a son or daughter for adoption or foster care
3. To care for an immediate family member (spouse, child, or parent) with a serious health
condition
4. Medical leave when the employee is unable to work because of a serious health condition
5. To care for an immediate family member (spouse, son, daughter or parent) injured while
on active duty if that injury renders the service member unfit for military duty
6. To handle a “qualifying exigency” relating from an employee’s spouse or child being
called to active duty
Paid / Unpaid Leave - Family Medical Leave may be paid or unpaid. FML runs concurrently
with paid time off (i.e. sick, annual time). If the employee has the time available he/she may be
paid. If the employee does not have the time available or he/she exhausts paid time while out on
FML, the remainder of the approved leave will be unpaid. During periods of unpaid leave, an
employee may not accrue any additional leave.
Employees requesting medical leave or family leave due to serious illness or injury (of
themselves or eligible family members) must generally use their accumulated sick leave
followed by annual leave or compensatory time/floating holidays. Fathers requesting family
leave for the birth of a child or adoption/foster placement must first use their annual, followed by
unpaid time. The combination of sick leave, annual leave, floating holidays, and unpaid leave
may not exceed the total allowable leave under FMLA.
Guidelines - An eligible employee may take up to 12 weeks of FML in a 12-month period for the
birth of a child or the placement of an adopted or foster care child. Leave may also be taken to
care for one’s self, a child, spouse, or parent who has a serious health condition. The right to
take leave applies equally to male and female employees who are eligible. Eligible employees
may take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave to deal with family issues resulting from a spouse, son,
daughter or parent being called to active duty (including being notified of an impending call to
active duty).
4-24
Eligible family members of military personnel defined as the spouse, son, daughter,
parent or next of kin of a covered service member may take a maximum of 26 weeks leave under
FML to care for a wounded member of the armed forces. This includes family members of the
National Guard or Reserves who are undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, therapy or
other medical treatment for a “serious injury or illness”.
Serious health condition means an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition
that involves one of the following:
1. Inpatient care in a hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility, including any
period of incapacity or subsequent treatment.
2. A period of incapacity of more than three consecutive calendar days that also involves
treatment two or more times by a health care provider or treatment which results in a
regimen of continuing treatment under the supervision of the health care provider.
3. Any period of incapacity due to pregnancy or for prenatal care.
4. A chronic condition that requires periodic treatments, continues over an extended period
of time, and may cause episodic rather than a continuous period of incapacity.
5. A period of incapacity which is permanent or long-term due to a condition for which
treatment may not be effective, requiring continuing supervision of a health care provider.
6. Multiple treatments either for restorative surgery after an accident or other injury, or for
a condition that would likely result in a period of incapacity of more than three calendar
days in the absence of medical intervention or treatments, such as cancer, severe arthritis
or kidney disease.
Serious Injury or Illness for an Injured Service member is defined as a covered service member’s
injury or illness incurred in the line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces that may render
the service member medically unfit to perform the duties of the member’s office, grade, rank, or
rating. This could include medical treatment, recuperation, therapy, outpatient care and other
treatments for a serious injury or illness.
During periods of unpaid leave, an employee may not accrue any additional seniority or
similar employment benefits during the leave period.
Spouse / Same Employer - If spouses are employed by the same employer and eligible to take
leave for the birth or adoption of a child, their aggregate leave under FMLA is limited to 12
weeks. For example, if the father takes four weeks leave to care for a child, the mother would be
entitled to eight weeks leave, for a total of 12 weeks. If, however, the spouse experiences her
own serious health condition as a result of the pregnancy, both employees are entitled to the full
12 weeks.
Right to Return to Work - On return from FML, an employee is entitled to be returned to the
same position the employee held when leave commenced, or to an equivalent position with
equivalent benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment. An employee is entitled
to such reinstatement even if the employee has been replaced or his/her position has been
restructured to accommodate the employee’s absence.
If the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of the position because of a
physical or mental condition, including the continuation of a serious health condition, the
employee has no right to restoration to another position under the FMLA. The employer,
however, may be required by the Americans with Disabilities Act to offer the employee an
accommodation.
Notification and Scheduling - An eligible employee must provide the employer at least 30 days
advance notice of the need for leave for birth, adoption, or planned medical treatment when it is
4-25
foreseeable. This 30-day advance notice is not required in cases of medical emergency or other
unforeseen events, such as premature birth or sudden changes in a patient’s condition that require
altering scheduled medical treatment.
Parents who are awaiting the adoption of a child and are given little notice of the
availability of the child may also be exempt from this 30-day notice.
It is the local government’s responsibility to designate leave in writing as FMLA leave and to
notify the employee. Employees may not retroactively claim that leave was for FMLA. Failure
to provide notification will result in the leave not being designated as FMLA.
The employer will, if necessary, provide the FMLA leave notice in alternate formats.
Certification -The employer reserves the right to verify an employee’s request for family/medical
leave. If an employee requests leave because of a serious health condition or to care for a family
member with a serious health condition, the employer may require that the request be supported
by certification from the health care provider of either the eligible employee or the family
member, as appropriate. Failure to submit proper certification may result in a delay of FML
approval. If the employer has a reason to question the original certification, the employer may,
at the employer’s expense, require a second opinion from a different health care provider chosen
by the employer. The health care provider may not be employed by the employer on a regular
basis. If a resolution of the conflict cannot be obtained by a second opinion, a third opinion may
be obtained from another provider and that opinion will be final and binding.
Payment for the second opinion shall be borne by the employee. Payment for the third
shall be divided between the employee and the local government. This certification must contain
the date on which the serious health condition began; it’s probable duration, and appropriate
medical facts within the knowledge of the health care provider regarding the condition. The
certification must also state the employee’s need to care for the family member. Medical
certifications will be treated as confidential and privileged information under HIPAA and the
State’s Open Records laws as appropriate.
An employee may be required to report periodically to the employer the status and the
intention of the employee to return to work. Before return is granted, employees who have taken
unpaid leave under this policy may be required to furnish the employer with a medical
certification from the employee’s health care provider that the employee is able to resume work.
Failure to provide certification in a timely manner may result in delay or denial of FMLA.
Reduced and Intermittent Leave - FMLA Leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced
schedule when medically necessary as certified by the health care provider. Intermittent leave is
defined as whatever increment your system will accommodate. Intermittent or reduced leave
schedules for routine care of a new child can be taken only with the employer’s approval. The
schedule must be mutually agreed upon by the employee and the employer.
Employees on intermittent or reduced leave schedules may be temporarily transferred by
the employer to an equivalent alternate position that may better accommodate the intermittent or
reduced leave schedule.
Intermittent or reduced leave may be spread over a period of time longer than 12 weeks,
but it will not exceed the equivalent of 12 workweeks total leave in a 12-month period.
Restoration - Employees who are granted leave under the FMLA policy will be reinstated to an
equivalent or the same position held prior to the commencement of their leave. Certain highly
compensated key employees, who are salaried and among the 10 percent highest paid workers,
may be denied restoration.
4-26
Restoration may be denied if:
1. the employer shows that such denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous
economic injury to the employer’s operations;
2. the employer notifies the employee that it intends to deny restoration on such basis at the
time the employer determines that such injury would occur; and
3. in any case in that the leave has commenced, the employee elects not to return to work
within a reasonable period of time after receiving such notice
Employees voluntarily accepting a light duty assignment in lieu of continuing FMLA leave
maintain their right to restoration to the original or an equivalent job until the twelve (12) weeks
of FMLA leave has passed.
The 12-Month FMLA Period - The 12-month period during which an employee is entitled to 12
workweeks of Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) leave is measured as follows. An
employee is entitled to 12-26 weeks of leave during the 12-month period after the leave begins.
The next FML period will begin the first time the employee requests FML after the completion
of the previous 12-month period. (Note: The employer has the option of determining which
counting method will be used.)
Denial of FMLA Leave - If an employee fails to give timely, advance notice when the need for
FMLA leave is foreseeable, the employer may delay the taking of FMLA leave until 30 days
after the date the employee provides notice to the employer of the need for FMLA leave.
If an employee fails to provide, in a timely manner, a requested medical certification to
substantiate the need for FMLA leave due to a serious health condition, an employer may delay
continuation of FMLA leave until an employee submits the certificate. If the employer never
produces the certification, the leave is not designated as FML.
If an employee fails to provide a requested fitness-for-duty certification to return to work,
an employer may delay restoration until the employee submits the certification.
Employee Benefits While on FMLA - During periods of FMLA, the City will continue to
provide health insurance benefits at the employee rate. If premiums are current, the employer
will maintain health insurance benefits during periods of unpaid leave without interruption. Any
payment for premiums or other payroll deductible insurance policies must be paid by the
employee or the benefits may be terminated. The employer is obligated to reinstate benefits
upon an employee’s return to work.
The employer has the right to recover from the employee all health insurance premiums
paid during the unpaid leave period if the employee fails to return to work after leave.
Employees who fail to return to work because they are unable to perform the functions of their
job because of their own serious health condition or because of the continued necessity of caring
for a seriously ill family member may be exempt from this recapture provision at the local
government’s discretion.
FMLA Leave under this policy does not constitute a qualifying event that entitles an
employee to Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconstruction Act (COBRA) benefit; however, the
qualifying event triggering COBRA coverage may occur when it becomes clearly known that an
employee will not be returning to work. At that point, the employee ceases to be entitled to leave
under this policy and may be offered COBRA.
Workers’ Compensation While on FMLA - Workers’ Compensation injury/illness meets the
criteria for a serious health condition, therefore the workers’ compensation absence and the
FMLA leave entitlement will run concurrently. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-27
4-510. RETIREMENT SYSTEM. Full-time employees will be eligible for retirement
benefits under the Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System and the Social Security
Administration. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-511. HOSPITALIZATION/LIFE INSURANCE. Full-time employees have the option
of hospitalization insurance with the company currently under contract with the City at the time
of their full-time (following 90 day temporary employment status) employment. All full-time
employees receive life insurance, with the premium paid in full by the City. (Ordinance #2011-
01, February 2011)
4-512. DEATH. Upon the death of a full-time regular employee, his/her beneficiary shall
receive his/her next due payroll check, pay for all accrued vacation time, and complete assistance
in settling life and hospital insurance benefits. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-513. OCCUPATIONAL DISABILITY/WORKER'S COMPENSATION.
A. Regulations. - Employees shall report immediately any injury and/or illnesses arising out of
or in the course of their employment, however minor, to their supervisor. An accident report (1st
Report of Injury) shall be filled out by the supervisor and turned in to the Safety Director. Any
employee determined to have been able, but who fails, to make such a report within twenty-four
(24) hours shall not be eligible for occupational disability or injury leave. Drug test are required
for incidents and injuries whether medical treatment was administered or not.
B. When to Report. - When an employee is injured on the job, the Safety Director, or designee,
shall submit an accident report to the designated insurance agent and retain a copy in the OSHA
file. Where an accident causes serious bodily injury or death to an employee, the supervisor shall
immediately notify the City Administrator.
C. Where to Seek Medical Attention – Employees are required to see a doctor from a 3 doctor
panel designated by the City when an injury or illness occurs. In the event that an employee
goes to a physician not on this panel, the employee will have sole responsibility for the payments
incurred by such visits and the City will in no way be responsible for said payments.
D. All reported injuries arising out of and in the course of one’s employment shall be governed
by the Tennessee Worker’s Compensation Law. If an employee cannot temporarily return to
work as a result of a work-related injury, replacement wages [(based on 66.66 percent) of the
employees gross earnings [for prior 52 weeks including overtime] but not to exceed $867 a week
are issued by the City’s Workers Compensation Provider after 15 calendar days of absence due
to the injury. The City of Newport will cover these wages until the workers compensation
provider picks up the approved claim. If the absence is deemed medically necessary the
employee will receive compensation up until the workers compensation provider approves or
denies the claim. If the claim is approved indemnity compensation will be paid to the employee
by the provider. If the claim is denied the employee must utilize sick leave for all the time paid
up by the City. When the employee begins receiving compensation from the provider the
4-28
employee will not be allowed to utilize other leave time as a supplement to the workers
compensation benefit.
E. Employees on occupational disability leave due to an on-the-job injury will not be charged
sick leave or vacation leave during the period of convalescence. The employee shall continue to
accrue sick leave and vacation leave at the employee's regular rate while he/she is on
occupational disability or injury leave.
F. In all cases of occupational disability the responsibility of determining the character, degree
and potential duration of an injury shall rest with the licensed, practicing medical doctor(s)
designated by the City Administrator. The medical doctor(s) may make periodic examinations,
progress reports and recommendations as deemed necessary by the City Administrator, or
designee. At no time shall occupational disability leave extend beyond six (6) months unless
authorized by the City Administrator. Extensions shall not be authorized for any period in excess
of three (3) months at any one time, and shall not exceed a total of twelve (12) months from the
day following the injury. Should the employee be unable to return to work within twelve (12)
months following the injury, the employee may be subject to separation from employment.
G. If drug analysis results show that the employee was under the influence of an illegal or
narcotic drug above any quantitative level prescribed by a physician to the injured employee that
was not reported to the personnel department prior to the incident, workers compensation
benefits may be denied and disciplinary actions may be taken up to and including termination.
(Resolution #2014-01, January 2014)
4-514. EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE. In order to promote professionalism among city
employees the City of Newport will pay employees who have college credit Educational
Incentive pay at the end of the calendar year. The pay scale is as follows:
30 hours of college credit $250.00
60 hours of college credit or Associate Degree* $500.00
90 hours of college credit $750.00
Bachelors degree $1,000.00
*If employee has 60 hours of degree seeking college credit from a 4-year institution they will
receive $500.00. If employee has 60 hours of college credit from a 2-year institution but no
Associate Degree they will only receive $250.00. After employee obtains an Associate Degree
they will receive $500.00.
Employees must be hired on or before April 30th to be eligible for educational pay at the
end of the calendar year. Any employee hired after May 1st will not be eligible that year. All
credits must be earned from an accredited institution. If an institution is accredited for only two
years, then only two years of credit can be earned from that institution. An employee must bring
a copy of their transcript to the City Recorder by May 1st to receive credit for that particular
year. Any credit earned after this date will not be eligible for payment at the end of that year.
Educational pay will be paid in a single check in December of each particular year. The
Educational Incentive will not apply to part-time employees. If an employee who is eligible to
4-29
receive Educational Incentive Pay retires, they will receive 1/12 of their incentive pay for each
month worked since the last incentive pay check was issued to each eligible employee. If an
employee who is eligible to receive Educational Incentive Pay takes a leave of absence from their
employment, 1/12 of their educational incentive shall be deducted from the gross amount for each
month of leave taken. Any eligible employee who is on leave of absence at the time of payment
shall not receive this benefit. If an employee is dismissed or resigns from their employment, they
will not receive any Education Incentive pay. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-515. RETIREMENT BONUS.
A. Eligibility
1. Employees who retire with Full-service retirement as defined with TCRS AND:
Age 60 and vested with a minimum of ten (10) years of creditable service to the city.
Thirty (30) years of service at any age with at least ten (10) years creditable service to the
city.
2. Early retirement. Age 55 with twenty-five (25) years of creditable service with at least 10
years service to the city.
B. A retirement bonus is provided upon retirement by the City for service to the City as
follows:
1. Employees retiring with full service TCRS eligibility will be paid a bonus of $2,500, with
an additional bonus of $500 for 20 to 29 years of TCRS service, and another $500 bonus
for 30 years or more of service.
2. Employees retiring age 55 with twenty-five (25) years of creditable service TCRS and 10
years service to the city will be paid a bonus of $2,500.00.
3. Employees MUST be actively on city payroll upon retirement to qualify for city
retirement gift and any other approved city retirement benefits and must have at least 10
years service to the city.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-516. RETIREMENT HOSPITALIZATION INSURANCE. Any retiree, who retires
on or after July1, 2006 under the provisions of full service retirement as defined by TCRS and
listed in paragraph 5.15 A. subsection 1; who was actively on city payroll at retirement; and is at
least age 60 on the date of retirement with 10 or more years service with the city, is eligible for
continued Health Insurance benefits. Said benefits shall be the same health benefits as those
provided to employees except will not include vision, dental or life insurance, and shall be
provided until the retiree reaches the age of 65 or the age at which he or she is eligible for
Medicare health insurance coverage. If the city insurance carrier or benefit changes for
employees, the same change will be in effect for retirees.
On the first day of the month of Medicare health insurance eligibility, the city insurance
shall no longer be in effect. If the retiree fails to notify the city of Medicare health insurance
eligibility, and continues to receive health insurance benefits, then the retiree shall be held liable
to reimburse the city for all health insurance premiums received after eligibility plus legal
interest and costs associated with collection.
4-30
Both employee and family coverage shall be offered, with the city paying one hundred
percent (100%) of the monthly premium for retiree coverage only; with family or two-party
coverage being 100% the responsibility of the retiree. No dental; vision; or life insurance is
included for retirees or family members.
Employees leaving the employment of the City other than TCRS full or early retirement
age 62 rules as related previously shall be eligible to continue health insurance under COBRA
provisions and limitations upon the payment of the full premium plus allowable administrative
costs pursuant to COBRA laws and rules provisions. This insurance has a time limit governed
by federal law. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-517. LONGEVITY PAY. This policy applies only to full time employees. The
beginning date that an employee will be eligible for longevity pay will be the first month that an
employee is hired as a full time employee. The employee will receive ten dollars ($10.00) per
month from the time of his or her employment through the month of November. This is for the
first year of employment. The base pay for longevity will be one hundred twenty dollars
($120.00). An additional twenty four dollars ($35.00) for each year thereafter will be added to
the base pay. Should an employee separate his or her employment from the City of Newport
(quits or dismissed) before November 30th of any year, he or she will not receive any longevity
pay for that year. If an employee retires before November 30th of any year, his or her longevity
pay will be pro-rated of that year. The employee’s longevity pay for that year will be divided by
twelve (12) and that figure will be multiplied by the number of months worked during that year.
The longevity will be paid in December of each year. (Resolution 2011-18, August 2011)
4-31
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS POLICIES
Section
4-601. Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy.
4-602. Sexual Harassment.
4-603. Workplace Harassment.
4-604. Garnishment.
4-605. Personal Telephone Calls.
4-606. Fighting, Horseplay, Damaging Municipal Government Property.
4-607. Travel Policy.
4-608. Use of City Vehicles.
4-609. Personnel Records.
4-610. Time Sheets.
4-611. Special Leave.
4-612. Inclement Weather Leave.
4-613. Safety Equipment.
4-614. Footwear Policy.
4-615. Cellular/Wireless Communications
4-601. DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY.
A. Purpose. The city of Newport recognizes that the use and abuse of drugs and alcohol in
today's society is a serious problem that may involve the workplace. It is the intent of the city of
Newport to provide all employees with a safe and secure workplace in which each person can
perform his/her duties in an environment that promotes individual health and workplace
efficiency. Employees of the city of Newport are public employees and must foster the public
trust by preserving employee reputation for integrity, honesty, and responsibility.
To provide a safe, healthy, productive, and drug-free working environment for its employees
to properly conduct the public business, the city of Newport has adopted this drug and alcohol
testing policy effective 1 July, 2006. This policy complies with the:
1) Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988, which ensures employees the right to work in an alcoholfree,
drug-free environment and to work with persons free from the effects of alcohol and
drugs;
2) Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) rules, which require drug and alcohol testing for
persons required to have a commercial driver's license (CDL); Division of Transportation
(DOT) rules, which include procedures for urine drug testing and breath alcohol testing; and
3) The Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991, which requires alcohol and
drug testing of safety-sensitive employees in the aviation, motor carrier, railroad, pipeline,
commercial marine, and mass transit industries. In the case of this policy, the Omnibus
Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991 is most significant with its additional
requirement of using the "split specimen" approach to drug testing, which provides an extra
safeguard for employees.
4-32
The types of tests required are: pre-employment, transfer, reasonable suspicion, postaccident
(post-incident), random, return-to-duty, and follow-up.
It is the policy of the city of Newport that the use of drugs by its employees and impairment
in the workplace due to drugs and/or alcohol are prohibited and will not be tolerated. Engaging
in prohibited and/or illegal conduct may lead to termination of employment. Prohibited and/or
illegal conduct includes but is not limited to:
1) Being on duty or performing work in or on city property while under the influence of
drugs and/or alcohol;
2) engaging in the manufacture, sale, distribution, use, or unauthorized possession of
(illegal) drugs at any time and of alcohol while on duty or while in or on city property;
3) Refusing or failing a drug and/or alcohol test administered under this policy;
4) Providing an adulterated, altered, or substituted specimen for testing;
5) Use of alcohol within four hours prior to reporting for duty on schedule or use of alcohol
while on-call for duty; and
6) Use of alcohol or drugs within eight hours following an accident (incident) if the
employee's involvement has not been discounted as a contributing factor in the accident
(incident) or until the employee has successfully completed drug and/or alcohol testing
procedures.
This policy does not preclude the appropriate use of legally prescribed medication that does
not adversely affect the mental, physical, or emotional ability of the employee to safely and
efficiently perform his/her duties. It is the employee's responsibility to inform the proper
supervisory personnel of his/her use of such legally prescribed medication before the employee
goes on duty or performs any work. The employee is required a statement from physician
certifying the employee can meet demands of job description while on prescription medication.
In order to educate the employees about the dangers of drug and/or alcohol abuse, the city
shall sponsor an information and education program for all employees and supervisors.
Information will be provided on the signs and symptoms of drug and/or alcohol abuse; the
effects of drug and/or alcohol abuse on an individual's health, work, and personal life; the city's
policy regarding drugs and/or alcohol; and the availability of counseling. The City Administrator
or his designee has been designated as the municipal official responsible for answering questions
regarding this policy and its implementation.
All city of Newport property may be subject to inspection at any time without notice. There
should be no expectation of privacy in such property. Property includes, but is not limited to,
vehicles, desks, containers, files, and lockers.
B. Scope. Certain aspects of this policy may apply to full-time, part-time, temporary, and
volunteer employees of the city of Newport. The policy also applies to applicants for positions
requiring a CDL and other safety sensitive positions who have been given a conditional offer of
employment from the city of Newport.
C. Consent Form. Before a drug and/or alcohol test is administered, employees and applicants
will be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to
4-33
the laboratory, medical review officer (MRO), (City Administrator, etc.), or his/her designee.
The consent form shall provide space for employees and applicants to acknowledge that they
have been notified of the city's drug and alcohol testing policy.
The consent form shall set forth the following information:
1. the procedure for confirming and verifying an initial positive test result;
2. the consequences of a verified positive test result; and
3. the consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and/or alcohol test.
The consent form also provides authorization for certified or licensed attending medical
personnel to take and have analyzed appropriate specimens to determine if drugs or alcohol were
present in the employee's system.
D. Compliance with Substance Abuse Policy. Compliance with this substance abuse policy is a
condition of employment. The failure or refusal by an applicant or employee to cooperate fully
by signing necessary consent forms or other required documents or the failure or refusal to
submit to any test or any procedure under this policy in a timely manner will be grounds for
refusal to hire or for termination. The submission by an applicant or employee of a urine sample
that is not his/her own or is adulterated shall be grounds for refusal to hire or for termination.
E. General Rules. These are the general rules governing the city of Newport‘s drug and alcohol
testing program:
1. City employees shall not take or be under the influence of any drugs unless prescribed by the
employee's licensed physician. Employees who are required to take prescription and/or overthe-
counter medications shall notify the proper supervisory personnel before the employees
go on duty.
2. City employees are prohibited from engaging in the manufacture, sale, distribution, use, or
unauthorized possession of illegal drugs at any time and of alcohol while on duty or while in
or on city property.
3. All City of Newport property is subject to inspection at any time without notice. There
should be no expectation of privacy in or on such property. City Property includes, but is not
limited to, vehicles, desks, containers, files, and lockers.
4. Any employee convicted of violating a criminal drug statute shall inform the director of
his/her department of such conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) within
five days of the conviction occurring. Failure to so inform the city subjects the employee to
disciplinary action up to and including termination for the first offense. The city will notify
the federal contracting officer pursuant to applicable provisions of the Drug-Free Workplace
Act and the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act.
F. Drug Testing. An applicant or employee must carry and present a current and recent photo
ID to appropriate personnel during testing. Failure to present a photo ID is equivalent to refusing
to take the test. Employees and applicants may be required to submit to drug testing under six
separate conditions:
1. Types of Tests.
4-34
Pre-employment All applicants for employee status, who have received a conditional offer of
employment with the City of Newport, must take a drug test before receiving a final offer of
employment.
Post-Accident/Post-Incident Testing Following any workplace accident (incident) determined by
supervisory personnel of the City of Newport to have resulted in significant property or
environmental damage or in significant personal injury, including but not limited to a fatality or
human injury requiring medical treatment, each employee whose performance either contributed
to the accident (incident) or cannot be discounted as a contributing factor to the accident
(incident) and who is reasonably suspected of possible drug use as determined during a routine
post-accident (post-incident) investigation or who receives a citation for a moving violation
arising from the accident will be required to take a post-accident (post-incident) drug test.
Post-accident (post-incident) testing shall be carried out as soon as possible after the accident
or incident, but in no circumstances will the time period exceed 32 hours following the accident
(incident). Urine collection for post-accident (post-incident) testing shall be monitored or
observed by same-gender collection personnel at the established collection site(s).
In instances where post-accident (post-incident) testing is to be performed, the City of
Newport reserves the right to direct the medical review officer (MRO) to instruct the designated
laboratory to perform testing on submitted urine specimens for possible illegal/illegitimate
substances.
Any testing for additional substances listed under the Tennessee Drug Control Act of 1989 as
amended shall be performed at the urinary cutoff level that is normally used for those specific
substances by the laboratory selected.
Post-Accident (Post-Incident) Testing for Ambulatory Employees. Following all workplace
accidents (incidents) where drug testing is to be performed, unless otherwise specified by the
department head, affected employees who are ambulatory will be taken by a supervisor or
designated personnel of the City of Newport to the designated urine specimen collection site
within as soon as possible but not to exceed 32 hours following the accident. In the event of an
accident (incident) occurring after regular work hours, the employee(s) will be taken to the
(testing site) as soon as possible within the 32 hour limit. No employee shall consume drugs
prior to completing the post-accident (post-incident) testing procedures.
No employee shall delay his/her appearance at the designated collection site(s) for post-accident
(post-incident) testing. Any unreasonable delay in providing specimens for drug testing shall be
considered a refusal to cooperate with the substance abuse program of the City of Newport and
shall result in administrative action up to and including termination of employment.
Post-Accident (Post-Incident) Testing for Injured Employees. An affected employee who is
seriously injured, non-ambulatory, and/or under professional medical care following a significant
accident (incident) shall consent to the obtaining of specimens for drug testing by qualified,
licensed attending medical personnel and consent to the testing of the specimens. Consent shall
also be given for the attending medical personnel and/or medical facility (including hospitals) to
release to the medical review officer (MRO) of the City of Newport appropriate and necessary
4-35
information or records that would indicate only whether or not specified prohibited drugs (and
what amounts) were found in the employee's system. Consent shall be granted by each employee
at the implementation date of the substance abuse policy of the City of Newport or upon hiring
following the implementation date. Post-accident (post-incident) urinary testing may be
impossible for unconscious, seriously-injured, or hospitalized employees. If this is the case,
certified or licensed attending medical personnel shall take and have analyzed appropriate
specimens to determine if drugs were present in the employee's system. Only an accepted
method for collecting specimens will be used. Any failure to do post-accident (post-incident)
testing within 32 hours must be fully documented by the attending medical personnel.
2. Testing Based on Reasonable Suspicion. A drug test is required for each employee where
there is reasonable suspicion to believe the employee is using or is under the influence of drugs
and/or alcohol. The decision to test for reasonable suspicion must be based on a reasonable and
articulate belief that the employee is using or has used drugs. This belief should be based on
recent, physical, behavioral, or performance indicators of possible drug use. One supervisor who
has received drug detection training that complies with DOT regulations must make the decision
to test and must observe the employee's suspicious behavior. Supervisory personnel of the City
of Newport making a determination to subject any employee to drug testing based on reasonable
suspicion shall document their specific reasons and observations in writing to the City
Administrator or his designee within 24 hours of the decision to test and before the results of the
urine drug tests are received by the department. Urine collection for reasonable suspicion testing
shall be monitored or observed by same-gender collection personnel.
3. Random Testing. It is the policy of the City of Newport to annually random test for drugs at
least 50 percent of the total number of drivers possessing or obtaining a commercial driver's
license (CDL). In addition, at least 25 percent of all other safety sensitive category employees
will be randomly tested. A minimum of 15 minutes and a maximum of two hours will be allowed
between notification of an employee's selection for random urine drug testing and the actual
presentation for specimen collection. Random donor selection dates will be unannounced with
unpredictable frequency. Some may be tested more than once each year while others may not be
tested at all, depending on the random selection. If an employee is unavailable (i.e., vacation,
sick day, out of town, work-related causes, etc.) to produce a specimen on the date random
testing occurs, the City of Newport may omit that employee from that random testing or await
the employee's return to work.
4. Return-to-Duty and Follow-Up. Any employee of the City of Newport, who has violated the
prohibited drug conduct standards and is allowed to return to work, must submit to a return-toduty
test. Follow-up tests will be unannounced, and at least six tests will be conducted in the
first 12 months after an employee returns to duty. Follow-up testing may be extended for up to
60 months following return to duty. The employee will be required to pay for his or her returnto-
duty and follow-up tests accordingly. Testing will also be performed on any employee
possessing a CDL returning from leave or special assignment in excess of six months. In this
situation, the employee will not be required to pay for the testing.
4-36
5. Prohibited Drugs. All drug results will be reported to the medical review officer (MRO). If
verified by the MRO, they will be reported to the City Administrator or his designee. The
following is a list of drugs for which tests will be routinely conducted (see Appendix A for cutoff
levels): Alcohol, Amphetamines (e.g. speed), Barbiturates (e.g. Phenobarbital,),
Benzodiazepines, Cannabinoids (Marijuana), Cocaine, Ecstasy, Methadone, Opiates (e.g.
Codeine, Heroin, Morphine, Hydromorphine, Hydrocodone, Oxycontin, etc.), Phencyclidine
(PCP), and Propoxyphene. This list is not intended as an exhaustive inventory of every drug but
is an example of the types of substances, which will be routinely tested. The City may test for
any additional substances listed under the Tennessee Drug Control Act of 1989 and any future
amendments to the Act.
6. Drug Testing Collection Procedures. Testing will be accomplished as non-intrusively as
possible. Affected employees, except in cases of random testing, will be taken by a supervisor or
designated personnel of the City of Newport to a drug test collection facility selected by the City
of Newport (see Appendix B), where a urine sample will be taken from the employee in privacy.
The urine sample will be immediately sealed by personnel overseeing the specimen collection
after first being examined by these personnel for signs of alteration, adulteration, or substitution.
The sample will be placed in a secure mailing container. The employee will be asked to complete
a chain-of-custody form to accompany the sample to a laboratory selected by the City of
Newport to perform the analysis on collected urine samples.
7. Drug Testing Laboratory Standards and Procedures. All collected urine samples will be sent
to a laboratory that is certified and monitored by the federal Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS). As specified earlier, in the event of an accident (incident) occurring after
regular work hours, the supervisor or designated personnel shall take the employee(s) to the
(testing site) as soon as possible within 32 hours where proper collection procedures will be
administered. The Omnibus Act requires that drug testing procedures include split specimen
procedures. Each urine specimen is subdivided into two bottles labeled as a "primary" and a
"split" specimen. Both bottles are sent to a laboratory. Only the primary specimen is opened and
used for the urinalysis. The split specimen bottle remains sealed and is stored at the laboratory. If
the analysis of the primary specimen confirms the presence of drugs, the employee has 72 hours
to request sending the split specimen to another federal Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS) certified laboratory for analysis. The employee will be required to pay for his
or her split specimen test(s). For the employee's protection, the results of the analysis will be
confidential except for the testing laboratory. After the MRO has evaluated a positive test result,
the employee will be notified, and the MRO will notify the City Administrator or his designee.
8. Reporting and Reviewing. The City of Newport shall designate a medical review officer
(MRO) to receive, report, and file testing information transmitted by the laboratory. This person
shall be a licensed physician with knowledge of substance abuse disorders (see Appendix C).
a. The laboratory shall report test results only to the designated MRO, who will review them in
accordance with accepted guidelines and the procedures adopted by the City of Newport.
4-37
b. Reports from the laboratory to the MRO shall be in writing or by fax. The MRO may talk
with the employee by telephone upon exchange of acceptable identification.
c. The testing laboratory, collection site personnel, and MRO shall maintain security over all
the testing data and limit access to such information to the following: the respective
department head, the City Administrator or designee, and the employee.
d. Neither the City of Newport, the laboratory, nor the MRO shall disclose any drug test results
to any other person except under written authorization from the affected employee, unless
such results are necessary in the process of resolution of accident (incident)
investigations, requested by court order, or required to be released to parties (i.e., DOT,
the Tennessee Department of Labor, etc.) having legitimate right-to-know as determined
by the city attorney.
G. Alcohol Testing. An applicant or employee must carry and present a current and recent
photo ID to appropriate personnel during testing. Failure to present a photo ID is equivalent to
refusing to take the test. Employees and applicants may be required to submit to alcohol testing
under six separate conditions:
1. Types of Tests.
Post-Accident/Post-Incident Testing. Following any workplace accident (incident) determined
by supervisory personnel of the City of Newport to have resulted in significant property or
environmental damage or in significant personal injury, including but not limited to a fatality or
human injury requiring medical treatment, each employee whose performance either contributed
to the accident (incident) or cannot be discounted as a contributing factor to the accident
(incident) and who is reasonably suspected of possible alcohol use as determined during a
routine post-accident (post-incident) investigation or who receives a citation for a moving
violation arising from the accident will be required to take a post-accident (post-incident) alcohol
test. Post-accident (post-incident) testing shall be carried out within two hours following the
accident (incident).
Post-Accident (Post-Incident) Testing for Ambulatory Employees. Following all workplace
accidents (incidents) where alcohol testing is to be performed, unless otherwise specified by the
department head, affected employees who are ambulatory will be taken by a supervisor or
designated personnel of the City of Newport to the designated breath alcohol test site for a breath
alcohol test within two hours following the accident. In the event of an accident (incident)
occurring after regular work hours, the employee(s) will be taken to the (testing site) within two
hours. No employee shall consume alcohol prior to completing the post-accident (post-incident)
testing procedures. No employee shall delay his/her appearance at the designated collection
site(s) for post-accident (post-incident) testing. Any unreasonable delay in appearing for alcohol
testing shall be considered a refusal to cooperate with the substance abuse program of the City of
Newport and shall result in administrative action up to and including termination of employment.
Post-Accident (Post-Incident) Testing for Injured Employees. An affected employee who is
seriously injured, non-ambulatory, and/or under professional medical care following a significant
accident (incident) shall consent to the obtaining of specimens for alcohol testing by qualified,
4-38
licensed attending medical personnel and consent to specimen testing. Consent shall also be
given for the attending medical personnel and/or medical facility (including hospitals) to release
to the medical review officer (MRO) of the City of Newport appropriate and necessary
information or records that would indicate only whether or not specified prohibited alcohol (and
what amount) was found in the employee's system. Consent shall be granted by each employee at
the implementation date of the substance abuse policy of the City of Newport or upon hiring
following the implementation date.
Post-accident (post-incident) breath alcohol testing may be impossible for unconscious,
seriously injured, or hospitalized employees. If this is the case, certified or licensed attending
medical personnel shall take and have analyzed appropriate specimens to determine if alcohol
was present in the employee's system. Only an accepted method for collecting specimens will be
used. Any failure to do post-accident (post-incident) testing within two hours must be fully
documented by the attending medical personnel.
2. Testing Based on Reasonable Suspicion. An alcohol test is required for each employee where
there is reasonable suspicion to believe the employee is using or is under the influence of
alcohol. The decision to test for reasonable suspicion must be based on a reasonable and
articulate belief that the employee is using or has used alcohol. This belief should be based on
recent, physical, behavioral, or performance indicators of possible alcohol use. One supervisor
who has received alcohol detection training that complies with DOT regulations must make the
decision to test and must observe the employee's suspicious behavior.
Supervisory personnel of the City of Newport making a determination to subject any
employee to alcohol testing based on reasonable suspicion shall document their specific reasons
and observations in writing to the City Administrator within eight hours of the decision to test
and before the results of the tests are received by the department.
3. Random Testing. It is the policy of the City of Newport to annually random test for alcohol at
least 25 percent of the total number of employees. A minimum of 15 minutes and a maximum of
two hours will be allowed between notification of an employee's selection for random alcohol
testing and the actual presentation for testing. Random test dates will be unannounced with
unpredictable frequency. Some employees may be tested more than once each year while others
may not be tested at all, depending on the random selection. If an employee is unavailable (i.e.,
vacation, sick day, out of town, work-related causes, etc.) to be tested on the date random testing
occurs, the City of Newport may omit that employee from that random testing or await the
employee's return to work.
4. Return-to-Duty and Follow-Up. Any employee of the City of Newport who has violated the
prohibited alcohol conduct standards must submit to a return-to-duty test. Follow-up tests will be
unannounced, and at least six tests will be conducted in the first 12 months after an employee
returns to duty. Follow-up testing may be extended for up to 60 months following return to duty.
The employee will be required to pay for his or her return-to-duty and follow-up tests
accordingly. Testing will also be performed on any employee with a CDL returning from leave
4-39
or special assignment in excess of six months. In this situation, the employee will not be required
to pay for the testing.
5. Alcohol Testing Procedures. All breath alcohol testing conducted for the City of Newport
shall be performed using evidential breath testing (EBT) equipment and personnel approved by
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). (Note - Newport's own police
department cannot do this testing unless the test is required because of a traffic accident
(incident). Alcohol testing is to be performed by a qualified technician as follows:
Step One: An initial breath alcohol test will be performed using a breath alcohol analysis device
approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). If the measured
result is less than 0.02 percent breath alcohol level (BAL), the test shall be considered negative.
If the result is greater or equal to 0.04 percent BAL, the result shall be recorded and witnessed,
and the test shall proceed to Step Two.
Step Two: Fifteen minutes shall be allowed to pass following the completion of Step One above.
Before the confirmation test or Step Two is administered for each employee, the breath alcohol
technician shall insure that the evidential breath testing device registers 0.00 on an air blank. If
the reading is greater than 0.00, the breath alcohol technician shall conduct one more air blank. If
the reading is greater than 0.00, testing shall not proceed using that instrument. However, testing
may proceed on another instrument. Then Step One shall be repeated using a new mouthpiece
and either the same or equivalent but different breath analysis device. The breath alcohol level
detected in Step Two shall be recorded and witnessed. If the lower of the breath alcohol
measurements in Step One and Step Two is 0.04 percent or greater, the employee shall be
considered to have failed the breath alcohol test. Failure of the breath alcohol test shall result in
administrative action by proper officials of the City of Newport up to and including termination
of employment.
Any breath level found upon analysis to be between 0.02 percent BAL and 0.04 percent BAL
shall result in the employee's removal from duty without pay for a minimum of 24 hours. In this
situation, the employee must be retested by breath analysis and found to have a BAL of less than
0.02 percent before returning to duty with the City of Newport.
All breath alcohol test results shall be recorded by the technician and shall be witnessed by
the tested employee and by a supervisory employee of the City of Newport, when possible.
The completed breath alcohol test form shall be submitted to the City Administrator or designee.
H. Education and Training.
1. Supervisory Personnel Who Will Determine Reasonable Suspicion Testing
Training supervisory personnel who will determine whether an employee must be tested
based on reasonable suspicion will include at the minimum two 60-minute periods of training
on the specific, contemporaneous, physical, behavioral, and performance indicators of both
probable drug use and alcohol use. One 60-minute period will be for drugs and one will be
for alcohol.
The City of Newport will sponsor a drug-free awareness program for all employees.
2. Distribution of Information
4-40
The minimal distribution of information for all employees will include the display and
distribution of:
a) informational material on the effects of drug and alcohol abuse;
b) an existing community services hotline number, available drug counseling,
rehabilitation, and employee assistance programs for employee assistance;
c) the City of Newport policy regarding the use of prohibited drugs and/or alcohol; and
d) the penalties that may be imposed upon employees for drug abuse violations occurring
in the workplace.
I. Consequences of A Confirmed Positive Drug and/or Alcohol Test Result and/or Verified
Positive Drug and/or Alcohol Test Result.
Job applicants will be denied employment with the City of Newport if their initial positive
pre-employment drug test results have been confirmed/verified.
If a current employee's positive drug and alcohol test result has been confirmed, the
employee is subject to immediate removal from any safety-sensitive function and may be
subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. The city may consider the
following factors in determining the appropriate disciplinary response:
1) the employee's work history,
2) length of employment,
3) current work assignment,
4) current job performance, and
5) existence of past disciplinary actions.
However, the city reserves the right to allow employees to participate in an education and/or
treatment program approved by the city Employee Assistance Program as an alternative to or
in addition to disciplinary action at the City Administrator’s discretion. If such a program is
offered and accepted by the employee, then the employee must satisfactorily participate in
and complete the program as a condition of continued employment.
No disciplinary action may be taken pursuant to this drug policy against employees who
voluntarily identify themselves as drug users, obtain counseling and rehabilitation through
the city's Employee Assistance Program or other program sanctioned by the city, and
thereafter refrains from violating the city's policy on drug and alcohol abuse. However,
voluntary identification will not prohibit disciplinary action for the violation of city personnel
policy and regulations, nor will it relieve the employee of any requirements for return to duty
testing. However, voluntary disclosure must occur before an employee is notified of or
otherwise becomes subject to a pending drug and/or alcohol test. Employees found positive
during drug and/or alcohol testing under this policy are not eligible to voluntarily disclose
their condition and are subject to administrative action up to and including termination of
employment as specified elsewhere in this policy.
Refusing to submit to an alcohol or controlled substances test means that an employee:
1) fails to provide adequate breath for testing without a valid medical explanation after he or
she has received notice of the requirement for breath testing in accordance with the
provisions of this part;
4-41
(2) fails to provide adequate urine for controlled substances testing without a valid medical
explanation after he or she has received notice of the requirement for urine testing in
accordance with the provisions of this part; or
(3) engages in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing process. In either case the physician
or breath alcohol technician shall provide a written statement to the city indicating a
refusal to test.
J. Voluntary Disclosure Of Drug and/or Alcohol Use. In the event that an employee of the City
of Newport is dependent upon or an abuser of drugs and/or alcohol and sincerely wishes to
seek professional medical care, that employee should voluntarily discuss his/her problem
with the respective Department Director in private.
Such voluntary desire for help with a substance abuse problem will be honored by the City of
Newport. If substance abuse treatment is required, the employee will be removed from active
duty pending completion of the treatment.
Affected employees of the City of Newport may be allowed up to 30 consecutive
calendar days for initial substance abuse treatment as follows:
1. The employee must use all vacation, sick, and compensatory time available.
2. In the event accumulated vacation, sick, and compensatory time is insufficient to provide
the medically prescribed and needed treatment up to a maximum of 30 consecutive
calendar days, the employee will be provided unpaid leave for the difference between the
amount of accumulated leave and the number of days prescribed and needed for treatment
up to the maximum 30-day treatment period.
Voluntary disclosure must occur before an employee is notified of or otherwise becomes
subject to a pending drug and/or alcohol test.
Prior to any return-to-duty consideration of an employee following voluntary substance abuse
treatment, the employee shall obtain a return-to-duty recommendation from the substance
abuse professional (SAP) of the City of Newport. The SAP may suggest conditions of
reinstatement of the employee that may include after-care and return-to-duty and/or random
drug and alcohol testing requirements. The respective department head and City
Administrator of the City of Newport will consider each case individually and set forth final
conditions of reinstatement to active duty. These conditions of reinstatement must be met by
the employee. Failure of the employee to complete treatment or follow after-care conditions,
or subsequent failure of any drug or alcohol test under this policy will result in administrative
action up to and including termination of employment. These provisions apply to voluntary
disclosure of a substance abuse problem by an employee of the City of Newport. Voluntary
disclosure provisions do not apply to applicants. Employees found positive during drug and/or
alcohol testing under this policy are not eligible to voluntarily disclose their condition and are
subject to administrative action up to and including termination of employment as specified
elsewhere in this policy.
K. Exceptions. This policy does not apply to possession, use, or provision of alcohol and/or drugs
by employees in the context of authorized work assignments (i.e., undercover police
4-42
enforcement, intoxilyzer demonstrations). In all such cases, it is the individual employee's
responsibility to ensure that job performance is not adversely affected by the possession, use, or
provision of alcohol.
L. Definitions. For purposes of the drug and alcohol testing policy, the following definitions are
adopted:
Alcohol - The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or other low molecular
weight alcohols including methyl or isopropyl alcohol.
Alcohol Concentration - The alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in terms of grams of
alcohol per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a breath test.
Alcohol Use - The consumption of any beverage, mixture, or preparation, including any
medication, containing alcohol.
Applicant - Any person who has on file an application for employment or any person who is
otherwise being considered for employment or transfer to the police department, fire department,
or to a position requiring a commercial driver's license (CDL) being processed for employment.
For the purposes of this policy, an applicant may also be: a uniformed employee who has applied
for and is offered a promotion or who has been selected for a special assignment; a nonuniformed
employee who is offered a position as a uniformed employee; or an employee
transferring to or applying for a position requiring a CDL.
Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT) - An individual who instructs and assists individuals in the
alcohol testing process and operates an evidential breath testing device (EBT).
Chain of Custody - The method of tracking each urine specimen to maintain control from initial
collection to final disposition for such samples and accountability at each stage of handling,
testing, storing, and reporting.
Collection Site - A place where applicants or employees present themselves to provide, under
controlled conditions, a urine specimen that will be analyzed for the presence of alcohol and/or
drugs. Collection site may also include a place for the administration of a breath analysis test.
Collection Site Personnel - A person who instructs donors at the collection site.
Commercial Driver's License (CDL) - A motor vehicle driver's license required to operate a
commercial motor vehicle (CMV).
Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV) - Any vehicle or combination of vehicles meeting the
following criteria: weighing more than 26,000 pounds; designed to transport more than 15
passengers; transporting hazardous materials required by law to be placarded, regardless of
weight; and/or classified as a school bus.
Confirmation Test - In drug testing, a second analytical procedure that is independent of the
initial test to identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite that uses a different chemical
principle from that of the initial test to ensure reliability and accuracy. In breath alcohol testing, a
second test following an initial test with a result of 0.02 or greater that provides quantitative data
of alcohol concentration.
Confirmed Positive Result - The presence of an illicit substance in the pure form or its
metabolites at or above the cutoff level specified by the National Institute of Drug Abuse
4-43
identified in two consecutive tests that utilize different test methods and that was not determined
by the appropriate medical, scientific, professional testing, or forensic authority to have been
caused by an alternate medical explanation or technically insufficient data. An EBT result equal
to or greater than 0.02 is considered a positive result.
Consortium - An entity, including a group or association of employers or contractors, which
provides alcohol or controlled substances testing as required by this part or other DOT alcohol or
drug testing rules and that acts on behalf of the employers.
Department Director - The director or chief of a city department or his/her designee. The
designee may be an individual who acts on behalf of the director to implement and administer
these procedures.
DHHS - The federal Department of Health and Human Services or any designee of the secretary,
Department of Health and Human Services.
DOT Agency - An agency of the United States Department of Transportation administering
regulations related to alcohol and/or drug testing. For the City of Newport, the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) is the DOT agency.
Driver - Any person who operates a commercial motor vehicle.
EAP - Employee Assistance Program.
Employee - An individual currently employed by the City of Newport.
Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT) - An instrument approved by the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) for the evidential testing of breath and placed on
NHTSA's "Conforming Products List of Evidential Breath Measurement Devices."
FHWA - Federal Highway Administration.
Initial Test - In drug testing, an immunoassay test to eliminate negative urine specimens from
further analysis. In alcohol testing, an analytic procedure to determine whether an employee may
have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in a breath specimen.
Medical Review Officer (MRO) - A licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy)
responsible for receiving laboratory results generated by an employer's drug testing program who
has knowledge of substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to interpret and
evaluate an individual's confirmed positive test result together with his/her medical history and
any other relevant biomedical information.
Negative Result - The absence of an illicit substance in the pure form or its metabolites in
sufficient quantities to be identified by either an initial test or confirmation test.
NHTSA - National Highway and Traffic Safety Administration.
Refuse to Submit - Refusing to submit to an alcohol or controlled substances test means that a
driver: (1) fails to provide adequate breath for testing without a valid medical explanation after
he or she has received notice of the requirement for breath testing in accordance with the
provisions of this part; (2) fails to provide adequate urine for controlled substances testing
without a valid medical explanation after he or she has received notice of the requirement for
urine testing in accordance with the provisions of this part; or (3) engages in conduct that clearly
obstructs the testing process.
4-44
Safety-Sensitive Drivers - Employees in the aviation, motor carrier, railroad, and mass transit
industries.
Split Specimen - Urine drug test sample will be divided into two parts. One part will be tested
initially, the other will remain sealed in case a retest is required or requested.
Substance Abuse Professional - A licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy), or
a licensed or certified psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction
counselor (certified by the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors
Certification Commission) with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and
treatment of alcohol and controlled substances-related disorders.
M. 1994 Drug and Alcohol Test Standards
Drug Cutoff Level Cutoff Level
Screen (ng/ml) Confirmation (ng/ml)
Amphetamine (speed) 1000.00
Amphetamine 500.00
Methamphetamine 500.00
Cannabinoid (marijuana) 50.00 15.00
Cocaine (benzoylecgonine) 300.00 150.00
Opiate 300.00
Codeine 300.00
Morphine 300.00
Phencyclidine (PCP) 25.00 25.00
Alcohol .02 percent BAL 04 percent BAL
(Note - Additional substances listed under the Tennessee Drug Control Act of 1989 may be
tested at the cutoff level customarily used by the selected laboratory. Cutoff levels are subject to
change as DOT rules change.)
N. City Of Newport Employee Acknowledgment Form.
As an applicant or an employee, I have carefully read the City of Newport drug and
alcohol testing policy. I have received a copy of the City of Newport drug and
alcohol testing policy. I understand its requirements and agree without reservation to
follow this policy. As an applicant, I am aware that my offer of employment is
conditional upon the results of a drug and/or alcohol test. As an employee, I am
aware that I may be required to undergo drug and/or alcohol tests, that I will be
informed prior to the drug and/or alcohol test, and that I may be subject to immediate
dismissal if I refuse to take the test.
4-45
______________________________________ __________________________
Name of Applicant or Employee Social Security Number
______________________________________ ___________________________
Department Supervisor
______________________________________ ___________________________
(Signature of Applicant or Employee) Date
______________________________________ __________________________
(Signature of Witness) Date
O. City Of Newport Drug/Alcohol Testing Consent- Acknowledgment Form
As an applicant or an employee with the City of Newport, I hereby consent to and
acknowledge that I am scheduled to undergo drug and/or alcohol testing. The test for
alcohol will be a breath analysis test. The drug test will involve an analysis of a urine
sample, which I will provide at a designated site. The purpose of the test will be to test for
the presence of the following substances: amphetamines, marijuana, cocaine, opiates, PCP,
alcohol, and/or any additional drugs listed in the Tennessee Drug Control Act. I authorize
qualified personnel to take and have analyzed appropriate specimens to determine if drugs
and/or alcohol are present in my system. I acknowledge that the drug/alcohol screen test
results will be made available to the testing laboratory, medical review officer (MRO), the
City Administrator, or his/her designee. As an applicant, I am aware that a confirmed and
verified positive drug/alcohol test result will rescind my conditional offer of employment.
As an employee, I am aware that a confirmed and verified positive test result may lead to
disciplinary action up to and including immediate dismissal. I will present a copy of this
form to the collection site when I report for my scheduled drug/alcohol test. I also
understand that failure to provide adequate breath for testing without a valid medical
explanation, failure to provide adequate urine for controlled substances testing without a
valid medical explanation, and engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing
process are the same as refusing to test.
Name of Applicant or Employee: ______________________________________
Department Name: _________________________________________________
Social Security Number: _________________
__________________________ ________________
4-46
(Signature of Applicant or Employee) Date
_____________________________________ ________________
(Signature of Witness) Date
P. Modification of Policy. This statement of policy may be revised by the City of Newport at
any time to comply with applicable federal and state regulations that may be implemented, to
comply with judicial rulings, or to meet any changes in the work environment or changes in the
drug and alcohol testing policy of the City of Newport. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-602. SEXUAL HARASSMENT. Sexual harassment is unwelcome sexual advances
such as requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature in the
form of pinching, grabbing, patting, propositioning; making either explicit or implied job threats
or promises in return for submission to sexual favors; making inappropriate sex-oriented
comments on appearance; telling embarrassing sex-oriented stories; displaying sexually explicit
or pornographic material, no matter how it is displayed; or sexual assault on the job by
supervisors, fellow employees, or on occasion, non-employees when any of the foregoing
unwelcome conduct affects employment decisions, makes the job environment hostile,
distracting, or unreasonably interferes with work performance is an unlawful employment
practice and is absolutely prohibited by the municipal government.
The municipality may be held liable for the actions of all employees with regard to sexual
harassment and therefore, will not tolerate the sexual harassment of its employees. The city will
take immediate, positive steps to stop it when it occurs.
By law, the city is responsible for acts of sexual harassment in the work place where the
city (or its agents or supervisory employees) knows or should have known of the conduct, unless
it can be shown that the city took immediate and appropriate corrective action. The City may
also be responsible for the acts of non-employees, with respect to the sexual harassment of
employees in the work-place, where the municipal government (or its agents or supervisory
employees) knows or should have known of the conduct and failed to take immediate and
appropriate corrective action.
Prevention is the best tool for the elimination of sexual harassment. Therefore, the
following rules shall be strictly enforced.
An employee who feels he/she is being subjected to sexual harassment should immediately
contact one of the persons below with whom the employee feels the most comfortable.
Complaints may be made orally or in writing to:
a. The employee's immediate supervisor.
b. The employee’s department or division head.
c. The City Administrator.
Employees have the right to circumvent the employee chain of command in selecting
which person to whom a complaint of sexual harassment may be made and bring their complaint
directly to the City Administrator. If the complaint is about the city administrator, the complaint
4-47
should be made directly to the Mayor. Regardless of which of the above persons the employee
makes a complaint of sexual harassment to, the employee should be prepared to provide the
following information:
a. Victim's name, department, and position title.
b. The name of the person or persons committing the sexual harassment, including their title/s,
if known.
c. The specific nature of the sexual harassment, how long it has gone on, and any employment
action (demotion, failure to promote, dismissal, refusal to hire, transfer, etc,) taken against
the employee as a result of the harassment, or any other threats made against the employee as
a result of the harassment.
d. Witnesses to the harassment.
e. Whether the employee has previously reported the harassment and, if so, when and to whom.
The City Administrator is the person designated by the city government to be the investigator of
complaints of sexual harassment against employees. In the event the sexual harassment
complaint is against the City Administrator, the Mayor.
When an allegation of sexual harassment is made by any employee, the person to whom
the complaint is made shall immediately prepare a report of the complaint according to the
preceding section and submit it to the investigator.
The investigator shall make and keep a written record of the investigation, including
notes of verbal responses made to the investigator by the person complaining of sexual
harassment, witnesses interviewed during the investigation, the person against whom the
complaint of sexual harassment was made, and any other person contacted by the investigator in
connection with the investigation. The notes shall be made at the time the verbal interview is in
progress.
Upon conclusion of the investigation, the investigator shall prepare a report of the
findings and present them to the person complaining of sexual harassment. The report shall
include the written statement for the person complaining of sexual harassment, the written
statement of witnesses, the written statement of the person against whom the complaint of sexual
harassment was made, and all the investigator's notes connected to the investigation.
Based upon the report the investigator shall, within a reasonable time, determine whether the
conduct of the person against whom a complaint of harassment has been made constitutes sexual
harassment. In making that determination, the investigator shall look at the record as a whole
and at the totality of circumstances, including the nature of the conduct in question, the context
in which the conduct, if any, occurred, and the conduct of the person complaining. The
determination of whether sexual harassment occurred will be made on a case-by-case basis.
If the investigator determines that the complaint of harassment is founded, the investigator shall
take immediate and appropriate disciplinary action against the employee found guilty of sexual
harassment, consistent with his/her authority under the municipal charter, ordinances or rules
governing his/her authority to discipline employees.
4-48
The disciplinary action shall be consistent with the nature and severity of the offense, the
rank of the employee, and any other factors the investigator believes relate to fair and efficient
administration of the city government, including, but not limited to, the effect of the offense on
employee morale and public perception of the offense, and the light in which it casts the
municipality. The disciplinary action may include demotion, suspension, dismissal, warning, or
reprimand. A determination of the level of disciplinary action shall also be made on a case-bycase
basis.
A written record of disciplinary actions taken shall be kept, including verbal reprimands.
In all events, an employee found guilty of sexual harassment shall be warned not to retaliate in
any way against the person making the complaint of sexual harassment, witnesses or any other
person connected with the investigation of the complaint of sexual harassment.
In cases where the sexual harassment is committed by a non-employee against a city employee in
the work place, the investigator shall take whatever lawful action against the non-employee is
necessary to bring the sexual harassment to an immediate end.
Employees are not only encouraged to report instances of sexual harassment, they are
obligated to report them. Employees are also obligated to cooperate in every investigation of
harassment.
The obligation includes, but is not necessarily limited to, coming forward with evidence,
both favorable and unfavorable, for a person accused of such conduct; fully and truthfully
making written reports or verbally answering questions when required to do so by an
investigator. Employees are also obligated to refrain from making bad faith accusations of
sexual harassment.
Disciplinary action may also be taken against any employee who fails to report instances of
sexual harassment, or who fails or refuses to cooperate in the investigation of a complaint of
sexual harassment, or who files a complaint of sexual harassment in bad faith.
If the person complaining of sexual harassment disagrees with the conclusions in the
investigator’s report, then that person may file a written grievance within three (3) working days,
in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section X, L, step four hereinafter. (Ordinance
#2011-01, February 2011)
4-603. WORKPLACE HARASSMENT. Defined as harassment in the workplace that is
so pervasive that the working conditions are unduly oppressive, creating a hostile work
environment. Workplace harassment applies to harassment based on any of these seven protected
classes: race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, and/or disability.
What constitutes harassment? Once defined, a determination is made whether the harassment is
severe enough to establish a hostile work environment:
How Frequent is the conduct?
How severe is the conduct?
Is the conduct physically threatening, humiliating or merely an offensive utterance?
Does the conduct unreasonably interfere with the individual’s work performance?
4-49
Would a “reasonable person” be offended by the conduct?
The procedure for making a complaint of workplace harassment shall be the same as for Sexual
Harassment described in Section 6.02. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-604. GARNISHMENT. An employee who is garnished for more than one
indebtedness within a twelve (12) month period may be subject to disciplinary action in
accordance with the following schedule:
First Offense - Oral Reprimand
Second Offense - Written Reprimand
Third Offense - May be discharged in accordance with the discipline and dismissal policy.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-605. PERSONAL TELEPHONE CALLS. The use of the telephone during regular
work hours for local and/or long distant calls of a personal nature, except in emergency cases, is
discouraged. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-606. FIGHTING, HORSEPLAY, DAMAGING MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT
PROPERTY. Fighting, horseplay, and intentionally defacing or damaging City property is not
permitted. Employees engaging in these activities will be subject to disciplinary action which
could include discharge. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-607. TRAVEL POLICY.
SECTION I. Title. The title of this section shall be known as the City of Newport Travel Policy.
The purpose of this ordinance and referenced regulations is to bring the city into compliance
with Tennessee Code Annotated §6-54-901-907.
SECTION II. Travel requests. An approved "authorization for travel" request form is required
prior to travel. A "statement of travel expense claims" form must be filed within ten (10) days of
the completion of the authorized travel. Expenses for travel required in the performance of
duties and approved by the immediate supervisor and the City Administrator, or the City
Administrator's designee, will be reimbursed in accordance with the rates hereinafter set forth.
Authorized travelers can request either a travel advance for the projected cost of authorized
travel or advance billing directly to the city for registration fees, air fares, meals, lodging,
conferences and similar expenses. Travel advance requests are not considered documentation of
travel expenses. If travel advances exceed documented expenses, the traveler must immediately
reimburse the city.
SECTION III. Lodging. Lodging will be reimbursed at the actual expense of the room and room
use tax, provided that the room is an economy, no frills room. Travelers should request a state
rate if available at the hotel-motel. A tax exempt form should be given to the hotel-motel upon
check-in and payment should be made either by a City of Newport check or by a City of
Newport Credit Card in order to AVOID paying STATE AND LOCAL SALES TAX. (Motel
occupancy tax is NOT exempt.) An original (not a copy) hotel-motel receipt is required for
4-50
reimbursement. Employees are encouraged to stay at the location of the meeting for both
individual convenience and safety. If a personal credit card is used, room sales tax WILL be
charged by the hotel and will NOT be reimbursed to the employee.
SECTION IV. Mileage. Employees are encouraged to reserve and use a city owned vehicle, if
available, for all work related travel. Mileage will only be paid if a city vehicle is NOT available
and the City Administrator or designee approves use of a privately owned vehicle for travel.
Mileage for personal vehicles will be reimbursed at the state rate in effect when the current year's
budget is adopted. If actual odometer mileage is not kept by the traveler, mileage will be
estimated, using a computerized mapping program maintained in the finance department. For
longer trips, mileage will not be paid that exceeds the cost of air transportation and associated
taxi services to the same location.
SECTION V. Employee and Board Meals. Due to IRS regulation, meal payment while in travel
status must be handled differently in over-night travel payment verses same day travel meal
reimbursement.
Meals in same day travel status may be reimbursed, provided that the travel was official
city business outside the City of Newport and a receipt was obtained for the meal. To obtain
reimbursement, the employee or board member must complete a travel reimbursement request
form and attach a copy of the meal receipt. The meal will be reimbursed UP TO the amount
allowed in over-night travel and the reimbursement will be reported on the employee or board
member’s W-2 form as taxable income in accordance with IRS regulations.
If an employee or board member is in over-night travel status, a meal allowance will be paid,
based on the following in-state travel lodging reimbursement rates, effective October 1, 2008:
LOCATION Breakfast Lunch Dinner Incidentals Full Day
Davidson Co. $10.00 $15.00 $26.00 $3.00 $54.00
Shelby Co. $9.00 $13.00 $24.00 $3.00 $49.00
Williamson Co $9.00 $13.00 $24.00 $3.00 $49.00
Hamilton Co. $8.00 $12.00 $21.00 $3.00 $44.00
Knox Co. $9.00 $13.00 $24.00 $3.00 $49.00
Anderson Co $7.00 $11.00 $18.00 $3.00 $39.00
All others
Partial per diem will be paid based upon departure and return times as follows for overnight
trips:
Meal If depart prior to If return after
Breakfast 7 A.M. 8 A.M.
Lunch 11 A.M. 1:30 P.M.
Dinner 5 P.M. 6:30 P.M.
4-51
SECTION VI. Parking. Parking will be reimbursed at the actual cost with receipt. Without
receipt, maximum reimbursement for parking is $8.00 per day. Valet parking will be at
employee's expense.
SECTION VII. Baggage and equipment handling fee. The maximum handling fee that will be
reimbursed is $6.00 PER HOTEL.
SECTION VIII. Automobile rentals. Automobile rentals are ONLY AUTHORIZED BY THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR IN UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES. If used in conjunction with air
travel, it must be demonstrated that automobile rental is more economical to the city that using
taxi or bus services and MUST BE PRE-APPROVED BY THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
SECTION IX. Air travel. Air travel will be utilized when it is more economical to the city than
providing a city vehicle. Air travel should be scheduled as far in advance as possible to get
maximum use of early scheduling discounts. Any and all frequent flyer miles accumulated are
the property of the city and will be applied to future official city travel.
SECTION X. Phone call charges. Only official business phone calls will be reimbursed by the
city. Any and all personal phone calls are the responsibility of the individual making the call.
SECTION XI. Conference or training registration. All registration fees, materials and supplies
will be reimbursed provided they were listed on the travel request for pre-approved travel. Meals
included in registration do NOT impact per diem rates.
SECTION XII. City credit cards. If requested, city credit cards will be issued in accordance with
the credit card policy for official travel. The credit card MUST be returned to finance and ALL
travel documents filed for reimbursement within ten (10) days of completion of travel.
SECTION XIII. Special functions. The City Administrator MAY approve payment of special
functions, such as banquets and other work related social events, if they are requested in
advance. Special function attendance does NOT affect per diem rate payment.
SECTION XIV. Disciplinary action. Violation of the travel rules or travel fraud can result in
disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment for city employees, in
addition to criminal prosecution. Violation of travel rules or travel fraud can result in removal
from office and criminal prosecution of city officials. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-608. USE OF CITY VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT. All City vehicles and
equipment are for official use only. Drivers and/or operators must have a valid Tennessee
Drivers License and be approved by the supervisor. No person other than a City employee may
operate a City vehicle or piece of machinery. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-609. PERSONNEL RECORDS. Personnel records for each employee are kept on file
and maintained by the Recorder or Human Resources as designated by the City Administrator.
Any change of address, telephone number, marital status, draft status, number of dependents, or
education completed should be turned in to the Recorder or Human Resources department. The
Recorder or Human Resources also maintains the life insurance, vacation, retirement, health
insurance, and sick leave records for each employee, and will notify each employee when they
are eligible for each benefit. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-52
4-610. TIME SHEETS. All departments must have their time sheets turned in to the
Recorder or Human Resources Department by Tuesday of each week for the previous work
week. All time sheets must be signed by both the employee and department head. Any employee
failing to submit a time sheet by the above stated date will not be paid until the following period.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-611. SPECIAL LEAVE.
A. Special leave is defined as time off from regular work which can be granted with or without
pay at the direction of the City Administrator. Such leave with pay may be used for such
occasions as jury duty, death, or natural catastrophe in an employee's family requiring the
employee's presence, and time granted for attendance at job related professional meetings.
B. Leave with pay may be authorized in order that full-time employees may serve required jury
duty, provided that such leave is reported in advance to the City Administrator.
C. Leave with pay not to exceed three (3) working days per occurrence may be authorized in
case of death within the employee's immediate family. In the event that the death in the
employee's immediate family requires an out-of-town trip, the City Administrator may
authorize additional leave which shall be counted against the employee's accrued sick leave
credits.
D. Special leave without pay may be granted for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days for
temporary sickness, disability, or for other good and sufficient reasons which are considered
controllable. Such leave shall require the prior approval of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. An employee on special leave without pay shall not accrue sick or vacation leave
while on special leave status.
E. This provision shall not be construed to eliminate other possible needs for special leave;
however, this leave will not be chargeable to either sick leave or vacation leave. Every
application for special leave must be accompanied by a complete explanation of the reason
for absence.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-612. INCLEMENT WEATHER LEAVE. When weather conditions appear to be so
severe that an employee fears for his/her safety in traveling to or from the worksite, he/she may
be absent with leave if the following conditions are met:
A. The employee informs their immediate supervisor of his/her absence and the reason for it as
soon as possible.
B. The employee reports to work immediately should weather conditions change allowing safe
transportation to the worksite.
C. The employee shall have the option of deducting the missed workday (or portion thereof)
from either accumulated vacation or sick leave. The reporting of this leave shall follow the
same requirements as sick leave. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-613. SAFETY EQUIPMENT. Employees are required to use all safety equipment
provided to them related to their respective job duties. This includes safety glasses, earplugs,
4-53
gloves, hardhats, vests, chaps, shoes, and any other item, clothing or device, determined to be in
the safety interest of the employee. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-614. FOOTWEAR POLICY.
A. Employees will refrain from wearing slick bottom or leather soled shoes. Shoes without
traction are injury risks for slips and falls.
B. Employees involved in outdoor work will wear appropriate work boots specified for their
specific job duties and provided by the City.
C. All work boots will:
1. Have rubber soles with grooved bottoms,
2. Provide ankle support and
3. Be water repellant.
D. Street, Sanitation and Recreation boots must be steel toed.
E. Police boots must be black.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-615. CELLULAR/WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS.
A. Employees are permitted to have personal cell phones or other wireless communication
devices in their possession while in work status. However, the following guidelines shall be
followed:
1. Cell phones should not be used while on police patrol except to make emergency calls.
2. All personal calls or wireless communications should be kept as short as possible while on
duty.
3. Cellular or wireless communications should not be used at fire scenes, crime scenes, traffic
accident scenes or during traffic stops for personal calls.
4. No blue tooth nor similar devices or technology should be used while in uniform or acting
in an official city employee capacity.
5. Employees making or receiving a cellular or wireless communication while driving should
find a safe place to pull over, clear of the roadway, and complete the call.
B. City issued cell phones shall only be used in a safe manner to conduct official business while
operating a city vehicle.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-54
CHAPTER 7
SEPARATIONS AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
Section
4-701. Types of Separation.
4-702. Resignation.
4-703. Lay-Off.
4-704. Disability.
4-705. Retirement.
4-706. Death.
4-707. Disciplinary-Action.
4-708. Oral Reprimand.
4-709. Written Reprimand.
4-710. Suspension.
4-711. Demotion or Dismissal.
4-712. Grievance Process.
4-713. Appeals Process.
4-701. TYPES OF SEPARATIONS. All separations of employees from positions
with the City government shall be designated as one of the following types and shall be
accomplished in the manner indicated: resignations, lay-offs, disability, death, retirement, and
dismissal.
At the time of separation and prior to final payment, all records, assets, and other items of
City property in the employee's custody must be transferred to the department. Any amount due
because of shortages shall be withheld from the employee's final compensation. (Ordinance
#2011-01, February 2011)
4-702. RESIGNATION. In the event an employee decides to leave the City's employ, a
one (1) to two (2) week notice shall be given to his/her supervisor so that arrangements for a
replacement can be made. In such a case employees will be expected to return any/or all City
equipment assigned. An unauthorized absence from work for a period of three (3) consecutive
working days may be considered by the Department Head as a resignation.
If a former employee returns to City employment, their status of seniority, pay, leave, etc. will be
the same as any new employee beginning work for the first time. (Ordinance #2011-01,
February 2011)
4-703. LAY-OFF. The City Administrator with approval of Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may layoff an employee in the classified service when they deem it necessary by
reason of shortage of funds, the abolition of a position, or other material changes in the duties or
organization of the employee's position, or for related reasons that are outside the employer's
control and which do not reflect discredit upon the service of the employee. The duties
4-55
performed by an employee laid-off may be assigned to other employees already working who
hold positions in the appropriate classes. Temporary employees shall be laid-off prior to the layoff
of probationary or regular employees. The order of layoff shall be in reverse order to total
continuous time served upon the date established for the layoff to become effective (last in, first
out). (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-704. DISABILITY. An employee may be separated for disability when he/she cannot
perform required duties because of physical or mental impairment. Action may be initiated by
the employee or the City, but in all cases it must be supported by medical evidence acceptable to
the City Administrator. The City may require an examination at its expense and performed by a
licensed physician of its choice. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-705. RETIREMENT. Whenever an employee meets the conditions set forth in the
retirement system’s regulations, he/she may elect to retire and receive all benefits earned under
the appropriate retirement system including all accumulated sick leave days without any cap
imposed to those sick leave days in accordance with TCRS regulations. (Revised August 8,
2006 retro-active to 1 January 2006 Res 2006-31) (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011
4-706. DEATH. Separation shall be effective as of the date of death of an employee. All
compensation due in accordance with these rules shall be paid to the employee’s beneficiary. All
accumulated sick leave shall be paid. Regular sick leave benefits shall be paid in full based on
prorated time worked the last year of service. All sick time carry-over that has been applied for
service credit upon retirement shall be paid in full. (Revised August 8, 2006 retro-active to 1
January 2006 Res 2006-31) (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-707. DISCIPLINARY - ACTION. Whenever an employee's performance, attitude,
work habits or personal conduct fall below a desirable level, supervisors shall inform employees
promptly and specifically of such lapses and shall give them counsel and assistance. If
appropriate and justified, a reasonable period of time for improvement may be allowed before
initiating disciplinary action. In some instances, a specific incident in and of itself may justify
severe initial disciplinary action; however, the action to be taken depends on the seriousness of
the incident and the whole pattern of the employee's past performance and conduct. The types of
disciplinary actions are: oral reprimand, written reprimand, suspension, demotion, and dismissal.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-708. ORAL REPRIMAND. Whenever an employee's performance, attitude, work
habits, or professional conduct fall below a desirable level, the supervisor and/or City
Administrator shall inform the employee promptly and specifically of such lapses and shall give
him/her counsel and assistance. If appropriate and justified, a reasonable period of time for
improvement may be allowed before initiating disciplinary actions. The supervisor will place a
4-56
memo in the employee's file stating the date of the oral reprimand, what was said to the
employee, and the employee's response. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-709. WRITTEN REPRIMAND. In situations where an oral warning has not resulted
in the expected improvement, or when more severe initial action is warranted, a written
reprimand may be sent to the employee, and a copy shall be placed in the employee's personnel
folder. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-710. SUSPENSION. An employee may be suspended for three (3) days without pay
by the City Administrator, not to exceed a total of fifteen (15) days in any 12 month period.
Pursuant to the Appeals Procedures, a written statement of the reason for suspension shall be
submitted to the employee affected at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time the
suspension becomes effective. The employee will be granted a hearing, upon request, pursuant to
the appeals process. An employee determined to be innocent of the charges shall be returned to
duty with full pay for the period of suspension. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-711. DEMOTION OR DISMISSAL. The City Administrator may dismiss or demote
an employee for good of the City service. Reasons for dismissal may include, but shall not be
limited to:
1. Incompetence or inefficiency in the performance of duties.
2. Conviction of a criminal offense or of a malfeasance involving moral turpitude.
3. Violation of any lawful and reasonable regulation, order, or direction made or given by a
superior; or insubordination that constitutes a serious breach of discipline.
4. Public intoxication or drinking any intoxicating beverages while on duty, or being under
the influence of a drug of narcotic while on duty.
5. Theft, destruction, carelessness, or negligence in the use of the property of the City;
6. Disgraceful personal conduct or language toward the public or toward fellow officers or
employees.
7. Unauthorized absences or abuse of leave privileges.
8. Incapacity for proper performance of duties because of a permanent or chronic physical
or mental defect.
9. Acceptance of any valuable consideration which was given with the expectation of
influencing the employee in the performance of his/her duties.
10. Falsification of records or use of official position for personal advantage.
11. Loss of an employee's drivers license and driving privileges by due process of law when
the employee's position makes the operation of a motor vehicle necessary in the
performance of his/her duties.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-712. GRIEVANCE PROCESS.
STEP ONE - If an employee feels he/she has not been treated fairly by their immediate
supervisor they may appeal the action to the Department Director. The Department Director
shall evaluate the incident and determine if the action taken by the supervisor was appropriate.
4-57
The Department Director shall, within forty-eight (48) hours, uphold, modify or overturn the
action taken by the supervisor.
STEP TWO - If the employee disagrees with the decision of the Department Director, he/she
may appeal the decision, in writing, to the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall
review the action taken by the Department Head and shall, within seven (7) calendar days,
uphold, modify or overturn the decision.
STEP THREE - If the grievance is not resolved with the City Administrator, the employee may
request, in writing, a hearing with the (Personnel Board or Board of Mayor and Aldermen, or one
of the two Civil Service Boards). The appropriate board shall have ten (10) calendar days to
schedule the hearing after which it shall provide a written response to the employee with copies
to the immediate supervisor and the City Administrator. Any action required shall be taken
within seventy-two (72) hours and the employee notified in writing. Every attempt will be made
to resolve the employee's grievance, and the action of the Board shall be final and binding on all
parties involved unless appealed to Chancery Court by the employee.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-713. APPEALS PROCESS. Any City employee reprimanded, suspended, or
dismissed may submit in writing to the City Administrator to have the action reviewed by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, or either the Police or Fire Civil Service Boards. An employee
must submit the request for an appeal within one (1) calendar week of receipt of notification of
the disciplinary action and must also state his/her intent to have representation and name the
representatives. The appropriate board shall schedule a hearing within one (1) calendar week of
the receipt of the employee's request for appeal. The action of the appropriate board shall be final
and binding on all parties involved unless appealed to Chancery Court by the employee.
(Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-58
CHAPTER 8
AMENDMENT OF PERSONNEL RULES
Section
4-801. Amendments.
4-802. Severability.
4-803. Special Note.
4-801. AMENDMENTS. Amendments or revisions of these rules may be recommended
for adoption by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen or the Fire or Police Civil Service Boards.
Such amendments or revisions of these rules shall become effective upon approval by resolution
of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-802. SEVERABILITY. Each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, and clause of
this policy document is hereby declared to be separable and severable. The invalidity of any
section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause shall not affect the validity of any other
portion of these rules, and only any portion declared to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be deleted. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
4-803. SPECIAL NOTE. These personnel policies are believed to be written within the
framework of the Charter of the City of Newport, but in case of conflict, the Charter takes
precedence. (Ordinance #2011-01, February 2011)
5-1
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND
TAXATION
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES.
3. PURCHASING POLICY.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
Section
5-101. Business Tax Act adopted.
5-101. Business Tax Act adopted. The taxes provided for in chapter
387 of the Public Acts of 1971, known as the Business Tax Act, are hereby levied
on the businesses, business activities, vocations or occupations carried on in the
city, at the rates and in the manner prescribed by the act. (1973 Code, § 17-1)
5-2
CHAPTER 2
REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY
TAXES
Section
5-201. When due and payable.
5-202. When delinquent--penalty and interest.
5-201. When due and payable. (1) All real property taxes shall be
assessed as of the tenth day of January of the year for which levied.
(2) Taxes levied by the city against real property shall become due and
payable annually on the first day of October of the year for which levied. (1973
Code, § 17-2(a)and(b))
5-202. When delinquent--penalty and interest. All real property
taxes levied by the city shall become delinquent on and after the first day of
March next after , they become due and payable and shall thereupon be subject
to such penalty and interest as is authorized and prescribed by the general law
of the state for delinquent state and county taxes. (1973 Code, § 17-2(c))
5-3
CHAPTER 3
PURCHASING POLICY
SECTION
1. Purchasing agent designated
2. Purchasing agent—authority
3. Purchasing of $10,000.00 or more submitted for bids
4. Purchases of $10,000.00 of more not submitted for bids
5. Purchases of $4,000.00 to $9,999.99
6. Purchases of $100.00 to $499.99
7. Purchases of less than $100.00
8. Purchasing agent—responsibilities
9. Relations of other departments with the purchasing department
10. Purchasing department’s responsibilities
11. Using department’s responsibility
12. Disposal of real property
13. Purchase of used equipment
14. Formal purchase contracts
15. Surety requirements
16. Quality assurance, inspection, and testing
17. Surplus property
18. Federal and state surplus property
19. Conflict of interest
20. Debt owed to City
21. Violation of purchasing policies
22. Replacement of all prior purchasing policies
23. Purchasing when using grant funds
24. Architectural, Engineering and Construction
1. Purchasing agent designated Interim city recorder/city administrator, chief administrative
officer of the city, or city recorder shall act as purchasing agent for the city with power, except as set out
in these procedures, to purchase materials, supplies, and equipment; secure leases and lease purchases;
and dispose of and transfer surplus property for the proper conduct of the city’s business. (Ordinance
#2017-20)
2. Purchasing agent—authority The purchasing agent shall have the authority to make
purchases, leases, and lease-purchases of less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) singly or in the
aggregate during any fiscal year and except as otherwise provided herein, shall require two (2)
competitive bids or quotations, either verbal or written, whenever possible prior to each purchase. All
competitive bids and quotations received shall be recorded and maintained in the office of the
purchasing agent for a minimum of seven (7) years after contract expires. When requisitions are
required, the competitive bids and quotations received shall be listed on that document prior to the
issuance of the purchase order. Awards shall be made to the lowest and best bid or “quote”. (Ordinance
#2017-20)
3. Purchasing of $10,000.00 or more submitted for bids A description of all projects
and purchases, except as herein provided, that require the expenditure of city funds of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and submitted for bid. Once
bids have been received, the purchasing agent will bring the bids to council for their approval.
After the determination that adequate funds are budgeted and available for a purchase, the
5-4
governing body may authorize the purchasing agent to issue a purchase order for the item and place the
order. The award of purchases, leases, or lease-purchases of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more
shall be made by the governing body to the lowest and best bid. (Ordinance #2017-20)
4. Purchases of $10,000.00 of more not submitted for bids Purchases amounting to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more that do not require public advertising and sealed bids or
proposals, may be allowed only under the following circumstances, except as otherwise provided
herein, when such purchases are approved by the governing body:
(1). Sole source of supply or proprietary products as determined after complete search by using
department and the purchasing agent, with governing body approval;
(2). Emergency expenditures with subsequent approval of the governing body. All purchases of
$10,000.00 or more of this nature not submitted for bid should be submitted to the council by
the City Administrator, purchasing agent, or department head via written communication at the
next council meeting to be held. The information to be submitted should include the vendor,
reason for repair, cost of repair, and any other relevant information;
(3). Purchases from nonprofit corporations whose purpose or one of whose purpose is to provide
goods or services specifically to;
(4). Purchases, leases, or lease-purchases of real property;
(5). Purchases, leases, or lease-purchases from any federal, state, or local government unit or agency
of secondhand articles or equipment or other materials, supplies, commodities, and equipment;
(6). Purchases through other units of government as authorized by the Municipal Purchasing Law of
1983; or Purchases from instrumentalities created by two (2) or more cooperating governments.
(7). Purchases directed through or in conjunction with the State Department of General Services.
Purchases directed through or in conjunction with the Federal General Services Administrative
Contracts for motor vehicles manufactured for a special purpose as defined in 12-3-1208 which
include, but are not limited to, school buses, buses with capacity exceeding 22 passengers used
to provide public transportation, garbage trucks, firetrucks, or ambulances based on having
greater cost avoidance than other allowed purchases; (Ordinance #2018-13)
(8). Purchases from Tennessee State Industries;
(9). Professional service contracts as provided in Tennessee Cody Annotated, §12-4-106;
Professional services include legal services, fiscal agent, financial advisor or advisory services,
educational consultant services, and similar services by professional persons or groups of high
ethical standards;
(10). Tort Liability Insurance as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 29-20-407;
(11). Purchases of fuels, fuel products, or perishable commodities;
(12). Purchases for resale of natural gas and propane gas;
(13.) Purchases for repair items where time is of the essence. Repair items include items that
are not necessarily deemed as emergency items, but are items that require repair and where time is of
the essence shall be approved by the City Administrator or City Recorder or Finance Manager. The
capability of the City to respond to any issue would be harmed if the City had to wait for council to
approve a repair at the next standard scheduled meeting. All purchases of $10,000.00 or more of this
nature not submitted for bid should be submitted to the council by the City Administrator, purchasing
agent, or department head via written communication at the next council meeting to be held. The
information to be submitted should include the vendor, reason for repair, cost of repair, and any other
relevant information. (Ordinance #2017-20)
5. Purchases of $500.00 to $9,999.99 Purchases of four thousand ($500.00) to nine thousand
nine hundred and ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($9,999.99) require two (2) or more written
quotations prior to purchase. Purchase orders will be issued. (Ordinance #2017-20)
6. Purchases of $100.00 to $499.99 A request for payment or use of the city purchasing card or
a purchase order may be used for purchases of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to four hundred ninetynine
dollars and ninety-nine cents ($499.99). (Ordinance #2017-20)
5-5
7. Purchases of less than $100.00 Low dollar purchases less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) may be paid by using the city purchasing card or petty cash. (Ordinance #2017-20)
8. Purchasing agent—responsibilities The purchasing agent shall be responsible for following
these procedures and the Municipal Purchasing Law of 1983, as amended, including keeping and filing
required records and reports as if they were set out herein and made a part hereof and within definitions
of words and phrases from the law as herein defined. (Ordinance #2017-20)
9. Relations of other departments with the purchasing department The purchasing
department is a service agency for all other departments of the city. The purchasing function is a
service, and for the mutual benefits gained to go toward the good of the city, all departments must work
in harmony. This manual is a guide to help the departments know their buying responsibilities.
(Ordinance #2017-20)
10. Purchasing department’s responsibilities
(1).To aid and cooperate with all departments in meeting their needs for operating supplies,
equipment and services;
(2). To process all requisitions with the least possible delay;
(3). To procure a product that will meet the department’s requirements at the least cost to the
city;
(4). To know the source and availability of needed products and services and maintain current
vendor files;
(5). To obtain prices on comparable materials after receipt of departmental requisition;
(6). To select vendors, prepare purchase orders, and process and maintain order and requisition
files;
(7). To search for new, improved sources of supplies and services;
(8). To assist in preparation of specifications and to maintain specification and historical
performance files;
(9). To prepare and advertise requests for bids and maintain bid files;
(10). To keep items in store in sufficient quantities to meet normal requirements of the city for a
reasonable length of time within space availability;
(11). To investigate and document complaints about merchandise and services for future
reference;
(12). To transfer or dispose of surplus property. (Ordinance #2017-20)
11. Using department’s responsibility
(1). To allow ample lead time for the purchasing department to process requisitions and issue
purchase orders, while permitting the supplier time to deliver the needed items;
(2). To prepare a complete and accurate description of materials to be purchased;
(3). To help the purchasing department by suggesting sources of supply;
(4). To plan purchases in order to avoid emergencies;
(5). To initiate preparation of specifications on items to be bid;
(6). To inspect merchandise upon receipt and complete a receiving report noting any
discrepancies in types, numbers, conditions, or quality of goods;
(7). To advise the purchasing department of defective merchandise or dissatisfaction with
vendor performance;
(8). To advise the purchasing department of surplus property.
12. Disposal of real property The City of Newport Purchasing Agent or his/her designee or a
designee of the Newport Board of Mayor and Alderman shall be authorized to dispose of and transfer
5-6
all surplus real property and all improvements to the real property at public auction and as directed by
the City of Newport Board of Mayor and Alderman. Negotiated sales shall be approved by the
affirmative vote of the board of mayor and alderman. (Ordinance #2017-20)
13. Purchase of used equipment Used equipment may be purchased without sealed bids if the
following conditions exist:
(1). There is a considerable savings over new equipment and the department has a justifiable
need.
(2). The source has been identified as reputable.
(3). Other sources have been researched for availability of item(s).
(4). The price is reasonable and within department budget limits.
(5). The equipment is purchased from another government agency. (Ordinance #2017-20)
14. Formal purchase contracts When an award is made by the City of Newport requiring a
signed contract rather than a purchase order for construction, major projects or contracts that will extend
beyond any fiscal year, the original comes to the purchasing department for signatures. An original of
the executed contract and associated documents will be retained in the bid file. The bid file is located in
the purchasing department. All contracts, leases, and lease-purchase agreements extending beyond the
end of any fiscal year must have prior approval of the governing body. Contracts extending beyond the
end of any fiscal year must be signed by the Mayor. Contracts that are equal to or less than one (1)
fiscal year may be signed by the City Administrator, Finance Director, or purchasing agent.
A purchase order properly endorsed by the city purchasing agent or his/her designee and one
accepted by the vendor, also forms a binding contract. (Ordinance #2017-20)
15. Surety requirements
(1). Bid bond. A bid bond issued by a surety company licensed to do business in the State of
Tennessee may be required for a specified solicitation. The amount of the bid bond shall be stated as a
set amount of as a percentage of the bid price. In no event may it exceed five percent (5%) of the total
contract price. Bid bonds submitted by unsuccessful vendors will be returned upon award of a contract.
Personal checks are not acceptable in the place of bid bonds; however, bank cashier’s checks, a certified
check or any other direct obligation drawn on a bank doing business in the United States is acceptable.
(2). Performance bond. A performance bond issued by a surety company licensed to do business
in the State of Tennessee and acceptable to the City of Newport may be required for a specified
solicitation. The amount of the performance bond shall be stated as a percentage of the contract price,
but may not exceed on hundred percent (100%) of the total contract price. Personal checks are not
acceptable in the place of performance bonds; however, bank cashier’s checks are acceptable. An
irrevocable letter of credit from a state or national bank or a state or federal savings and loan association
having its principal office in Tennessee may be accepted instead of a performance bond, subject to
approval of the terms and conditions of said irrevocable letter of credit. If the successful bidder fails to
furnish a performance bond and execute a contract within the time allowed, the bid deposit of the bidder
shall be retained by the City of Newport as liquidated damages and not as a penalty. In addition, the
city shall remain free to pursue any other remedies it may have.
(3). Payment bond. A payment bond issued by a surety company licensed to do business in the
State of Tennessee may be required for a specified solicitation. The bond shall be not less than twentyfive
percent (25%) or more than one hundred percent (100%) of the contract price. The bond is to
ensure that the contractor will pay for all labor and material used by the contractor or any immediate or
remote subcontractor under the contractor. (Ordinance #2017-20)
16. Quality assurance, inspection, and testing The purchasing agent or a designee may take
such steps as deemed desirable to ascertain or verify that supplies, services or construction items
procured conform to specifications. This authority may be delegated to the using department if the best
5-7
interest of the city operation is served. (Ordinance #2017-20)
17. Surplus property The using department shall identify in writing surplus, scrap, or obsolete
property and report same to purchasing. Centralized purchasing shall have the authority to dispose of
surplus, scrap, excess or obsolete property and regulate its disposal in a manner deemed to be in the
city’s best interest. Equipment acquired by a department through federal or state grant funding which
no longer serves the needs for which originally acquired shall be disposed of in accordance with the
property management regulations of the funding agency. Used equipment may be disposed of via
negotiated sale and approved by the board of mayor and alderman if the purchaser qualifies as a
government, non-profit, or quasi-governmental agency provided that it is not prohibited by any state or
federal laws or grant stipulations if the item was purchased under a grant contract. (Ordinance #2017-
20)
18. Federal and state surplus property Authority is granted to the city purchasing agent or his
or her designee to monitor both federal and state surplus property programs and to allow using
departments to purchase if:
(1). The price is reasonable;
(2). The item is budgeted;
(3). Funds are available; and
(4). Justification of need is provided.
An approved purchase order and request to purchase will be obtained from the purchasing
department before making the purchase. (Ordinance #2017-20)
19. Conflict of interest No employee shall have any financial interest in the profits of any
contract, service or other work performed for the city. He/she shall not personally profit directly or
indirectly from any contract, purchase, sale or service between the city and any person or company.
Any employee violating provisions of this rule shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action
including dismissal. (Ordinance #2017-20)
20. Debt owed to City The City of Newport will not do business with anyone who owes a debt
to the city or is a defaulter on surety to the city. Prior to any bid being awarded, the city purchasing
agent or his/her designee will confirm with accounts receivable whether the bidder is in arrears to the
city. (Ordinance #2017-20)
21. Violation of purchasing policies Department heads will be responsible for explaining any
such violations in writing to the mayor, city purchasing agent and/or the board of mayor and alderman.
(Ordinance #2017-20)
22. Replacement of all prior purchasing policies This ordinance replaces all prior purchasing
policies including, but not limited to, the purchasing policy established under Ordinance #07-19-05-01,
July 2005 (Ordinance #2017-20)
23. Purchasing when using grant funds When a grant is obtained by the City and a grant
administrator not employed by the City is hired, the administrator of the grant will be responsible to
ensure that all purchasing policies of the City and any specific instructions related to purchasing in the
grant contract are followed. The firm that is hired as the grant administrator will be provided a copy of
the purchasing policy by the purchasing agent after the purchasing agent is given a copy of the grant
administration contract. (Ordinance #2017-20)
24. Architectural, Engineering and Construction Architectural and engineering services will
be procured through a request for proposal process. Construction work that is under the coordination
and oversight of a construction manager shall be procured through competitive bids. (Ordinance #2017-
20)
5-8
6-1
Municipal code reference 1
Traffic citations, etc.: title 15, chapter 7.
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER
1. POLICE AND ARREST.
2. RESERVE POLICE FORCE.
3. WORKHOUSE.
CHAPTER 1
POLICE AND ARREST1
SECTION
6-101. Resisting or interfering with a police officers.
6-102. Impersonating police officer.
6-103. Police officers subject to chief's orders.
6-104. General duties of the chief of police.
6-105. Police officers to wear uniforms and be armed.
6-106. When police officers to make arrests.
6-107. Police officers may require assistance in making arrests.
6-108. Disposition of persons arrested.
6-109. Emergency personnel authorized to enter premises and notify police.
6-101. Resisting or interfering with a police officer. It shall be
unlawful for any person to resist or in any way interfere with or hinder any
police officer while he is in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty.
(1973 Code, § 14-1)
6-102. Impersonating police officer. It shall be unlawful for any
person, other than an official police officer of the city, to wear or carry the
uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office like
or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the
official police officers of the city. (1973 Code, § 14-2)
6-103. Police officers subject to chief's orders. All police officers of
the city shall obey and comply with such orders and administrative rules and
regulations as the chief of police may officially issue. (1973 Code, § 14-18)
6-2
6-104. General duties of the chief of police. The chief of police shall
see that law and order is maintained within the city; he shall see to the patrol
of the city at all times and shall have at least one (1) police officer in attendance
at all announced sessions of the recorder's court to assist the recorder in
maintaining order and decorum and to otherwise wait upon the court during its
trial of cases. The chief of police shall also be responsible for seeing that all legal
process issued by the recorder is duly executed. (1973 Code, § 14-19)
6-105. Police officers to wear uniforms and be armed. All police
officers of the city shall wear such uniform and badge as the chief of police may
prescribe and shall carry a service pistol and billy club at all times while on
duty. (1973 Code, § 14-20)
6-106. When police officers to make arrests. Unless otherwise
authorized or directed in this code or other applicable law, an arrest of the
person shall be made by a police officer in the following cases:
(1) Whenever they are in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person;
(2) Whenever an alleged offense has been committed in the officer's
presence by the person;
(3) Whenever an offense has been in fact committed and the officer has
reasonable and probable cause to believe the person has committed it. (1973
Code, § 14-21)
6-107. Police officers may require assistance in making arrests.
It shall be unlawful for any male person to willfully refuse to aid a city police
officer in making a lawful arrest when such person's assistance is reasonably
requested and is necessary. (1973 Code, § 14-22)
6-108. Disposition of persons arrested. Unless otherwise authorized
by law, when any person is arrested for any offense other than one involving
intoxication he shall be brought before the recorder for immediate trial or
allowed to post bond in such sum as may be prescribed by the recorder. When
the arrested person is intoxicated or when the recorder is not immediately
available and the alleged offender is not able to post the required bond, he shall
be confined in the city jail, which shall be maintained by the chief of police or in
such other place as may be lawfully designated, until he can be tried. (1973
Code, § 14-23)
6-109. Emergency personnel authorized to enter premises and
notify police. In a situation where there has been a 911 emergency call and
where there is no response from within: Emergency personnel at the building
shall be authorized to forcibly enter the building to investigate in order to
determine that no one inside is in danger or having a medical problem. An
6-3
attempt shall then be made to leave the premises secure before leaving the
premises and the emergency personnel must leave a message posted on the
premises in a prominent place to contact the Police Department of the City of
Newport. (Ord. #95-3, March 1995)
DRAFT 6-4
1/15/09
CHAPTER 2
RESERVE POLICE FORCE
SECTION
6-201. Establishment authorized; purpose.
6-202. Supervision.
6-203. Composition; appointment of members.
6-204. Conformity with rules and regulations.
6-205. Carrying arms; restrictions or exercise of police authority.
6-206. Restrictions on use of reserve police force.
6-201. Establishment authorized; purpose. The board of mayor and
aldermen is authorized to recruit, train and organize an active reserve police
force to supplement the regular police force of the city, which shall not be used
for ordinary police duty, except by consent of the mayor. (1973 Code, § 14-28)
6-202. Supervision. The reserve police force shall be under the direct
control of the chief of police or, in the absence of the chief of police, the mayor.
(1973 Code, § 14-29)
6-203. Composition; appointment of members. The active reserve
shall be limited to a membership of twenty-five (25) men, who shall be selected
by the board of mayor and aldermen. The chief and sergeants of the reserve
police force shall also be appointed by the board of mayor and aldermen. (1973
Code, § 14-30)
6-204. Conformity with rules and regulations. To remain a member
of the reserve police force, each member shall agree to abide by the rules,
regulations and training presented for the reserve police force. (1973 Code,
§ 14-31)
6-205. Carrying arms; restrictions or exercise of police authority.
The members of the reserve police force shall not carry arms or have any police
authority except when ordered to duty by the mayor or the chief of police, and
then only in prescribed uniform. Any member carrying arms or attempting to
perform any duties of a police officer, except when on active duty, shall be
dismissed from the reserve police force and prosecuted according to all laws
applicable to any other person. (1973 Code, § 14-32)
6-206. Restrictions on use of reserve police force. (1) The reserve
police force shall not be used in conducting raids or investigations.
DRAFT 6-5
1/15/09
(2) No member of the reserve police force shall be used in such a way
as to deprive a regularly paid police officer of his job, pay or extra pay, but shall
be used only to supplement the regular police force. (1973 Code, § 14-33)
DRAFT 6-6
1/15/09
CHAPTER 3
WORKHOUSE
SECTION
6-301. Designated.
6-302. Inmates to be worked.
6-303. Compensation of inmates.
6-304. Inmates to be humanely treated.
6-301. Designated. The city jail is hereby designated as the city
workhouse. (1973 Code, § 14-44)
6-302. Inmates to be worked. All persons committed to the city
workhouse shall be required to perform such public work or labor as the chief
of police may lawfully prescribe. (1973 Code, § 14-45)
6-303. Compensation of inmates. City workhouse inmates shall be
allowed one dollar ($1.00) per day as credit toward payment of the fines and
costs assessed against them. (Code 1959, § 14-46)
6-304. Inmates to be humanely treated. All city workhouse inmates
shall be furnished with adequate food and water, provided with clean quarters
and sanitary facilities and shall otherwise be humanely treated. (1973 Code,
§ 14-47)
7-1
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIREWORKS¹
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. FIRE DISTRICT.
3. FIRE CODE.
4. VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
5. FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
7-101. Gasoline trucks.
7-102. Open burning.
SECTION
7-101. Gasoline trucks. No person shall operate or park any gasoline tank truck within
any residential area of the city at any time except for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in the expeditious delivery of gasoline. (1973 Code, § 8-1)
7-102. Open burning. No person shall burn any material whatever without first
obtaining the permission of the chief of the fire department therefore. (1973 Code, § 8-2)
_________________
¹Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
7-2
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DISTRICT
SECTION
7-201. Fire limits described.
7-201. Fire limits described. The fire limits of the city shall be as follows:
Beginning on the south bank of the Big Pigeon River at a point which is the intersection
of an extension of Prospect Avenue and said river bank; thence in a southerly direction with said
extension and continuing along Prospect Avenue to a point two hundred (200) feet past the
intersection of Prospect Avenue and Broadway; thence along a line parallel to and two hundred
(200) feet to the south of Broadway in an easterly direction to the intersection of the line and
College Street; thence along College Street and Broadway; thence across Broadway to the
western line of the Stokley Van Camp Canning Company property; thence along said line in a
northerly direction to the intersection of that line and Main Street and continuing along an
extension of that line in a northerly direction, across River Road to the intersection of that line
and the southern bank of the Big Pigeon River; thence in a westerly direction along the southern
bank of the Big Pigeon River to the point of origin. (1973 Code, § 6-1)
7-3
CHAPTER 3
FIRE CODE
SECTION
7-301. Fire code adopted.
7-302. Enforcement.
7-303. Definition of "municipality."
7-304. Storage of flammable liquids and liquefied petroleum gas.
7-305. Modifications by the chief of the fire department.
7-306. Appeals from decisions of the chief of the fire department.
7-307. Violations.
7-301. Fire code adopted. The International Fire Code 2012 edition published by the
International Fire Code Council and the NFPA Life Safety Code 101, 2012 edition published by
the National Fire Protection Association regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the
occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provide; providing for issuance of permits and
collections of fees and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City of Newport are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, with additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes, if any, prescribed in section 2a for the International Fire Code and section 2b for the
NFPA Life Safety Code. When any conflict between the International Fire Code and the NFPA
Life Safety Code arises the International Fire Code shall prevail.
Section 2a. That the following sections of the International Fire Code 2012 edition are
hereby revised:
1) Section 101.1 Title. Insert: City of Newport for name of jurisdiction.
2) Section 109.4 Violation Penalties. Insert: class C misdemeanor for [specify offense],
fifty dollars for [amount], and thirty days for [Number of Days].
3) Section 609.1 Shall be deleted and revised to say: Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods
shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 96 Standard for Ventilation Control and
Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations 2011 Edition.
Section 2b. The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2006 edition is hereby: for state buildings,
educational occupancies and any other occupancy requiring an inspection by the state fire
marshal for initial licensure.
Section 3. That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2006
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
1) Section 5704.2.9.6.1 The storage of Class I liquids in above ground tanks outside
shall be prohibited except in areas zoned M-1 (Light Industrial), and M-2 (Heavy
Industrial). The storage of Class II liquids in above ground tanks shall be prohibited
except in areas zoned C-2 (General Business), C-3 (Interstate Business), M-1 (Light
Industrial), and M-2 (Heavy Industrial).
2) Section 5706.2.4.4 The storage of Class I liquids in above ground tanks shall be
prohibited except in areas zoned M-1 (Light Industrial), and M-2 (Heavy Industrial), .
7-4
The storage of Class II liquids in above ground tanks shall be prohibited except in
areas zoned C-2 (General Business), C-3 (Interstate Business), M-1 (Light Industrial),
and M-2 (Heavy Industrial).
3) Section 5806.2 The storage of cryogenic fluids in stationary containers in the CITY
OF NEWPORT shall be prohibited except in areas zoned M-R (medical residential),
M-1 (light industrial), and M-2 (heavy industrial).
4) Section 6104.2 The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited except in areas
zoned M-1 (Light Industrial), M-2 (Heavy Industrial) provided that the authority
having jurisdiction grants approval.
(1973 Code, § 8-18, as amended by Ordinance #99-08-A, Aug. 1999; as amended by
Ordinance #2009-06, September,2006; as amended by Ordinance #2016-12 January 2017)
7-302. Enforcement. The fire prevention code adopted by reference shall be enforced by
the chief of the fire department. (1973 Code, § 8-19)
7-303. Definition of "municipality." Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the
fire prevention code herein adopted, it shall mean the City of Newport, Tennessee. (1973 Code, §
8-20)
7-304. Storage of flammable liquids, and liquefied petroleum gas. (1) The limits
referred to in § 74a of the fire prevention code adopted in this chapter, in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited and the limits referred to in
section 114 of the fire prevention code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted, are hereby declared to be the fire limits as set out in the § 7-201. (1973 Code, § 8-21)
7-305. Modifications by the chief of the fire department. The chief of the fire
department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code
adopted in this chapter upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or the duly authorized
agent of either, when there are practical difficulties in the manner of carrying out the strict letter
of the fire prevention code, if the spirit of the fire prevention code shall be observed, public
safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of the modifications, when granted or
allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon, shall be entered upon the
records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (1973 Code, §
8-22)
7-306. Appeals from decisions of the chief of the fire department. When any person
feels that he has been wrongfully aggrieved by a decision of the chief of the fire department in
interpreting and applying the fire prevention code adopted in this chapter or granting or refusing
modifications thereof, he may within thirty (30) days appeal the decision to the board of mayor
and aldermen. The appeal shall be in writing. (1973 Code, § 8-23)
7-307. Violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire
prevention code adopted in this chapter or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued
7-5
thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall, fail to comply with such an
order as affirmed or modified by the board of mayor and aldermen or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed therefore, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be subject to the application of the penalty prescribed by the penalty
provisions of this code. (1973 Code, § 8-24)
7-6
CHAPTER 4
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION
7-401. Established; composition.
7-402. Rules and regulations.
7-403. General powers and duties of the chief.
7-401. Established; composition. There is hereby established a volunteer fire
department, supported and equipped by the city and composed of a chief and a driver appointed
by the board of mayor and aldermen and such number of subordinate officers and firemen as the
chief of the fire department may initially appoint and the membership shall thereafter elect.
(1973 Code, § 8-35)
7-402. Rules and regulations. The volunteer fire department and the members thereof
shall be subject to such administrative and disciplinary rules and regulations as the chief of the
fire department shall prescribe and the board of mayor and aldermen shall approve. (1973 Code,
§ 8-36)
7-403. General powers and duties of the chief. (1) The chief of the fire department
shall be responsible for and shall have general control and supervision of all members of the
volunteer fire department; he shall see that all the fire prevention and fire protection activities of
the city are efficiently carried out and that all applicable fire regulations are observed within the
city. (2) In addition to the provisions of subsection (1) and pursuant to the requirements of state
law, the chief of the volunteer fire department is designated as an assistant to the state
commissioner of insurance and is subject to all the duties and obligations imposed by Tennessee
Code Annotated, title 53 of chapter 24, and shall be subject to the directions of the fire
prevention commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof. (1973 Code, § 8-37)
7-7
CHAPTER 5
FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
SECTION
7-501. Equipment not to be used outside of the city.
7-501. Equipment not to be used outside of the city. No equipment of the volunteer fire
department shall be used for fighting any fire outside the city. (1973 Code, § 8-38)
8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES¹
CHAPTER
1. IN GENERAL.
2. BEER.
3. BEER BOARD.
4. PERMITS.
5. SALE OF INTOXICATION LIQUOR FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.
6. SALES OF INTOXICATION LIQUOR FOR LICENSED LIQUOR STORES.
7. WINE SALES IN RETAIL FOOD STORES.
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
Section
8-101. Intoxication Liquors Prohibited; Exception.
8-102. Public Intoxication.
8-103. Reserved.
8-101. Intoxication Liquors Prohibited; Exception. 1. As used in this section, the
words, "intoxication liquor" shall be construed to include whiskey, wine, "homebrew,"
"moonshine" and other intoxicating, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors and beers which contain
more than eight (8) per cent of alcohol by weight.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or attempt to manufacture, receive, possess,
store, transport, sell or attempt to sell or furnish any intoxicating liquor within the city.
3. Nothing in subsection (b) shall make it unlawful:
a. For any priest or minister of any religious denomination or sect to receive and possess
wines for sacramental purposes or for any common or other carrier to ship or transport
wine to any priest or minister for such purposes.
b. For any common carrier to transport intoxication liquor through the city when the
carrier has a valid bill of lading for the intoxication liquor which is consigned from and
addressed to persons located outside the city in areas where the possession of intoxicating
liquor has been legalized. (Code 1959, 2-1012-103) (Ordinance #2019-02, March 2019)
8-102. Public Intoxication. It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in a
public place. (Code 1959,2-301)
8-103. Reserved.
_______________________
'State law reference
Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 57.
8-2
CHAPTER 2
BEER
Section
8-201. Possession and Sale Lawful, Subject to State Law and This Article.
8-202. Consumption or Possession in Public Places.
8-203. Privilege License Required.
8-204. Hours of Sale.
8-205. Wholesale Beer Tax.
8-206. Reserved.
8-201. Possession and Sale Lawful, Subject to State Law and This Article. The
transportation, storage, sale, distribution, possession or manufacture of beer or ale of an alcoholic
content of not more than eight (8) per cent by weight within the city shall be lawful, but subject
to the regulations prescribed in this article. (Code 1959,2-201) (Ordinance #2019-02, March
2019)
8-202. Consumption or Possession in Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person
to drink or consume, or to have an open can or bottle of beer, on the public streets, alleys,
avenues, highways, sidewalks, public parks, public school grounds or any other public place
within the city unless the premises has a beer permit issued pursuant to this division. (Code
1959,2-303)
8-203. Privilege License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, store or
manufacture beer or other beverage subject to this division without first obtaining a privilege
license therefore as required by section 17-1. (Code 1959,2-203)
8-204. Hours of Sale It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or distribute any beer or
other beverage subject to this division within the city between the hours of 3:00 am and 8:00 am
on weekdays or 1:00 am and 10:00 am on Sundays. (Code 1959,2-208) (Ordinance #2019-02,
March 2019)
8-205. Wholesale Beer Tax. The recorder shall collect for the city the seventeen (17) per
cent wholesale beer tax levied by the Wholesale Beer Tax Act as set out in Chapter 3 of Title 57,
Tennessee Code Annotated. (Code 1959, 6-401) State law reference - Wholesale beer tax,
T.C.A., 57-301-et seq.
8-206. Reserved.
*State law reference - Beer and alcoholic beverage of less than five per cent, T.C.A. 57-201 et
esq.
8-3
CHAPTER 3
BEER BOARD
Section
8-301. Created; Composition; Appointment of Members.
8-302. Qualifications of Members.
8-303. Terms of Members.
8-304. Filling Vacancies.
8-305. Organization; Chairman.
8-306. Meetings.
8-307. Quorum.
8-308. Reserved.
8-301. Created; Composition; Appointment of Members. There is hereby created a
board, to be known as the Beer Board of the City of Newport, consisting of three (3) members
appointed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. (Code 1959, 2-202)
8-302. Qualifications of Members. No person shall be eligible for membership on the
Beer Board unless he shall have been a resident and taxpayer of the City of Newport for at least
one (1) year next preceding the date of his appointment, shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of
age and shall be a resident citizen of the United States. (Code 1959, 2-202)
8-303. Terms of Members. All members of the Beer Board shall serve and hold office
for a term of four (4) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The members
appointed by the mayor and approved by the Board of Aldermen shall be in staggered terms so at
least one member’s term expires each year.
Each existing member shall stagger their term as the first member up for appointment
shall serve and hold a two (2) year term, the second member up for appointment shall serve and
hold a three (3) year term and the third member up for appointment shall serve and hold a four
(4) year term (Code 1959, 2-202) (Ordinance #2018-15)
8-304. Filing Vacancies. When any vacancy occurs in the Beer Board by reason of
death, resignation or removal of a member or other cause, the vacancy shall be filled by an
appointment made by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen at its next succeeding regular meeting
after the vacancy occurs, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable. (Code 1959,2-202)
8-305. Organization; Chairman. Within ten (10) days after their appointment, the
members of the Beer Board shall hold a meeting for the purpose of effecting the organization of
the Beer Board. The Beer Board shall select one of its numbers to act as chairman. The chairman
shall preside at all meetings of the Beer Board and shall keep a detailed and accurate record of all
actions taken by the Beer Board. (Code 1959,2-202)
8-4
8-306. Meetings. Meetings of the Beer Board shall be held on the first Tuesday of each
month or upon the call of its chairman, when necessary and proper to effectually carry out the
provision of this article. (Ordinance #2014-03, May 2014)
8-307. Quorum. At all meetings of the Beer Board, a majority shall constitute a quorum
and the Beer Board shall act only by vote of a majority of all members. (Code 1959,2-202)
8-308. Reserved.
8-5
CHAPTER 4
PERMITS
Section
8-401. Permit Required for Engaging in Beer Business.
8-402. Application.
8-403. Limitation on Number of Beer Permits Authorized to be Issue.
8-404. Locations Ineligible for Permit.
8-405. Issuance; Contents.
8-406. Duration of Permit.
8-407. Scope of Permit: Bond.
8-408. Restrictions on Signs.
8-409. Grounds for Revocation; Unlawful Acts.
8-410. Suspension or Revocation; Grounds
8-411. Special Events Permits.
8-412. Outdoor Serving Area
8-413. Reserved
8-401. Permit Required for Engaging in Beer Business. It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture beer without first making
application to and obtaining a permit from the Beer Board. The application shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable
application fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Said fee shall be
in the form of cash or check made payable to the City of Newport. Each applicant must be a
person of good moral character and certify that he has read and is familiar with the provisions of
this.
a) Privilege tax. There is hereby imposed in the business of selling, distributing, storing or
manufacturing beer an annual privilege tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person, firm,
corporation, joint stock company syndicate or association engaged in the sale, distrusting,
storage or manufacture of beer shall remit the tax on January 1, 1994 and each successive
January 1, to the City of Newport, Tennessee. At that time a new permit is issued to any business
subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on prorated basis
for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next payment date. (Ordinance #2014-03,
May 2014)
b) Civil penalty in lieu if suspension. The Beer Board may, at any time it imposes a revocation or
suspension offer a permit holder the alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed $1,500 for
each offense of making or permitting to be made any sales to minors or a civil penalty is offered
as an alternative to revocation or suspension the holder shall have seven (7) days within which to
pay the civil penalty before the revocation or suspension shell be imposed. If the civil penalty is
paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed withdrawn.
8-402. Application.
a) Each applicant for a permit required by this division shall submit a written application which
shall establish the following:
8-6
1) That if the applicant is a firm or corporation, it is authorized to conduct business in the
state of Tennessee
2) That the applicant has not been convicted of any violation of the laws of the state
prohibiting the possession, sale, manufacture or transportation of intoxicating liquor or
any other crime involving moral turpitude within the pass ten (10) years.
3) That, in the contemplated place of business, proper sanitary facilities are available.
4) That the contemplated place of business is so located as not to likely cause congestion
of traffic or interference with schools or churches or interfere with the public health,
safety and morals.
5) That the applicant is of good character and repute.
6) That the applicant is the owner or a stockholder, if the business is a firm or
corporation, and whether a wholesale or retail sale or distribution is contemplated.
b) Each application for a permit required by this division shall be filed with the chairman of the
Beer Board , shall at all times be kept on file by the Beer Board and shall be open to inspection
by the general public at all reasonable times.
c) Any person making any false statement in his application for a permit required by this division
shall forfeit his permit and shall not be eligible to receive another permit by this division for a
period often (10) years thereafter.
d) Each application for a permit required by this division shall be carefully examined by the Beer
Board and a complete record of its action thereon shall be kept in writing as a part of the regular
proceedings of the Beer Board. (Code 1959,2-206)
e) Each applicant will be required to have a TBI background check prior to the meeting. The cost
of the background check will be paid for by the applicant to the city with the application. The
background fee is non-refundable. (Ordinance #2014-03, May 2014)
f) A temporary permit may be issued by the City Recorder and Beer Board Chairman to allow
the continued sale of alcoholic beverages at a location which presently has a valid permit. A
temporary permit may be issued in order to allow a new applicant to be administratively
processed and considered by the Beer Board. The applicant for a temporary permit shall meet all
requirements set for the in these ordinance and the temporary permit shall not be issued for more
than 40 days and regardless of stated ending date, the temporary permit ends the date the Beer
Board rules on the permanent beer sales permit. The non-refundable application fee for a
temporary permit is in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) (Ordinance #2014-03, May 2014)
8-403. Limitation on Number of Beer Permits Authorized to be Issued. The Beer
Board is expressly prohibited from issuing any permit required by this division when the number
of existing, currently effective beer permits for on premises consumption in the city equals one
(1) for each two hundred seventy five (275) inhabitants of the city according to the latest federal
census. Any beer permit issued in violation of this section shall be null and void. (Code 1959,
2-204)
Beer permit issued for "Off Premises Consumption" is not governed by the limitations of
this
8-404. Locations Ineligible for Permit. No beer permit for on premises consumption
shall be issued to any person to sell or distribute beer or other beverage regulated by this division
at any location which is situated closer than three hundred and fifty (350) feet from premises
(from door to door) upon which is located a church or other place of public worship, or upon
8-7
which is located a school. Any permit issued pursuant to this division in violation of this section
shall be null and void. (Code 1959,2-205)
Beer permit issued for "Off Premises Consumption" is not governed by the limitations of
this section.
8-405. Issuance; Contents. Upon favorable action by the Beer Board on any application
submitted to it for permit required by this division, the permit shall be issued to applicant. The
permit shall contain the name of the applicant, the type of beer business authorized, the location
of the premises where the business is authorized, the date of issuance, the signature of the
chairman of the Beer Board and such reasonable conditions or restrictions as the Beer Board may
direct. (Code 1959,2-207)
8-406. Duration of Permit. Any permit issued by the Beer Board pursuant to this
division which is not utilized within a period of fifteen (15) days and then thereafter
continuously so used, for the purpose for which it was issued shall lapse and become null and
void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect until its revocation by the Beer Board in
the manner prescribed in this division. (Code 1959, 2-207)
8-407. Scope of Permit: Bond. A permit issued pursuant to this division shall entitle the
permittee, upon his payment of all applicable privilege taxes and conditioned upon his
continuing to pay the applicable privilege taxes and any fines assessed against him for violations
of this chapter, to obtain from the recorder the privilege license required by this article. (Code
1959,2-207)
8-408. Restrictions on Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a beer permit
issued to this division to hang or maintain any sign advertising beer so that the sign extends
perpendicularly over any street or sidewalk. No person holding a beer permit issued pursuant to
this division shall maintain outside or window beer signs with a combined total area exceeding
six (6) square feet. (Code 1959,2-209)
8-409. Grounds for Revocation; Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful and grounds for
revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this division for any premittee under this division to do,
permit or suffer any of the following acts:
a) To make or permit to be sales or distribution of beer to persons under twenty-one (21) years of
age
b) To employ directly in the sale or distribution of beverages subject to this article or to permit
persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to loiter on the premises
c) To sell or distribute beverages subject to this division to intoxicated persons or under the
influence of intoxicating beverages
d) To sell or distribute beverages subject to this division to persons who are feeble-minded,
insane or otherwise mentally incapacitated
e) To fail to provide proper sanitary facilities
f) To fail to provide unobstructed visibility, except for hotels and incorporated clubs and lodges,
in the front window
g) To sell or distribute beverage subject to this division at any place where pool or billiards is
played unless the sale, distribution and consumption of beverages is made in the front of the
8-8
room or place and where a solid petition or wall separates the place from the pool or billiard
parlor (Ordinance #2014-03, May 2014)
h) To sell or distribute beverages subject to this division at any place where gambling is allowed
or permitted
i) To allow loud, unusual or obnoxious noises or disorderly conduct on his premises
j) To employ any person who has been convicted of any violation of state statutes prohibiting the
possession, sale, manufacture or transportation of intoxicating liquors or any other crime
involving moral turpitude within the past ten (10) years
k) To tolerate within his premises any intoxicating liquor as defined in this chapter
1) To otherwise violate any provision of this chapter or any reasonable condition or restriction
written into his permit by the Beer Board (Code 1959,2-210)
8-410. Suspension or Revocation; Grounds.
a) Complaints brought for the purpose of suspending or revoking a permit issued pursuant to this
division shall be made in writing and filed with the chairman of the Beer Board, who shall
thereupon give or cause to be given written notice, accompanied by a copy of the written
complaint, commanding the permittee under this division to appear, at a time and place
designated in the notice, before the Beer Board and show cause why the permit issued pursuant
to this division should not be suspended or revoked. The notice shall be served either by
registered letter or by any police officer in the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing when the permittee is cited to appear. On the specified date, the Beer Board shall
publicly hear and determine the nature and merits of the complaint and, for this purpose, the
chairman of the Beer Board is authorized to compel cause the attendance of witnesses by
subpoena. After the hearing, the Beer Board may for proper cause suspend or revoke any permit
issued pursuant to this division.
b) Upon final hearing and determination by the Beer Board, either party may remove the cause
by certiorari to the next term of the circuit court of the county. (Code 1959,2-11)
8-411. Special Events Permit.
a) In addition to the off-premises and on-premises permits provided for in this article, the
Beer Board shall have the authority to issue special event permits for the sale, storage,
dispensing, serving, distribution and/or manufacture of beer in the city for periods not to exceed
a total of 10 days during a calendar year. A special event permit may be issued by the Beer
Board for scheduled sporting, recreation, amusement, dining, entertainment and other similar
events and activities and shall specify with reasonable particularity the premises on which the
permit shall be valid and the time or times during which the permit shall be valid. Special event
permits shall be issued upon the same conditions governing other permits and the Beer Board
shall determine and specify the terms and conditions for issuance of each special event permit.
Special event permits may be issued for onpremises
consumption only, but no such permit shall
allow the sale, storage, dispensing, serving, distribution, or manufacture of beer on publicly
owned or controlled property, or on public right-of-way, except as may be specifically
authorized by the city council from time to time.
b) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture
beer without first making application to and obtaining a permit from the Beer Board. The
application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) for a one (1) day event or five hundred dollars ($500) for a three (3) day or
8-9
more days' event. Said fee shall be in the form of cash or check made payable to the City of
Newport. Each applicant must be a person of good moral character and certify that he has read
and is familiar with the provisions of this.
c) The Beer Board may issue a special event permit of indefinite duration for scheduled events
and such a permit may authorize the sale, storage, dispensing, serving, distribution and/or
manufacture of beer for periods not to exceed a total of 10 days during a calendar year.
d) The term of a special event permit issued for a reoccurring event may be extended by the Beer
Board for successive additional terms, not to exceed one year each, upon application of the
holder and a showing satisfactory to the Beer Board that: (1) there has been no substantial
change in status of the licensed premises or the eligibility of the holder since the permit was
issued; (2) extending the term of the permit would not be detrimental to public health, safety or
welfare; and (3) all applicable licenses have been obtained and fees paid. Such an application
shall be filed with the chairman of the Beer Board prior to the expiration of the permit and at
least 30 days prior to its consideration by the Beer Board. (Ordinance #2014-03, May 2014)
Section 8-412: Outdoor Serving Area
“Outdoor Serving Area” is defined as a patio, deck, courtyard, or other outdoor area where
permitted establishment provides service where the outdoor serving area is (1) contiguous to the
exterior of the building in which the business is located, (2) operated and controlled by the
business, and (3) fenced or surrounded on all sides except for designated entrances and exits.
1) An outdoor serving area may not include all or any part of an area otherwise used by the
business or by the public for parking in areas within the city zoned C-1, C-2, and C-3
(pedestrian commercial district).
2) A permittee having this category of license shall be allowed to sell and serve on outdoor
serving area, for which access is provided only by going through the interior of the
building.
3) The outdoor serving area shall be closed by a privacy fence, a minimum of six (6) feet in
height, which obstructs normal walking access to the outdoor serving area, except by
entering through the interior of the building.
4) The privacy fence shall have at least one (1) emergency exit, to be opened only on the
event of an emergency and so marked, which will emit an audible sound, such as a bell,
siren or other like sound, when the emergency exit is opened. Additional such exits may
be required depending on the size of the fence area, as specified in the City of Newport
Fire Protection Ordinance.
5) A permittee having a minimum of forty (40) seats in the interior of the building under
permanent roof and enclosed on all sides. The outdoor serving area shall not exceed the
interior of number of seating.
Non-complying issue shall be corrected if change of owner of business. (Ordinance
#2017-15, September 2017)
8-413. Reserved.
8-10
CHAPTERS 5
SALES OF INTOXICATION LIQUOR FOR
CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES
Section
8-501. Subject to Certain Statutes and Restrictions.
8-502. Terms Defined.
8-503. Intoxicating Liquors for Consumption On Premises.
8-504. Regulations and Prohibited Practices.
8-505. Revocation of Beer Permit Reported To ABC.
8-506. Prohibited Sexual or Pornographic Conduct.
8-507. Privilege Taxes.
8-508. Violations; Penalty.
8-509. Chapter Cumulative and Supplemental.
8-510. Reserved.
8-501. Subject to Certain Statutes and Restrictions. (1) The general provisions of the
state law relating to intoxicating liquors contained in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-101, et
seq., are hereby adopted as part of this chapter and by reference are fully incorporated in this
chapter.
(2) Various rules and regulations promulgated from time to time by the Tennessee Alcoholic
Beverage Commission and Department of Revenue regarding the sale of intoxicating liquors for
consumption on premises are hereby adopted as a part of this chapter and by reference are fully
incorporated herein.
(3) It shall be unlawful to sell wine and other alcoholic beverages as defined in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-4-102 to be consumed on the premises of any hotel, commercial passenger boat
company, restaurant, commercial airlines, passenger trains, premiere type tourist resort or club,
convention center, historic performing arts center, permanently constructed facility within an
urban park, any historic interpretive center, community theater, historic mansion house site, any
restaurant in the terminal building of a commercial air carrier airport, any zoological institution,
any museum, within the corporate limits of the City of Newport, Tennessee, except as provided
by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 57, and by the rules and regulations promulgate thereunder,
and as provided in this chapter. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-502. Terms Defined. The definitions set forth in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-
4102 are hereby incorporated herein as if copied verbatim in their entirety. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-503. Intoxicating Liquors for Consumption On Premises. (1) No business which
sells intoxicating liquors for consumption on the premises shall be permitted in a location which
is zoned other than C-2, C-3, C-4. In addition, 8-10 no such business shall be located close to a
church (excluding churches in C-2 zone), or school, or part-time than the minimum distance of
separation required for the zone in which the building is located, measured by the length of a
straight line drawn from the closest points of the church or school building or park boundary and
8-11
the building proposed for the sale of intoxicating liquors for consumption on premises. Said
minimum distances of separation shall be as follows:
Zone School Church Park
C-1 200' 200' 200'
C-2 200' 200' 200'
C-3 200' 200' 200'
For the purpose of this section the terms "church" and "church building" shall not include
any church building or building used for church purposes which is located on privately owned
real property. "School" shall mean any primary or secondary public or private school building
which is used for school purposes, and shall not include a vocational school or university. "Park"
shall mean municipal property designated public parks and maintained as such by the
municipality.
(2) A licensee holding a license for selling intoxicating liquors for consumption on the
premises of a restaurant shall illustrate that he has adequate parking to provide one (1) parking
space for an automobile for each two (2) seats in his place of business. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-504. Regulations and Prohibited Practices. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation holding a license to sell intoxicating liquors for consumption on the premises to
violate the rules, regulations, and prohibited practices set forth in Tennessee Code Annotated, §§
57-4-201 and 57-4-203, which code sections are incorporated herein as if copied verbatim in
their entirety. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-505. Revocation of Beer Permit Reported to ABC. When any person, firm or
corporation holds both a license to sell intoxicating liquors for consumption on the premises and
a beer permit, should the beer permit be revoked or suspended, the city recorder is hereby
directed to send a certified copy of the revocation to the alcoholic beverage commission pursuant
to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-202(b). In addition, when the person, Beer Board, or city
council is considering the suspension or revocation of such beer permit, consideration shall also
be given to suspending the licensees license for sale of intoxication liquors for consumption on
the premises as provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-202. Said person, Beer Board, or
city council shall have the authority to suspend the liquor license of any such person, firm, or
corporation as authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-4-204. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-506. Prohibited Sexual or Pornographic Conduct. Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-
4- 204 is incorporated herein as if copied verbatim in its entirety. The City of Newport Police
Department is hereby authorized and directed to investigate and police the places of business
holding a license to sell intoxicating liquors for consumption on premises and shall report
violations to the alcoholic beverage commission as authorized, by Tennessee Code Annotated, §
57-4-204(e). (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-507. Privilege Taxes. (1) Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § S7-4-301(b)(2) the
City of Newport hereby levies the following taxes for the privilege of selling intoxicating liquors
for consumption on premises, which taxes shall be for municipal purposes to be paid annually
towit:
8-12
(a) Private club $300.00
(b) Hotel and motel $1,000.00
(c) Convention center $500.00
(d) Premier type tourist resort $1,500.00
(e) Restaurant, according to seating capacity, on licensed premises:
(i) 75 through 125 seats $600.00
(ii) 126 through175 seats $750.00
(iii) 176 through 225 seats $800.00
(iv) 226 through 275 seats $900.00
(v) 276 seats and over $1,000.00
If a restaurant is licensed by the commission to sell wine only under Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 57-4-101(n), the privilege tax imposed shall be one-fifth (1/5) the amount specified
in this subdivision (b)(1).
(a) Historic performing arts center $300.00
(b) Urban park center $500.00
(c) Commercial passenger boat company $750.00
(d) Historic mansion house site $300.00
(e) Historic interpretive center $300.00
(f) Community theater $300.00
(g) Zoological institution $300.00
(h) Museum $300.00
(i) Establishment in a terminal building of a commercial air
traffic airport $1,000.00
(j) Commercial airline travel club $500.00
The foregoing taxes shall be payable on the date the license is issued by the ABC and the
foregoing taxes shall be prorated from said date of issuance until the next following October 1, at
which time, a full year's taxes shall then be due and immediately payable.
(2) In addition to the privilege taxes levied in subsection (1), there further levied a tax
equal to the rate of fifteen percent (15%) of the sales price of all alcoholic beverages sold for
consumption on the premises the tax to be computed on the gross sales of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises for the purpose of remitting the tax due the state, and to include
each and every retail thereof.
(3) No tax authorized or imposed by this section shall be levied or assessed from any
charitable, nonprofit, or political organization selling alcoholic beverages at retail pursuant to a
special occasion license.
(4) When any licensee shall fail to pay the initial privilege tax or any annual taxes due
each October 1, there shall be imposed a penalty in the amount of five percent (5%) from each
month of delinquency or part thereof not to exceed a total of twenty-five percent (25%), provided
however each licensee shall have thirty (30) days from the due date before any penalty starts to
accrue, interest on the taxes shall accrue at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum until
paid.
(5) All penalties imposed by this section and taxes provided by this section may be
collected as other taxes payable to the city.
8-13
(6) Should the licensee also hold a beer permit issued by the city, a failure to pay taxes
under this section shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of the beer permit.
Repeated violations of this section will constitute grounds for permanent revocation of a beer
permit. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-508. Violations; Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00). Upon conviction of any person under this chapter, it shall be mandatory for
the city judge to immediately certify said conviction, whether on appeal or not, directly to the
Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-509. Chapter Cumulative and Supplemental. That the provisions of this chapter shall
be cumulative and supplemental to any other ordinance or law now existing or hereafter enacted;
and it is not the intent of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by enacting this chapter to repeal by
implication any other ordinance or law not existing or hereafter enacted. (Ord. #_, Dec. 2004)
8-510. Reserved.
8-14
CHAPTER 6
SALES OF INTOXICATION LIQUOR FOR
LICENSED LIQUOR STORES
Section
8-601. Subject to Regulation.
8-602. Terms Defined.
8-603. Manufacture prohibited. Wholesale business prohibited.
8-604. Requirements for applicants who seek certification from board. Certificate required. Contents
- Exceptions.
8-605. Miscellaneous restrictions on license holders and their employees. Location
restrictions on retailers; Applications for transfer
8-606. Number of Retailers.
8-607. Bonds of Retailers.
8-608. License to be Displayed. Transfer of Licenses Prohibited; Term of Licenses; Use of
Agents.
8-609. Expiration and Renewal of Licenses. New License After Revocation.
8-610. Federal License, Effect of.
8-611. Inspection Fee.
8-612. Regulations for Purchase and Sale of Intoxication Liquors. Retailers Not to Solicit Orders
or Make Deliveries off Their Premises.
8-613. Regulation of Retailers.
8-614. Recorder May Examine Books, Papers, ect. of Dealers.
8-615.violations.
8-616. Public Drinking and Public Display of Alcoholic Beverage Prohibited.
8-617. Charter Not Applicable to Beer.
8-618. Reserved.
8-601. Subject to Regulation. It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of selling,
storing, transporting, or distributing, or to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages within the
corporate limits of this municipality except as provided by Title 57, Chapter 1, Tennessee Code
Annotated, and by rules and regulations promulgated there under, and as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-602. Terms Defined. Whenever used herein unless the context requires otherwise:
1) "Alcoholic beverage" or "beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine,
and every liquid containing alcohol, spirits, or wine and capable of being consumed by a human
being, other than patented medicine, beer, or wine, where the latter two (2)contain an alcoholic
content of five percent (5% )by weight, or less.
2) "License" means the license issued herein and "licensee" means any person to whom
such license has been issued.
3) "Retail sale" or" sale at retail" means a sale to a consumer or to any person for any
purpose other than for resale.
4) "Retailer" means any person who sells at retail any beverage for the sale of which a
license is required under the provisions herein.
8-15
5) "Manufacturer" means and includes a distiller, vintner, and rectifier. "Manufacture"
means and includes distilling, rectifying, and operating a winery.
6) "Wholesale sale" or "sale at "wholesale" means a sale to any person for purposes of
resale.
7) “Wholesaler" means any person who sells at wholesale any beverage for the sale of
which a license is required under the provisions of Title 57, Tennessee Code Annotated.
8) "Wine" means the product ofthenormala1coholic fermentation of the juice of fresh,
sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and necessary additions to correct defects due
to climate, saccharine, and seasonal conditions, including champagne, and sparkling and fortified
wine of alcoholic content not to exceed twenty-one percent (21 %)by volume. No other product
shall be called "wine unless designated by appropriate prefixed descriptive of the fruit or other
product from which the same was predominately produced, or an artificial or imitation wine.
9) The word" gallon" or" gallons, wherever used herein, shall be construed to mean a
vine gallon or wine gallons, or one hundred and twenty-eight (128)ounces. The word "quart"
whenever used herein will be construed to mean one- fourth (1/4) of a wine gallon. The word
"pint," wherever used, shall be construed to mean one-eighth (1/8) of a wine gallon.
10) Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter, and
the singular shall include the plural.
11) The term "federal license” as used herein, shall not mean tax receptor permit.
12) The word "board" as used herein shall mean the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of Newport.
13) The word "recorder" as used here in shall refer to the city recorder of the City of
Newport.
14) The word" city" shall refer to the City of Newport.
15) "Commission" means the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission. (Ord. #_,
August 1983)
8-603. Manufacture Prohibited. Wholesale Business Prohibited. The manufacture of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Newport. No person,
firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages at wholesale
within the corporate limits of the City of Newport. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-604. Requirements for Applicants Who Seek Certification From Board.
Certificate Required. Contents - Exceptions.
a) As a condition precedent to the issuance of a license under T.C.A. § 57-3-204, every applicant
for a license under said section shall submit with his application to the alcoholic beverage
commission a certificate signed by the mayor and a majority of the members of the Board of
Aldermen of the City of Newport.
b) Said certificate must state: (1) That the applicant or applicants who are to be in actual charge
of said business are of good moral character and are personally known to the official or officials
signing the certificate, and, if a corporation, that the executive officers or those in control are of
good moral character and personally known to the official or officials signing said certificate, or
that such official or officials have made careful investigation of the applicant's general character
and from such investigation it is found to be good, and that in the official's or officials' opinion
tae applicant will refrain from a violation of § 57-3-101 - 57-3-504, Tennessee Code Annotated,
8-16
and is entitled to the license applied for;(2) That the applicant or applicants have secured a
location for said business which complies with all restrictions or any local law, ordinance, or
resolution, duly adopted by the local authorities as to location within the city or county; and
(3)That the applicant or applicants have complied with any local law, ordinance, or resolution
duly adopted by the local authorities regulating the number of retail licenses to be issued within
the jurisdiction.
c) Each applicant must submit a written application to the City Recorder along with an
investigation fee of Five Hundred and 00/100 Dollars ($500.00) and the City Recorder is to refer
the application to the City Attorney for review and the Chief of Police for investigation who
must submit written findings to the Board within ten (10) days of the date said application is
filed. All but One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) of said fee shall be refunded to those applicants
which are denied.
d) An applicant may seek review of the denial of a certificate by instituting an action in the
chancery court of Cocke County within sixty (60) days of the denial.
e) The requirements imposed by this section shall not be applicable to those holding retail
r licenses on the date of enactment. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-605. Miscellaneous Restrictions on License Holders and Their Employees.
Location Restrictions on Retailers; Applications For Transfer.
1) The license fee or every license hereunder shall be payable by the person making
application for such license and to whom it is issued, and no other person shall pay for any
license issued under this chapter. In addition to all other penalties, a violation of this section shall
authorize and require the revocation of the license, the fee for which was paid by another, and
also the revocation of the license, if any, of the person so paying for the license of another.
2) No retailer's license shall be issued to a person who is a holder of a public office, either
appointive or elective, or who is a public employee, either national, state, city, or county. It shall
be unlawful for any such person to have any interest in such retail business, directly, or
indirectly, either proprietary or by means of any loan, mortgage, or lien, or to participate in the
profits of any such business
3) No retailer shall be a person who has been convicted of a felony involving moral
turpitude within ten (10) years prior to the time he or the concern with which he is connected
shall receive a license; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who
has been so convicted, but whose rights of citizenship have been restored or judgment of infamy
has been removed by a court of competent jurisdiction; and in the case of any such conviction
occurring after a license has been issued and received, the said license shall immediately be
revoked, if such convicted felon be an individual licensee, and if not, the partnership,
corporation, or association with which he is connected shall immediately discharge him.
4) No license shall under any condition be issued to any person who within ten (10) years
preceding application for such license or permit shall have been convicted of any offense under
the laws of the State of Tennessee or of any other state or of the United States prohibiting or
regulating the ale, possession, transportation, storing, manufacturing, or otherwise handling
intoxicating liquors or who has during said period been engaged in business alone or with others,
in violation of any of said laws or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or as they
existed or may exist thereafter.
8-17
5) No manufacturer, brewer, or wholesaler shall have any interest in the business or
building containing licensed premises of any other person having a license hereunder, or in the
fixtures of any such person,
6) It shall be unlawful for any person to have ownership in, or participate, either directly
or indirectly, in the profits of any retail business licensed, unless his interest in said business and
the nature, extent, and character thereof shall appear on the application; or if the interest is
acquired after the issuance of a license, unless it shall be fully disclosed to the City Council and
approved by City Council. Where such interest is owned by such person on or before the
application for any license, the burden shall be upon such person to see that this section is fully
complied with whether, he, himself, signs or prepares the application, or whether the same is
prepared by another; or if said interest is acquired after the issuance of the license, the burden of
said disclosure of the acquisition of such interest shall be upon the seller and the purchaser.
7) No person shall be employed in the sale of alcoholic beverages except a citizen of the
United States, the State of Tennessee, and Cocke County.
8) No retailer or any employee thereof, engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall
be person under the legal drinking age as established by the State of Tennessee; and it shall be
unlawful for any retailer to employ any person under the legal drinking age of the State of
Tennessee for the physical storage, sale, or distribution of alcoholic beverages, or to permit any
such person under said age in its place of business to engage in the storage, sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages.
9) No retailer shall employ in the storage, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, any
person who, within ten (10) years prior to the date of his employment, shall have been convicted
of a felony involving moral turpitude, and in case an employee should be convicted he shall
immediately be discharged; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person
who has been convicted, but whose rights of citizenship have been restored, or judgment of
infamy has been removed by a court of competent juristic ion.
10) The issuance of a license does not vest a property right in the licensee, but is a
privilege subject to revocation or suspension under this chapter.
11) Misrepresentation of a material fact or concealment of a material fact required to be
shown in the application for a license shall be a violation of this chapter.
12) It shall be unlawful for a licensee to advertise by signs, window displays, posters, or
any other designs intended to advertise any alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits of the
city, except by a sign approved by the city recorder, in letters not larger than twelve (12) inches
in height designating the premises as "Package Store." Only one such sign, and no other, shall be
permitted and no sign shall extend or project from the building; provided however, that when a
store is located at an intersection a sign shall be permitted on both sides of the building facing the
two streets. The lettering on the approved sign shall not be artificially illuminated, other than by
exterior flood or spot lights. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any manufacturer or
wholesaler from advertising in news media.
13) If a licensee is a corporation, then in addition to the other provisions of this
ordinance: (a) No person owning stock in or who is an officer or director in such corporate
licensee shall have any interest as an owner, stockholder, officer, director, or otherwise in any
business licensed to engage in the sale at wholesale or retail of alcoholic beverages in the state or
in any other place; (b) No stock of such corporate licensee shall be transferred by sale, gift,
pledge, operation of law or otherwise to any person who has not been a resident of the city for
8-18
the two (2) consecutive years immediately preceding the date of any such transfer; nor shall any
of said stock be so transferred to any person who would not be otherwise qualified as an original
stockholder of an initial corporate applicant for a license hereunder.
14) The location of retail liquor stores shall be limited to business zones described in the
zoning ordinance of the City of Newport.
The location of said store shall be approved by a majority of the board; but a liquor store
shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of the property line upon which is erected any
church edifice, school building, public park, playground, as measured in a direct line from the
center of the front door of the place of business. All retail sales shall be confined to the premises
of the licensee. No liquor store shall be located in the city on any premises above the ground
floor or in any basement. Each such store shall have only one (1) main entrance for use by the
public as a means of ingress and egress for the purpose of purchasing alcoholic beverages at
retail; provided, that any liquor store adjoining the lobby of a hotel or motel may maintain an
additional entrance into such lobby as long as such lobby is open to the public.
A retailer's license shall not be valid except at the premises recited in the application, and
any change of location without the approval of the board shall be a cause for revocation of the
license.
Whenever an existing licensee wishes to move the location of his retail liquor business,
the Board shall apply the following criteria following the receipt of a written application by the
licensee setting out all relevant information regarding the new location and the reasons justifying
the relocation, to-wit:
(a) The new location must comply with all zoning requirements of the city.
(b) The applicant for transfer must pay a fee of Two Hundred Fifty and 0011 00 Dollar
($250.00) to the City Recorder who will investigate the new location and advise the
Board within thirty (30) days of the proposed location's suitability.
(c) The physical transfer of the store must be completed within ninety (90) days after the
transfer is granted. Under exceptional and unusual circumstances, the applicant may
request an additional thirty (30) days time.
(d) The approval of all applications for the transfer of a retail liquor license shall be
within the discretion of the Board.
(e) Circumstances which may be considered by the Board include:
i. Physical destruction of the premises not the fault of the licensee.
ii. Bona fide termination of the lease.
iii. Eminent domain or condemnation proceedings causing serious disruption of
the business.
iv. Substantial changes in traffic patterns surrounding the existing store.
v. Situations which on the discretion of the Board are determined to be a material
change of circumstances.
(f) The proposed new location must comply with such statutes regulations, and
ordinances for new licenses as are determined to be applicable and material in the
discretion of the Board. (Ord.#_, August 1983)
8-606. Number of Retailers. The number and location of all retail licensees shall be
subject to the sound discretion of the Mayor and Board. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-19
8-607. Bonds of Retailers. Bonds required here in shall be executed by a surety
company, duly authorized and qualified to do business in Tennessee. Bonds of retailers shall be
One Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($1,000.00). Said bonds shall be conditioned that the principal
thereof shall pay any fine which may be assessed against such principal. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-608. License to be Displayed. Transfer of Licenses Prohibited; Term of Licenses;
Use of Agents. Persons granted a license to carry on the business or undertaking contemplated
herein shall, before being qualified to do business, display and post, and keep displayed and
posted, in the most conspicuous place in their premises, such license.
The holder of a license may not sell, assign, or transfer such license to any person, and
said license shall be good and valid only for the calendar year in which the same was issued.
Provided, however, that licensees who are serving in the military forces of the United States in
time of war may appoint an agent to operate under the license of the licensee during the absence
of the licensee. In such instances, the license shall continue to be carried and renewed in the
name of the owner. The agent of the licensee shall conform to all the requirements of a licensee.
No person who is ineligible to obtain a license shall be eligible to serve as the agent of a licensee
under this section. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-609. Expiration and Renewal of Licenses. New License After Revocation. Licenses
issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of each calendar year. Where a license is
revoked, no new license shall be issued to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on the same
premises until after the expiration of one (1 ) year from the date of said revocation becomes final
and effective. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-610. Federal License, Effect Of. The possession of a federal license to sell alcoholic
beverages without the corresponding requisite state license shall in all cases be prima facie
evidence that the holder of such federal license is selling alcoholic beverages in violation of the
terms of this chapter. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-611. Inspection Fee. There is hereby imposed an inspection fee of eight percent (8%)
of the wholesale price of alcoholic beverages by licensees under this chapter, payable to the city
by each wholesaler The payment of said fee shall be accompanied by a report of gross sales of
said beverages for each calendar month. Failure of the wholesaler to pay said fee and make said
report accurately within the time prescribed by council may be cause for appropriate action.
(Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-612. Regulations For Purchase and Sale of Intoxication Liquors. Retailers Not to
Solicit Orders or Make Deliveries Off Their Premises.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to buy any alcoholic beverages herein
defined from any person who does not hold the appropriate license under this chapter authorizing
the sale of said beverages to him.
(2) No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverages from anyone other than a licensed
wholesaler, nor shall any wholesaler sell any alcoholic beverages to anyone other than a licensed
retailer.
(3) No licensee shall sell intoxicating liquors at retail in connection with any other
business or in the same store where any other business is carried on.
8-20
(4) No retail store shall be located except on the ground floor and it shall have one (1)
main entrance opening on a public street and such place of business shall have no other entrance
for use by the public except as hereafter provided. When are tail store is located on the comer of
two (2) public streets such retail store may maintain a door opening on each of the public streets.
Provided, however, that any salesroom adjoining the lobby of a hotel or other public building
may maintain an additional door into such lobby so long as same shall be open to the public, and
provided further-, that every retail store shall be provided with whatever entrances and exits may
be required by existing or future municipal ordinances.
(5) No holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for retail shall sell, deliver,
or cause, permit, or procure to be sold or delivered, any alcoholic beverages on credit.
(6) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises of the seller.
(7) The sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages shall be confined to the premises of the
licensee and curb service shall not be permitted. No sales shall be made through drive-in
windows.
(8) To the fullest extent consistent with the nature of the establishment, full, free, and
unobstructed vision shall be afforded from the street and public highway to the interior of the
place of sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages there sold or dispensed.
(9) No form of entertainment, including pinball machines, music machines, or similar
devices, shall be permitted to operate upon any premises from which alcoholic beverages are
sold.
(10) No holder of a license issued shall employ any canvasser or solicitor for the purpose
of receiving an order from a consumer for any alcoholic beverage at the residence or place of bus
mess of such consumer, nor shall any such licensee receive or accept any such order which shall
have been solicited or received at the residence or place of business of such consumer. This
paragraph shall not be construed so as to prohibit the solicitation by a state licensed wholesaler
of an order from any licensed retailer at the licensed premises. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-613. Regulation of Retailers. (1) No retailer shall, directly or indirectly, operate more
than one ( 1) P ace of business for the sale of alcoholic beverages, and the word "indirectly" shall
include and mean any kind of interest in another place of business, by way of stock ownership,
loan, partner's interest, or otherwise.
(2) No retailer shall sell, lend, or give away any alcoholic beverages between 9 o'clock
P.M. on Saturday and 9 o'clock A.M. on Monday of each week and between 10 o'clock P.M. and
9 o'clock A.M. Monday through Saturday, prevailing time.
(3) No retailer shall sell, lend, or give away any alcoholic beverages on any day of a
municipal, general, or primary election or upon Christmas or Thanksgiving days, or upon Labor
Day, New Year's Day, and the Fourth of July, Memorial Day, Good Friday.
(4) No retailer of alcoholic beverages shall keep or permit to be kept upon the licensed
premises any alcoholic beverages in any unsealed bottles or other unsealed containers.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, furnish, or give away any alcoholic'
beverage to any person who is under the legal drinking age of the State of Tennessee or to any
person who is visibly intoxicated or to any person who is an habitual drunkard (any person under
the legal drinking age of the State of Tennessee or visibly intoxicated or an habitual drunkard
being hereinafter in this section referred to as "such person "). It shall be unlawful for any such
person to enter or remain in a liquor store, or to loiter in the immediate vicinity of a liquor store.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to allow any such person to enter or remain in the licensee's
8-21
liquor store or any part of the licensee's premises adjacent to the liquor store. It shall be unlawful
for any such person to buy or receive any alcoholic beverage from any licensee, or from any
other person, and the burden of ascertaining the age of such person shall be on the licensee. It
shall be unlawful for a minor to misrepresent his age in an attempt to gain admission to a liquor
store or in an attempt to buy any alcoholic beverage from a licensee. It shall be unlawful for any
person to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any licensee for the purpose of selling or giving
such alcoholic beverage to such person. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-614. Recorder May Examine Books, Papers, Ect. of Dealers. The recorder is
authorize to examine t e books, papers, an records of any dealer for the purpose of determining
whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. Any refusal to permit the
examination of any such books, papers, and records, or the investigation and examination of such
premises, shall constitute sufficient reason for a recommendation to the commission to revoke
the license. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-615. Violations. Any violations of the terms of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine under the general penalty clause for this code. (Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-616. Public Drinking and Public Display of Alcoholic Beverage Prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage or visibly and openly possess,
display, exhibit, or show an unsealed bottle containing any alcoholic beverage in that portion of
restaurant or other eating place to which the general public is admitted, or in the parking area of
any drive-in restaurant, or on any public street, or sidewalk, or in any public park, playground,
auditorium, theater, stadium, school, or school ground or in any other public place. (Ord. #_,
August 1983)
8-617. Charter Not Applicable to Beer. No provisions of this chapters all be considered
or construed as in any way modifying, changing, or restricting the rules and regulations
governing the sale, storage, transportation, etc., or tax upon beer or other liquids with an
alcoholic content of five percent (5%) or less, more specifically chapter 2 in this title.
Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and shall be fined a minimum of $10.00and a maximum of $50.00 for each such violation.
Furthermore, any licensee violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to having his
license suspended or revoked for such violation as elsewhere herein provided in this Ordinance.
(Ord. #_, August 1983)
8-618. Reserved.
8-22
CHAPTER 7
Wine Sales in Retail Food Stores
Section
8-701. Application of this chapter.
8-702. Definitions.
8-703. Adoption of State Law.
8-704. Issuance of Retail Food Store Wine License.
8-705. Certificate of Compliance.
8-706. Issuance of Certificate of Compliance: Appeal.
8-707. Issuance, Renewal, Suspension, Termination of Retail Food Store Wine License.
8-708. Regulation of Sales.
8-709. Reserved.
8-701. - Application of This Chapter. This chapter shall apply and be effective
immediately upon the passage, pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-3-801, of the referendum authorizing the
sale of wine in retail food stores. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Said fee shall be in the form of cash
or check made payable to the City of Newport. Each applicant must be a person of good moral
character and certify that he has read and is familiar with the provisions of this. (Ordinance
#2016-02, March 2016)
8-702. - Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include
the singular number; and words in the singular number the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory:
(1) “Retail food store” means an establishment that is open to the public that derives at least
20% of its taxable sales from the retail sale of food and food ingredients for human consumption
taxed at the rate provided in T.C.A. § 67-6-228(a) and has retail floor space of at least 1,200
square feet;
(2) “Wine” means the product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of fresh,
sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and necessary additions to correct defects due
to climatic, saccharine and seasonal conditions, including champagne, sparkling and fortified
wine of an alcoholic content not to exceed 18% by volume. No other product shall be called
"wine" unless designated by appropriate prefixes descriptive of the fruit or other product from
which the same was predominantly produced, or an artificial or imitation wine. "Wine" does not
mean alcohol derived from wine that has had substantial changes to the wine due to the addition
of flavorings and additives. (Ordinance #2016-02, March 2016)
8-23
8-703. - Adoption of State Law. There is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference the applicable statutes on retail food store wine sales, codified in T.C.A. § 57-3-801 et
seq. (Ordinance #2016-02, March 2016)
8-704. - Issuance of Retail Food Store Wine License. Any person, partnership, limited
liability company or corporation desiring to sell wine to patrons or customers within the premises
of a retail food store, in sealed packages only, and not for consumption on the premises, shall
make application to the alcoholic beverage commission for a retail food store wine license. This
application shall comply with all the terms and conditions set forth in T.C.A. § 57-3-801 et seq.
(Ordinance #2016-02, March 2016)
8-705. - Certificate of Compliance. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a state
liquor retailer's license by the state alcoholic beverage commission, the mayor or a majority of
the city council may authorize the issuance of certificates of compliance by the city according to
the terms contained herein. An applicant or applicant group for a retail food store wine license
shall file with the city recorder a completed written application on a form to be provided by the
city recorder which shall contain all of the following information and whatever additional
information the city council or city administrator may require:
(1)The name and street address of each person who will be in charge of or in control of the
business, and a statement that the applicant or applicants who are to be in actual charge of
the business have not been convicted of a felony within a ten-year period immediately
preceding the date of the application with the state alcoholic beverage commission and, if
a corporation, that the executive officers or those in control have not been convicted of a
felony within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application;
(2)The name and address of the proposed retail food store applying for a retail food store
wine license, and a statement that the applicant or applicants have secured a location for
the business, which complies with all zoning laws of the city;
(3)That the applicant or applicants have complied with this chapter and the applicable state
laws on retail food store wine sales. (Ordinance #2016-02, March 2016)
8-706. - Issuance of Certificate of Compliance; Appeal. A failure on the part of the
issuing authority to grant or deny the applicant's request for the certificate of compliance within
60 days of the written application shall be deemed a granting of the certificate. If an applicant is
denied a certificate of compliance, the applicant may seek review of such denial by instituting an
action in Chancery Court within 60 days of the denial. (Ordinance #2016-02, March 2016)
8-707. - Issuance, Renewal, Suspension, And Termination of Retail Food Store Wine
License. The issuance, renewal, suspension, and termination of retail food store wine licenses
and the regulation of and operation by such license holders shall be governed by T.C.A. § 57-3-
201 et seq., except where T.C.A. § 57-3-801 et seq. expressly states otherwise. In order to renew
a retail food store wine license, the licensee must maintain a minimum of 20% of the taxable
sales from the retail of food and food ingredients for human consumption. If a licensee fails to
comply with this requirement, the licensee shall have one year to work with the alcoholic
beverage commission to create a plan to become compliant. Failure to comply with this
8-24
requirement after one year shall result in the retail food store wine license being suspended or
revoked by the alcoholic beverage commission. (Ordinance #2016-02, March 2016)
8-708. - Regulation of Sales. (a) Hours of sales on weekdays. Retail food store wine
licensees shall not engage in the sale of wine, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays.
(b) Sales on Sundays and holidays. No retail food store wine licensee shall sell or give away
any wine between 11:00 p.m. on Saturday and 8:00 a.m. on the following Monday of each
week. No retail food store wine licensee shall sell or give away wine on the following
holidays: New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas.
(c) Sales to minors. No retail food store wine licensee shall sell or give away wine to a person
under 21 years of age, and it shall be unlawful for any such minor to purchase wine. Also, it
shall be unlawful for any person to present false evidence that he has attained the age of 21
years.
(d) Keeping an unsealed bottle or container. No retail food store wine licensee shall keep, or
permit to be kept upon his premises, wine in any unsealed containers or bottles.
(e) Sales to persons intoxicated. No retail food store wine licensee shall sell or give away wine
to any person who is intoxicated, nor shall any retail food store wine licensee sell or give away
wine to any person accompanied by a person who is intoxicated.
(f) Sales on credit. No retail food store wine licensee shall sell, deliver, or cause, permit, or
procure to be sold or delivered, wine on credit.
(g) Wine tastings. No retail food store wine licensee shall conduct tastings of wine on the
premises of the retail food store.
(h) Consumption on premises. No wine shall be sold for consumption, or consumed, on the
premises of the retail food store, except that a retail food store wine licensee may also hold a
license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises pursuant to T.C.A. § 57-4-101
et seq., provided that the premises of the on-premises licensee shall be separate and distinct
from the premises of the retail food store and the business of the on-premises licensee shall be
operated separately and distinctly from the operation of the business of the retail food store
wine licensee.
(i) Public display and public drinking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
publicly drink wine or publicly display any bottle or container of wine on any street or
sidewalk, on any school ground or in any park, theatre, stadium, or school. (Ordinance #2016-
02, March 2016)
7-709. Reserved.
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.¹
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. PEDDLERS, ETC.
3. SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
4. TAXICABS.
5. POOL ROOMS.
6. AMUSEMENTS.
7. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
8. TENT SALES.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
9-101. Doing business on Sunday.
9-101. Doing business on Sunday. It shall be unlawful for any person to open any store
or place of business and sell any goods, wares or merchandise on Sunday; however, this section
shall not be applied to movie theaters, drugstores, restaurants or service stations. (1973 Code, §
7-1)
_________________
¹Municipal code reference
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
Municipal code references 1
Building, plumbing, wiring and housing regulations: title 12.
Liquor and beer regulations: title 8.
Noise reductions: title 11.
Storage and abandonment of vehicles: title 13.
Zoning: title 14.
9-2
CHAPTER 2
PEDDLERS, ETC.
SECTION
9-201. Defined.
9-202. Permit required.
9-203. Application for permit.
9-204. Contents of permit.
9-205. Exhibition of permit.
9-206. Restrictions on hours and location of business.
9-207. Revocation or suspension of permit.
9-208. Permit fee.
9-209. Permanent, complying building required.
9-210. Exception to regulations.
9-201. Defined. As used in this chapter, the term "peddler" shall mean any person,
whether or not a resident of the city, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other
type of conveyance from place to place, house to house, or street to street, carrying, conveying,
or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, fish, vegetables, fruits or other products or provisions
and offering and exposing them for sale; or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or
offers for sale such products from a wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance. A "peddler"
shall also include any "hawker," "huckster," or "street vendor," but shall exclude any solicitor
subject to the provisions of this chapter. (1973 Code, § 7-34)
9-202. Permit required. No person shall act as a peddler in the city unless he shall have
first obtained a permit therefore from the recorder. (1973 Code, § 7-35)
9-203. Application for permit. Each applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall
file an application therefore stating or containing the following:
(1) The name of the applicant;
(2) A brief description of the nature of the goods to be sold;
(3) If employed, the name and address of the peddler's employer;
(4) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of it together with the license number or other
means of identification;
(5) Evidence of the good moral character of the applicant. (1973 Code, § 7-36)
9-204. Contents of permit. Each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
show the name and address of the peddler, the kind of goods to be sold, the date of issuance, the
permit number and the identifying description of any vehicle used by the peddler. (1973 Code, §
7-37)
9-205. Exhibition of permit. Any peddler shall exhibit his permit issued pursuant to this
chapter to any police officer or person solicited, upon demand. (1973 Code, § 7-38)
9-3
9-206. Restrictions on hours and location of business. No peddler shall engage in the
business of peddling:
(1) During the hours of darkness;
(2) On Sunday;
(3) Within two hundred (200) feet of a public market house;
(4) Within two hundred (200) feet of a curb market. (1973 Code, § 7-39)
9-207. Revocation or suspension of permit. Any permit issued under the provisions of
this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the board of mayor and aldermen for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the application for the
permit;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement in the course of carrying on the business
of peddling;
(3) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude;
(4) Conducting the business of peddling in such a manner as to create a public nuisance,
cause a breach of peace or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare;
(5) Allowing another to use the permit. (1973 Code, § 7-40)
9-208. Permit fee. All peddlers, street vendors, etc. as herein defined shall pay the City
of Newport, Tennessee a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) prior to conducting business within
the city limits. The permit fee is due at the time of application and covers a period of fourteen
(14) consecutive days after which business shall not be conducted until the permit is renewed or
a new permit issued. (Ord. #86-11, Dec. 1986)
9-209. Permanent, complying building required. All peddlers, street vendors, etc., as
herein defined shall only conduct business from a permanent structure. Said structure shall
comply with all state and municipal codes and said structure must be either leased to or under the
ownership of the applicant. (Ord. #86-11, Dec. 1986)
9-210. Exception to regulations. These regulations apply to all peddlers, street vendors,
etc. within the city limits with the exception of those operating roadside stands for the sale of
agricultural or forestry products and shall not apply to special events (craft fair, street festival,
holiday events) sponsored by charitable, religious, government or other non-profit organizations,
not to exceed three (3) days. (Ord. #86-11, Dec. 1986)
9-4
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
SECTION
9-301. When permit required.
9-302. Application for permit.
9-303. Bond.
9-304. Exhibition of permit.
9-305. Transferability of permit.
9-306. Revocation of permit.
9-307. Charitable solicitations.
9-301. When permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a resident of
the city or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise,
including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery or for services to be performed in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the order or whether or not he is collecting advance
payments on such orders, to induce or invite such orders, without having first obtained from the
recorder a permit therefore. This section shall also apply to any person who, for himself or for
another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent,
hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or other place within the city for the primary purpose
of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. (1973 Code, § 7-17)
9-302. Application for permit. Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter
shall apply therefore in writing to the recorder. The application shall state or contain:
(1) The name of applicant;
(2) A complete permanent home and the local address of the applicant;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(4) If employed, the name and address of the applicant's employer, together with
credentials there from establishing the exact relationship;
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
(6) The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders taken for
the sale thereof; where the goods or products are located at the time said application is
filed and the proposed method of delivery;
(7) The last cities or towns not to exceed three (3), where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application and the addresses from which the
business was conducted in those municipalities;
(8) A personal description and complete identification of the applicant;
(9) Such other credentials and evidence of the good moral character and identity of the
applicant as may be reasonably required by the recorder. (1973 Code, § 7-18)
9-5
9-303. Bond. Each application for a permit required by this chapter shall be accompanied
by a surety bond, or a personal bond executed by two (2) good and sufficient sureties who are
bona fide residents of the city. The bond shall be payable to the city in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the
provisions of this code and the state law regulating solicitors and canvassers. It shall guarantee to
all residents of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied
according to the representations made, that the property purchased will be delivered according to
such representations and shall be as represented by the solicitor and that the solicitor will refund
the purchase price of any goods sold by him which are not as represented. Action on the bond
may be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given,
but the surety may by paying, pursuant to order of the court, the face amount of the bond to the
clerk of the court in which the suit is commenced, be relieved without costs of all further
liability. (1973 Code, § 7-19)
9-304. Exhibition of permit. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be carried at
all times by the person to whom it was issued when soliciting or canvassing in the city and shall
be exhibited upon the request of any police officer or person solicited. (1973 Code, § 7-20)
9-305. Transferability of permit. No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be used
at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. (1973 Code, § 7-21)
9-306. Revocation of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked
by the board of mayor and aldermen for violations by the holder thereof of any of the provisions
of this code or of state or federal law or whenever the holder of the permit shall cease to possess
the character and qualifications required by this chapter for the issuance of the permit. (1973
Code, § 7-22)
9-307. Charitable solicitations. It shall be unlawful for any person representing or
claiming to represent, any church, school or any eleemosynary, charitable, religious, social
service or public institution or organization of any kind to solicit money or subscriptions from
the general public or to sell tickets or to canvass for advertising space on any program, booklet,
pamphlet or other printed matter for the benefit or for the alleged benefit of any such institution
or organization without first obtaining a permit therefore from the recorder, who shall have
authority to issue the permit if the purpose thereof is found to be worthy and bona fide. This
section shall not, however, apply to solicitations made at the regular services or meetings of such
organizations, but is intended to regulate solicitations from the general public. (1973 Code, § 7
23)
9-6
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS
SECTION
9-401. Definitions.
9-402. Solicitation of business.
9-403. Parking.
9-404. Routes.
9-405. Unlawful use.
9-406. Transportation of more than one passenger.
9-407. Franchise required.
9-408. Persons ineligible for franchise.
9-409. Application.
9-410. Investigation; recommendation.
9-411. Hearing.
9-412. Financial responsibility.
9-413. Revocation or suspension.
9-414. State license and city permit required.
9-415. Persons eligible for permit.
9-416. Revocation or suspension of permit.
9-417. Prohibited conduct.
9-418. Equipment.
9-419. Cleanliness.
9-420. Inspections.
9-401. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them: "Taxicab" shall mean all automotive vehicles used in and upon the public
streets for carrying passengers for hire except motor buses or coaches operated by bus lines over
designated routes in and through the city. "Taxicab business" shall mean the use of one (1) or
more taxicabs within the city for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire. (1973 Code, § 18-
16)
9-402. Solicitation of business. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to
indiscriminately solicit passengers or cruise upon the streets of the city for the purpose of
obtaining patronage for their cabs. (1973 Code, § 18-17)
9-403. Parking. It shall be unlawful to park any taxicab on any street except in such
places as have been specifically designated and marked for such use; however, taxicabs may stop
upon any street for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers if such stops are made in
such manner as not to interfere with or obstruct other traffic and if the passenger loading or
discharging is promptly accomplished. (1973 Code, § 18-18)
9-7
9-404. Routes. Taxicab drivers shall always deliver their passengers to their destinations
by the most direct available route. (1973 Code, § 18-19)
9-405. Unlawful use. No taxicab shall be used for or in the commission of any illegal act,
business or purpose. (1973 Code, § 18-20)
9-406. Transportation of more than one passenger. No person shall be admitted to a
taxicab already occupied by a passenger without the consent of the latter. (1973 Code, § 18-21)
9-407. Franchise required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab
business unless he has first obtained a franchise therefore from the city. (1973 Code, § 18-27)
9-408. Persons ineligible for franchise. No person shall be eligible to apply for a
franchise required by this chapter if he has a bad character, has been convicted of a felony within
the last ten (10) years or is not a bona fide resident of the city. (1973 Code, § 18-28)
9-409. Application. Applications for a franchise required by this chapter shall be made
under oath and in writing to the chief of police. The application shall state the name and address
of the applicant, the name and address of the proposed place of business, the number of cabs the
applicant desires to operate, the makes and models of the cabs and such other relevant
information as the chief of police may require. The application shall be accompanied by at least
two (2) affidavits of reputable local citizens attesting to the good character and reputation of the
applicant. (1973 Code, § 18-29)
9-410. Investigation; recommendation. Within ten (10) days after the receipt of an
application for a franchise required by this chapter, the chief of police shall make a thorough
investigation of the applicant, determine if there is a public need for additional taxicab service,
present the application to the board of mayor and aldermen and make a recommendation to either
grant or refuse a franchise to the applicant. (1973 Code, § 18-30)
9-411. Hearing. The board of mayor and aldermen shall, upon the investigation and
recommendations of the chief of police as to the application for a franchise required by this
chapter, hold a public hearing. At that time, witnesses for and against the granting of the
franchise shall be heard. In deciding whether or not to grant the franchise, the board of mayor
and aldermen shall consider the public need for additional service, the increased traffic
congestion, parking space requirements and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the
public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of an additional taxicab
franchise. (1973 Code, § 18-31)
9-412. Financial responsibility. No franchise required by this chapter shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy or bond
for each vehicle authorized in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for bodily injury
to any one (1) person, twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for injuries to more than one (1)
person which are sustained in the same accident and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for
property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. The required insurance or bond shall inure
9-8
to the benefit of the city and any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to
property proximately caused by the negligence of a taxicab owner, operator or driver. The
insurance policy or bond required by this section shall contain a provision that it shall not be
cancelled except after twenty (20) days written notice is given by the insurer or surety to the
recorder. (1973 Code, § 18-32)
9-413. Revocation or suspension. The board of mayor and aldermen, after a public
hearing, may revoke or suspend any franchise granted pursuant to this division for repeated
violations of this chapter or the traffic laws of the city by the taxicab operator or his drivers.
(1973 Code, § 18-33)
9-414. State license and city permit required. No person shall drive a taxicab unless he
is in possession of a state chauffeur's license and a taxicab driver's permit issued by the chief of
police. (1973 Code, § 18-39)
9-415. Persons eligible for permit. No person shall be issued a permit required by this
chapter unless he complies with the following to the satisfaction of the chief of police:
(1) He makes written application therefore to the chief of police;
(2) He is eighteen (18) years old or over and holds a state chauffeur's license;
(3) He is of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart
trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe
operation of a public vehicle;
(4) He is clean in dress and person and is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor or
drugs;
(5) He produces affidavits of good character from two (2) reputable citizens of the city
who have known him personally and have observed his conduct for at least two (2) years
next preceding the date of his application;
(6) He has not been convicted of a felony, drunk driving, or driving under the influence
of an intoxicant or drug;
(7) He is familiar with the local traffic laws. (1973 Code, § 18-40)
9-416. Revocation or suspension of permit. The board of mayor and aldermen, after a
public hearing, may revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to this, division for a violation
of this article or for repeated violations of the traffic laws of the city. (1973 Code, § 18-41)
9-417. Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver, while on duty, to
be under the influence of, or to drink, any intoxicating beverage or beer; to use profane or
obscene language; to shout or call to prospective passengers; to unnecessarily blow the
automobile horn; or to otherwise disturb the peace, quiet and tranquility of the city in any way.
(1973 Code, § 18-42)
9-418. Equipment. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to operate in the city unless it is
equipped with proper four (4) wheel brakes, front and rear lights, tires, horn, muffler, windshield
wiper and rear vision mirror, all of which shall conform to the requirements of state law. Each
taxicab shall be equipped with a handle or latch or other opening device attached to each door of
9-9
the passenger compartment so that such doors may be operated by the passenger from the inside
of the taxicab without the intervention or assistance of the driver. The motor and all mechanical
functions shall be kept in such condition of repair as may be reasonably necessary to provide for
the safety of the public and the continuous satisfactory operation of the taxicab. (1973 Code, §
18-48)
9-419. Cleanliness. All taxicabs operated in the city shall at all times be kept in a
reasonably clean and sanitary condition; they shall be thoroughly swept and dusted at least once
each day. At least once each week, taxicabs shall be thoroughly washed and the interior cleaned
with some suitable antiseptic solution. (1973 Code, § 18-49)
9-420. Inspections. All taxicabs shall be inspected at least semi-annually by the chief of
police to insure that they comply with the requirements of this division with respect to
mechanical condition and cleanliness. (1973 Code, § 18-50)
9-10
CHAPTER 5
POOL ROOMS
SECTION
9-501. Days and hours of operation.
9-502. Requirements as to premises.
9-503. Persons under eighteen years of age.
9-501. Days and hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any pool
room or any of his employees, to allow the pool room to be open for business at any time on
Sundays or on weekdays and nights except between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
(1973 Code, § 4-17)
9-502. Requirements as to premises. No pool room shall be allowed except in a
building, place or room that has an entrance directly and immediately upon some street and
which also has a front window affording at all times an unobstructed, plain view of the entire
interior of the building, place or room from the street. (1973 Code § 4-18)
9-503. Persons under eighteen years of age. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
pool room or any of his employees, to allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years to visit
in, loiter in or around or to play pool or any other game therein. (1973 Code, § 4-19)
9-11
CHAPTER 6
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION
9-601. Restriction as to location of carnivals, tent shows and similar entertainments.
9-601. Restriction as to location of carnivals, tent shows and similar entertainments.
No person shall give, conduct, operate or attempt to give, conduct or operate, any street fair,
carnival, tent show or other exhibition or theatrical production of like character at any place
within three hundred (300) yards of any church, residence or place of business. (1973 Code, § 4-
1)
9-12
CHAPTER 7
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION
9-701. Purpose and findings.
9-702. Definitions.
9-703. Classification.
9-704. License required.
9-705. Issuance of license.
9-706. Fees.
9-707. Inspection.
9-708. Expiration of license.
9-709. Suspension.
9-710. Revocation.
9-711. Transfer of license.
9-712. Location of sexually oriented businesses.
9-713. Exterior portions of oriented businesses.
9-714. Signage.
9-715. Massage or baths administered by persons of opposite sex.
9-716. Additional regulations for adult motels.
9-717. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films videos or
live entertainment in viewing rooms.
9-718. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
9-719. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
9-720. Additional regulations concerning public nudity.
9-721. Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business.
9-722. Hours of operation.
9-723. Injunction.
9-701. Purpose and findings. (1) Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare
of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is
it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-702. Definitions. (1) "Adult arcade" means any place to which thepublic is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, electronically,
9-13
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or
laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
(2) "Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store" means a commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offer for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one (1) or more of the following:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" or
(b) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical area" and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or
adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental
for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(3) "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
(b) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities;" or
(c) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(4) "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(a) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides
patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas;" and has sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(b) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10)
hours; or
(c) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
(5) "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
9-14
(6) "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or
live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by
"specified sexual activities."
(7) "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said
person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee
does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises
or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
(8) "Escort" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie
or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(9) "Escort agency" means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or
other consideration.
(10) "Establishment" means and includes any of the following:
(a) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
(b) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any sexually oriented business;
(c) The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually
oriented business; or
(d) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
(11) "License" means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued
authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
(12) "Nude model studio" means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a
state of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical area" and is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who
pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Tennessee or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
(a) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and
(b) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3)
days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at
any one time.
(13) "Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering,
9-15
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple,
or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(14) "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
(15) "Semi-nude" or in a "semi-nude condition" means the showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male
or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female
breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by
a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not
exposed in whole or in part.
(16) "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(a) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the
opposite sex; or
(b) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex
when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
(17) "Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency,
nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
(18) "Specified anatomical areas" means:
(a) The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered; or
(b) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(19) "Specified criminal activity" means any of the following offenses:
(a) Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale,
distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a
child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent
exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual
assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance;
or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code
of other states or countries;
(b) For which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty-four (24) month period.
9-16
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
(20) "Specified sexual activities" means any of the following:
(a) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(c) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in (a) through (b) above.
(21) "Substantial enlargement" of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor
areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the floor areas exist
on the date this chapter takes effect.
(22) "Transfer or ownership or control" of a sexually oriented business means and
includes any of the following:
(a) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(b) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(c) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers
the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-703. Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-704. License required. (1) It is unlawful:
(a) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually
oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
(b) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person
to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually
oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter.
(c) For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business
without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to
this chapter.
(2) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by
the city.
9-17
(3) All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints)
as to enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this chapter.
(4) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the
person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a
sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent
(20%) or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each
applicant must be qualified under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a
licensee if a license is granted.
(5) The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the
following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(a) If the applicant is:
(i) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any
aliases and submit proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age;
(ii) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the
names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
(iii) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date
of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of its state of incorporation, the
names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders,
and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the
registered office for service of process.
(b) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name
other than that of the applicant; he or she must state:
(i) The sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and
(ii) Submit the required registration documents.
(c) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
(d) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a
previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business
ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including
the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a
corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well
as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(e) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other
licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance
9-18
from another city or county and if so, the names and locations of such other
licensed businesses.
(f) The single classification of license for which the applicant is
filing.
(g) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal
description of the property, street address, and the telephone number(s), if any.
(h) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(i) A recent photograph of the applicant.
(j) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, and/or his/her
state or federally issued tax identification number.
(k) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six (6) inches.
(l) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days
prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the distances to all
property lines, structures and uses in which the distance is regulated under § 9-
712. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established
if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.
(m) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an
adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of
less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes,
other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the
application requirements set forth § 9-717.
(6) Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the
applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the city the following information:
(a) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases
used by the individual.
(b) Age, date, and place of birth;
(c) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(d) Present residence address and telephone number;
(e) Present business address and telephone number;
(f) Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other identification card
information;
(g) Social security number; and
(h) Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(7) Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as
provided above, shall be the following:
(a) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and
the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees
for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
(b) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether
9-19
such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other
county, city, state, or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do
business denied, revoked, or suspended or had any professional or vocational
license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial revocation, or
suspension. A copy of any order or denial, revocation, or suspension shall be
attached to the application.
(c) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-705. Issuance of license. (1) Sexually oriented employee license.
(a) Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee
license, the city shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application
shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be
made on such information as is contained on the application. The application
process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date the completed
application is filed. After the investigation, the city shall issue a license, unless it
is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the
following findings is true:
(i) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
(ii) The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
(iii) The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as
defined in this chapter;
(iv) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or
(v) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current
application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied,
the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and
void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in § 9-710.
(b) A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the
written application of the applicant and a finding by the city that the applicant has not
been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed
any act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the
initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of
the fee as set forth in § 9-706.
(2) Sexually oriented business license. (a) Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a
completed sexually oriented business application, the city shall approve or deny the issuance of a
9-20
license to an applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is
determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(i) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(ii) An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon him/her in relation to any business.
(iii) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
(iv) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been
denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within
the preceding twelve (12) months or whose license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
(v) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter.
(vi) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building
official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(vii) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(viii) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not
in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(b) The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons
to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented
business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to § 9-703.
All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.
(c) The health department, fire department, and the building official shall
complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the city.
(d) A sexually oriented business license shall be issued for only one (1)
classification as found in § 9-703.
(e) A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal
upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city that the
applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in
this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the previous license,
which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the
license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 9-706. (Ord.
#03-04-08, April 2003)
9-706. Fees. (1) Every application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) nonrefundable application and
investigation fee.
(2) In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually
oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the city an annual non9-
21
refundable license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) within thirty (30) days of license
issuance or renewal.
(3) Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) non-refundable application, investigation, and license fee.
(4) All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the city recorder of the city.
(Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-707. Inspection. (1) An applicant or license shall permit representatives of the police
department, health department, fire department, zoning department, or other city departments or
agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(2) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits
a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is
open for business. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-708. Expiration of license. (1) Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of
issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 9-704. Application for
renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date.
(2) When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license
for one (1) year from the date of denial. If subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for
denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial becomes final. (Ord. #03-04-08,
April 2003)
9-709. Suspension. The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by this chapter. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-710. Revocation. (1) The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in § 9-709
occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(2) The city shall revoke a license if it determines that:
(a) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted
during the application process.
(b) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises.
(c) A licensee has knowingly allowed a prostitution on the premises.
(d) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the licensee's license was suspended.
(e) Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to
occur in or on the licensed premises; or
(f) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or
fees past due.
9-22
(3) When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and
the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date
the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety
(90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(4) After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension
or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such
administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be
promptly reviewed by the court. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-711. Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor
shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place
other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-712. Location of sexually oriented businesses. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning other than
commercial as defined and described in Newport Zoning Ordinance.¹
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually
oriented business within distance of certain establishments as follows:
(a) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a church, synagogue mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
(b) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private educational facility
including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior
high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary
schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and
universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities
used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
(c) Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a boundary of a residential district as
defined in the Newport Zoning Ordinance.
(d) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public park or recreational area which
has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to
a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other
similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or
management of the city, county, or park and recreation authorities;
(e) Within five hundred (500) feet of a residential structure in any zoning district.
(f) Within five hundred (500) feet of an entertainment business which is oriented
primarily towards children or family entertainment; or
(g) Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any business or private club licensed by
the city or state to sell packaged beer or alcohol for on premises consumption.
________________________
¹The Newport Zoning Ordinance is included in this municipal code as 1
Appendix A.
9-23
(3) It shall be unlawful if a person causes or permits the operation, establishment,
substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control or a sexually oriented business
within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business.
(4) It shall be unlawful if a person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or
maintenance of more than one (1)sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or
portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(5) For the purpose of subsection (2) of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of
the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (2). Presence
of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of
calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
(6) For purposes of subsection (3) of this section, the distance between any two (2)
sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the
intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
(7) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this
chapter, that is in violation of subsections (1) through (6) of this section shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the
use may be changed to a conforming use.
(8) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented
business license, of a use listed in subsection (2) of this section with one thousand (1,000) feet of
the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and
does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been
revoked. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-713. Exterior portions of oriented businesses. (1) It shall be unlawful for an owner or
operator of a sexually oriented business to allow merchandise or activities of the establishment to
be visible from a point outside the establishment.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow
the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words,
lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to
the extent permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow
exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic
color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions
are met:
(a) The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
(b) The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit
center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color
9-24
as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall
architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
(4) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise
unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
(5) A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. #03-
04-08, April 2003)
9-714. Signage. (1) Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the
contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other
person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the
one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein.
(2) Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display
surface shall:
(a) Not contain any flashing lights;
(b) Be a flat plane; rectangular in shape;
(c) Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and
(d) Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
(3) Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise.
(4) Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of a solid color, and each such
letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the
display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
(5) Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall:
(a) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(b) Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
(c) Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and
(d) Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
(6) The provisions of subsections (2)(a), (3) and (4) shall also apply to secondary signs.
(7) Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-715. Massages or baths administered by person of opposite sex. It shall be unlawful
for any sexually oriented business, regardless of whether in a public or private facility, to operate
as a massage salon, massage parlor or any similar type business, where any physical contact with
the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. Violation of this
section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-716. Additional regulations for adult motels. (1) Evidence that a sleeping room in a
hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more
times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
(2) A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a
hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license,
he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the
room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
9-25
(3) For purposes of subsection (2) of this section the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the
act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. (Ord. #03-04-08, April
2003)
9-717. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms. (1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of
less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live
entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead
lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will
be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and
should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to
show the various internal dimensions of all area of the interior of the premises to
an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The city may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal application if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not
been altered since it was prepared.
(b) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(c) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be
made without the prior approval of the city.
(d) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one (1)
licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times
that any patron is present inside the premises.
(e) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has
two (2) or more manager's stations designated then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from
at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection
must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(f) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in
subsection (e) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to
ensure that no patron is permitted accessto any area of the premises which has
9-26
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
(g) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any time.
(h) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level.
(i) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(j) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms
or booths.
(k) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing booths or rooms.
(l) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls
between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
(m) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(n) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing
booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered
by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition
board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the
floor.
(2) A person having a duty under subsections (a) through (n) above commits a
misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-718. Additional regulations for escort agencies. (1) An escort agency shall not
employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an
escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-719. Additional regulations for nude model studios. (1) A nude model studio shall
not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(2) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if the person
appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a
defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a
restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person.
(3) A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly
allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which
can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
(4) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on
the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. (Ord. #03-
04-08, April 2003)
9-720. Additional regulations concerning public nudity. (1) It shall be a misdemeanor
for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state
of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities.
9-27
(2) It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually
oriented business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while
semi-nude, shall be at least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two
(2) feet from the floor.
(3) It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented
business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer
to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually
oriented business.
(4) It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer or
the clothing of a customer. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-721. Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. A person commits
a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on
the premises of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-722. Hours of operation. No sexually oriented business except for an adult motel, may
remain open at any time between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. on weekdays and
Saturdays and noon (12:00 P.M.) on Sundays. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-723. Injunction. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as
well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or thirty (30) days imprisonment. Each day a sexually oriented
business so operates is a separate offense or violation. (Ord. #03-04-08, April 2003)
9-28
CHAPTER 8
TENT SALES
SECTION
9-801. Defined.
9-802. Permit required.
9-803. Application for permit.
9-804. Permit fees and terms.
9-805. Exhibition of permit.
9-806. Transferability of permit.
9-407. Revocation of permit.
9-801. Defined. As used in this chapter, the term “tent sale” shall mean the selling of
goods out of a tent, vehicle, temporary structure, or similar temporary display, which is not
owned or operated by the owner of the premises on which the sales are taking place. Tent sale
shall not include temporary extension of an existing retail business that has a permanent building
on the premises, nor shall it include a yard sale held from time to time at a residence. (Ord.
#2014-02, April 2014)
9-802. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a resident of the
city or not, to set up, maintain, or sell goods at a tent sale without having first obtained from the
recorder a permit therefore. A separate permit is required for each location where a tent sale is to
be held. (Ord. #2014-02, April 2014)
9-803. Application for permit. Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter
shall apply therefore in writing to the recorder. The application shall state:
(1) The name of applicant;
(2) A complete permanent home address of the applicant;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(4) Location of tent sale, along with a sketch drawing of the site showing the location of
the sale;
(5) The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold;
(6) The applicant’s federal Employer Identification Number, if available;
(7) Copies of any federal and state permits required to engage in the business or sell the
good proposed (such as fireworks sales permits);
(8) Documentation of any liability insurance carried by the applicant applicable to the
tent sale activities. (Ord. #2014-02, April 2014)
9-804. Permit fees and terms. Each application shall be accompanied by a two hundred
and fifty dollar ($250.00) non-refundable application fee. Permits are valid for sixteen
consecutive days and expire six months after the date they are issued. (Ord. #2014-02, April
2014)
9-29
9-805. Exhibition of permit. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed
at all times at the premises of the tent sale for which it was issued and shall be exhibited upon the
request of any police officer, city representative, or customer. (Ord. #2014-02, April 2014)
9-806. Transferability of permit. No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
used at any time for any location other than the one for which it was issued. (Ord. #2014-02,
April 2014)
9-807. Revocation of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the board of mayor and aldermen or by the building official for violations by the
holder thereof of any of the provisions of this code or of state or federal law or whenever the
holder of the permit shall cease to possess the character and qualifications required by this
chapter for the issuance of the permit. (Ord. #2014-02, April 2014)
10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. IN GENERAL.
2. DOGS AND CATS.
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION
10-101. Hunting and killing of animals prohibited.
10-102. Permit required to keep livestock in proximity to residence or business.
10-103. Livestock or poultry running at large.
10-104. Animal care.
10-105. Inspections of kennels and pet stores.
10-106. Keeping of wild animals.
10-107. Keeping of wolf-hybrids.
10-108. Impoundment and disposition of animals other than dogs and cats.
10-101. Hunting and killing of animals prohibited. It shall be
unlawful to kill or attempt to kill any bird or wildlife or other domestic animals,
except domestic fowl, within the city. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-102. Permit required to keep livestock in proximity to
residence or business. No person shall keep any cattle, swine, sheep, goats,
horses, or mules within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence or place of
business in the city without a permit therefor from the health officer. The health
officer shall issue a permit only when he shall find that the keeping of such an
animal in the yard or building under the circumstances as set forth in the
application for the permit will not injuriously affect the public health. Any
person aggrieved by the health officer 's decision in such cases may appeal the
decision to the board of mayor and aldermen. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
1-103. Livestock or poultry running at large. It shall be unlawful
for any person owning or in charge of any cattle, swine, sheep, goats, horses or
mules or any offensive animals, or chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or other
domestic fowl to permit any such animal to run at large in any street, alley or
unenclosed lot within the City of Newport. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-104. Animal care. (1) No owner(s) shall fail to provide their animals
with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and
10-2
protection from the weather, veterinary care as is necessary to prevent disease
and suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
(a) The building, structure, corral, pen, or other enclosures in
which any animals are kept shall be, at all times, maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition and free from excessive odor.
(b) When any animal is confined by the use of a chain, must be
of adequate length and gauge to secure the animal without denying
movement unnecessarily, and must be attached to the animal by an
appropriate collar or harness, and must remain free from possible
entanglement .
(i) Metal or chain, "choke" or "training" collars shall not
be considered appropriate, with leather or cotton or nylon webbing
being preferred.
(2) No person or organization shall give away any live animal as a
prize for, or as an inducement, to enter a place of amusement; or offer such
animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer
was for the purpose of attracting trade.
(3) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a
domestic animal shall immediately report such accident to the Newport Police
Department, who will then notify the city animal shelter or animal control
officer.
(4) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be consumed by any
animal.
(5) Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 39-14-201 through 39-14-210 are
incorporated by reference as if set out in full. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-105. Inspections of kennels and pet stores. It shall be the duty
of the animal control officer to make regular inspections of kennels and stores
in which animals are sold. These inspections may be made at all reasonable
times and places. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-106. Keeping of wild animals. No person shall keep or permit to
be kept on his premises any wild animal, native or exotic, except with a state
issued permit and strict adherence to state wildlife requirements and
regulations. Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 70-4-402 through 70-4-409. Wildlife
Resources - Miscellaneous Regulations are incorporated by reference as if set out
in full. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-107. Keeping of wolf-hybrids. Wolf-hybrids will be considered as
"dangerous animals" and shall be securely confined as set down in § 10-220.
(Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-3
10-108. Impoundment and disposition and animals other than
dogs and cats. (1) Except for dogs and cats, any animal found running at large
in violation of this chapter my be taken up by the animal control officer and
impounded. The impounding officer shall post notices in at least three (3) public
places, briefly describing the animal, reporting its impoundment and giving the
date and place that the animal is to be sold, if not claimed by its owner within
five (5) days. Any impounded animal my be claimed by its owner upon payment
of the accrued fees. The owner shall also be liable for fines and costs as the
recorder may assess for the violations of this chapter, as well as any damages.
In the event any animal is not claimed within the prescribed time, it may be
sold at public auction at the time and place as advertised to the highest bidder
for cash. In the absence of a bidder or purchaser at such a sale, the animal may
be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of for the benefit of the city.
(2) When any animal has been lawfully impounded, it shall not be
taken or released from the place of impoundment except in accordance with the
provision of subsection (1). (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-4
CHAPTER 2
DOGS AND CATS
SECTION
10-201. Definitions.
10-202. Running at large.
10-203. Bitches to be quarantined while in season/heat/estrus.
10-204. Importation or abandonment of animals.
10-205. Barking or howling.
10-206. Condition of pen and premises.
10-207. Number of animals.
10-208. Animals doing property damage.
10-209. Use of dog as a weapon.
10-210. Control of restrained dogs.
10-211. Enforcement.
10-212. Citations.
10-213. Investigation.
10-214. Interference with animal control officer.
10-215. Animal control officer authorized to request assistance from police
department.
10-216. Rabies control.
10-217. Seizure of animal running at large--redemption by owner.
10-218. Confining or isolating animal upon suspicion of rabies.
10-219. Monitoring of quarantine.
10-220. Concealing animal kept in violation of this chapter a misdemeanor.
10-221. Dangerous and vicious dogs.
10-222. Impoundment.
10-223. Fraudulent redemption or adoption of animals.
10-224. Failure or refusal to redeem an impounded dog.
10-225. Euthanasia of animals.
10-226. Veterinary care of sick or injured animals.
10-227. Adoption disclaimer.
10-228. Removal and disposal of dog or cat feces from public or private property
regulated.
10-229. Penalty.
10-201. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall, for the
purpose of this chapter have the following meanings:
(1) "Animal control officer." The person or persons employed by the
City of Newport and designed by the city as an enforcement officer or officers
and having authority to carry out all provisions of this chapter.
10-5
(2) "Animal shelter." Any premises designated by the City of Newport
for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals found running at large in
violation of this chapter.
(3) "Animals." Animals when used herein, shall include both dogs and
cats ad defined below.
(4) "At large." An animal shall be "at large" when not confined to the
premises of the owner or under restraint when away from the premises of the
owner.
(5) "Confinement" or "confined." An animal shall be confined or under
confinement to the premises of the owner when restricted within an adequate
fence or enclosure or within a house, garage or other building or structure or
under restraint sufficient to prevent the dog from escaping or leaving the
premises.
(6) "Dogs." When used herein, shall include animals of all ages, both
male and female, which are members of the canine family physically and
geographically subject to this chapter.
(7) "Humane treatment." Care of an animal to include, but not be
limited to, adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter, and wholesome food
and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the
animal's size and breed.
(8) "Owner." Any person having a right of property in or custody of an
animal or who feeds/keeps or harbors an animal or knowingly permits an animal
to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person over which that
person has substantial control.
(9) "Person." Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
(10) "Quarantine." A condition of total confinement within a structure,
cage or pen which prevents any potential contact with any other animal and
with any human being except as is necessary for those responsible for the
quarantined animal's custodial or medical care.
(11) "Restraint." An animal is under restraint if it is controlled by a
leash, tether, or chain, or within the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle
being driven or parked on a street or confined on the property of its owner.
(12) "Veterinary hospital or clinic." A hospital or clinic operated by a
licensed veterinarian. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-202. Running at large. The owner of any animal found to be at
large shall be guilty of allowing the animal to run at large. (Ord. #93-5, June
1993)
10-203. Bitches to be quarantined while in season/heat/estrus.
Every owner of a bitch is required to contain same for the twenty-four (24) days
of her reproductive cycle when she is fertile (capable of reproduction).
10-6
Any female dog found in violation of this section and impounded will not
be released from the animal shelter until said animal has been spayed, at the
expense of the owner, and all other fees, fines, and/or penalties have been paid.
(Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-204. Importation or abandonment of animals. (1) It is unlawful
for any person to bring into the city any stray or unwanted animal and release
same within the city limits to run at large upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys
and other public or private property.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to bring into the city any stray or
unwanted animal and misrepresent the origin of the animal or themselves for
the purpose of obtaining the services of the city's animal control facilities or
personnel without charge/fee.
(3) It is unlawful for any resident of the city to abandon, cast out, leave
or discard any animal which they own or possess because same has become
unwanted, ill or aged or misrepresent their intent and purpose in order to obtain
the services of the city animal control facilities and personnel and/or avoid
financial responsibility associated with the humane treatment of an animal.
(Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-205. Barking or howling. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to keep on his premises or under his control and within the City
of Newport, any animal which, by loud and frequent barking or howling, shall
unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet for any person who may reside within
reasonable proximity of the place where such animal is located. (Ord. #93-5,
June 1993)
10-206. Condition of pen and premises. (1) It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation, keeping or harboring any animal, to fail to keep
the premises, where such animals are kept, free from offensive odors to the
extent that such odors are disturbing to persons residing within reasonable
proximity of the said premises.
(2) It shall be unlawful to allow the premises where animals are kept
to become unclean and a threat to the public health by failing to diligently and
systematically remove all animal waste from the premises.
(3) Said pen and premises shall be constructed and equipped so as to
provide humane treatment of the animals confined therein. (Ord. #93-5, June
1993)
10-207. Number of animals. (1) It will be unlawful for more than four
(4) animals over the age of three (3) months to be confined, kept or harbored
upon the premises of any person within the city limits, except that this provision
shall not apply to proprietors of animal hospitals and clinics or veterinarians
10-7
and grooming facilities (or licensed kennels and catteries), when such animals
are kept upon the premises in the course of their normal business.
(2) The keeping on the premises of the owner of more than four (4)
animals shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section, and the burden
of proof shall be on the owner to show the ages of such animals. (Ord. #93-5,
June 1993)
10-208. Animals doing property damage. (1) The owners of all
animals at large in the City of Newport, which animals, while at large do
damage to the property of any person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2) Upon conviction, the owner shall be fined not less than $ , plus
court costs nor more than $ , plus court costs plus the cost of all damages
done by the animals. Damages shall be paid to the person so damaged within
thirty (30) days after the damage done.
(3) Said offense to be separate from and in addition to the section
pertaining to "running at large." (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-209. Use of dog as a weapon. (1) It shall be unlawful for any
person who owns, possesses or has direct or indirect control of a dog within the
city limits of Newport to permit, encourage, incite, command or direct said
animal to challenge, threaten, charge, assault, or do injury to any person upon
the streets and thoroughfares or public lands of Newport or upon the premises
of said owner, possessor or controller except as would otherwise be permissible
under Tennessee statutes as they relate to the justifiable use of deadly physical
force.
(2) The penalty for using a dog as a weapon shall be no less than
nor more than , if no physical contact between animal and "victim" occurs,
otherwise the penalty shall be a fine of no less than nor more than and
the city judge (municipal judge) may order the confiscation and destruction of
the animal. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-210. Control of restrained dogs. (1) It shall be unlawful for any
person upon the streets, sidewalks, or public places while having a dog under
restraint by leash, tether, or chain in their possession to encourage, command,
allow, or permit the animal to challenge, confront, attack or fight any other
animal whether said challenge or combat is by mutual agreement with another
owner of a restrained animal or with a stray animal.
(2) It shall be the duty of any person upon the streets, sidewalks or
public places while having a dog under restraint to prevent such conduct by the
animal and if it becomes involved in any altercation with another animal
inadvertently, to take whatever corrective action is necessary to withdraw their
animal from the affray immediately. If the other animal involved is a stray,
animal control should be called immediately to impound said stray.
10-8
(3) Failure to control a restrained animal shall carry a penalty of no
less than $ nor more than $ for the first offense. A second offense shall
carry a penalty of double the previous fine and confiscation of the animal upon
order of the municipal (city) judge. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-211. Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
by the animal control officer(s) of the City of Newport. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-212. Citations. The animal control officer(s) is hereby authorized to
issue a citation for court appearance as defined by the Tennessee Rules of
Criminal Procedure, to the owner or possessor of any animal violating any
provisions of this chapter. The citation shall be in the form as approved by the
Newport Municipal (city) Court. Said citation shall designate the offense
committed and shall require the person so charged to appear before the Newport
City Court to answer the charges contained or present said citation at the city
records office prior to said court date for disposition. Should an arrest be
required for failure to appear in response to said citation, the animal control
officer shall seek the assistance of the Newport Police Department to effect such
physical arrests. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-213. Investigation. For the purpose of discharging the duties
imposed by this chapter and to enforce its provisions, the animal control officer
is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which an animal is kept or
harbored to request the exhibition of such animal and the rabies certificate for
the animal by the owner or possessor. It is further provided the animal control
officer may enter the premises where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel
or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal and to take
possession of such animal, when in the officer's opinion it requires humane
treatment and to keep and care for same until such time as the court makes a
disposition on any charges or the animal. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-214. Interference with animal control officer. No person shall
interfere with, hinder or molest an animal control officer in the performance of
any duty of such officer, or seek to release or take any animal in the custody of
the animal control officer. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-215. Animal control officer authorized to request assistance
from police department. The animal control officer is empowered to call upon
the personnel and facilities of the Newport Police Department to assist in the
performance or furtherance of the assigned duties as may be necessary for the
officer's or public's physical protection, investigations, or physical arrests.
(Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-9
10-216. Rabies control. (1) Vaccination schedule. It shall be the
responsibility/duty of every dog and cat owner to have his/her dog vaccinated
against rabies at the age of three (3) months, cats at the age of six (6) months,
and annually thereafter. All vaccinations must be administered by a
veterinarian licensed by the Tennessee State Board of Veterinary Medical
Examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Tennessee.
(2) Penalty. Any person failing to have their animal (dog or cat)
vaccinated as required under this section shall upon conviction be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than fifty dollars ($50.00).
(3) Tag evidencing vaccination to be attached to collar and worn at all
times. Every dog owner shall attach a metal tag, evidence of rabies vaccination,
to a collar which shall be worn at all times by the vaccinated.
(4) Vaccination certificate. The vaccination certificate shall be kept by
the person who owns, keeps, or harbors the said animal (dog or cat) at all times
subject to the properly empowered officer(s).
(5) Harboring or owning unvaccinated animal misdemeanor. It is
hereby declared a misdemeanor for any person to own, keep, or harbor any
animal which has not been vaccinated pursuant to the requirements of this
section. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-217. Seizure of animal running at large--redemption by owner.
Any animal found running at large may be seized by an officer (animal control,
health or any peace officer) and placed in the animal sheltering facility. If said
animal is wearing a rabies tag, the owner will be notified by telephone, or a post
card addressed to his last known mailing address to appear within five (5) days
and redeem the animal by paying an owner claim fee of ten dollars ($10.00), the
daily boarding fee of three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per day, as well as the
city pick-up fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50), or the same will be
destroyed. If said animal (dog) is not wearing a tag, the same shall be destroyed
unless legally claimed by the owner within three (3) days. No animal shall be
released in any event from a shelter unless and until it has been vaccinated and
the rabies tag placed on its collar. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-218. Confining or isolating animal upon suspicion of rabies.
(1) If any animal has bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten
any person or is for any reason suspected of being infected with rabies, the
Cocke County Health Department, City of Newport Health Officer, any peace
officer, animal control officer or municipal judge shall cause such animal to be
quarantined, confined or isolated at a veterinary hospital, the animal shelter or
other facility as approved by the Cocke County Health Department for such time
as the health department deems it necessary to protect the safety of the people
and/or personal property.
10-10
(2) When an animal has bitten a person, it shall not be killed while
under confinement/quarantine, except when the animal is too unmanageable as
to be a danger to the public or staff in the sheltering facility.
(3) If such animal should die or be destroyed, within the period, the
Cocke County Health Department shall send the head to the state laboratory for
examination.
(4) The animal shelter shall be authorized to impose a reasonable
charge for the housing and maintenance of said animals. (Ord. #93-5, June
1993)
10-219. Monitoring of quarantine. In those instances where the
animal is quarantined on the premises of the owner, the animal control officer
shall have the authority to monitor the conditions of the quarantine and the
health of the dog at irregular intervals.
If the owner is unable, or fails or refuses to properly quarantine the
animal in such a manner as to protect others from contact with it, the animal
control officer shall impound the animal and quarantine it at the city animal
shelter at the owner's expense. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-220. Concealing animal kept in violation of this chapter a
misdemeanor. Any person who shall hide, conceal or aid or assist in the hiding
or concealing of any animal owned, kept or harbored in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. #93-5, June
1993)
10-221. Dangerous and vicious dogs. (1) Dangerous and vicious dogs
declared a hazard. Dogs within the City of Newport who by their nature,
treatment, training or personality are unusually, overly, decidedly or
deliberately aggressive toward persons or others animals are hereby declared
to be a hazard to the public safety as "dangerous" or "vicious" dogs. The owners
thereof shall be subject to additional restrictions and requirements for the
keeping of such animals within the city and additional penalties if found in
violation.
(a) Dangerous dogs. A dangerous dog shall be:
(i) Any dog which, according to the records of the
Newport Police Department, has inflicted injury on a human being
without provocation on public or private property; or
(ii) Any dog which, according to the records of the
Newport Police Department, has killed a domestic animal without
provocation while off of the owner's property; or
(iii) Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for
the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; or
(iv) Any dog not owned by governmental or law
enforcement used primarily to guard public or private property; or
10-11
(v) Any dog not owned by governmental or law
enforcement trained to attack a human being or another animal
upon voice command or hand signal given by its owner or handler.
(b) Vicious dogs. A vicious dog shall be any dog with a known
propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury,
to domestic animals.
(2) Dogs involved in unprovoked fatal or severe attacks on humans.
(a) Deadly force may be utilized by the animal control officer or
the Newport Police Department, or assigned agent (a licensed
veterinarian) to effect the capture of any dog responsible for an
unprovoked fatal or severe attack upon a human being or to prevent such
an attack upon themselves or another when they believe an attack to be
imminent or unavoidable in the course of their duties.
(b) A dog responsible for an unprovoked fatal or severe attack
on a human being shall, if captured alive and in the custody of the city,
be humanely euthanized following an investigation to clarify the
circumstances of the incident and a reading from the municipal court to
that effect. The cost of the euthanization of said animal will be at the
expense of the owner.
(3) Requirements for keeping a dangerous or vicious dog. The owner
of any dog ruled to be dangerous or vicious shall be required to meet the
following conditions in order to keep the dog inside the city limits of Newport:
(a) The owner shall, at his own expense, have a "dangerous" or
"vicious" dog number as assigned by the City of Newport Animal Control
Department, tattooed upon such dog by a licensed veterinarian or by a
person trained or authorized by a locally licensed veterinarian. The
animal control officer shall designate the particular anatomical location
of said tattoo.
(b) The animal will wear a "dangerous" dog collar, easily
recognizable to the public, police and animal control officers, at all times,
to identify the animal as a dangerous dog.
(c) The owner shall notify the Newport Police Department and
animal control as soon as possible, but no more than eight (8) hours
afterwards, if a dangerous or vicious dog is loose, unconfined or at large
or has been sold, died, or given away.
Notification shall be made immediately if the dog has attacked a
human being or another animal. If the dog has been sold or given away,
the owner shall provide to the animal control officer the name, address
and telephone number of the new owner, who must comply with the
requirements of this chapter. The animal control officer will also notify
the new owner of the animal's complete history.
(d) While on the owner's property, a dangerous or vicious dog
must be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed (four sides and
top) and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of children
10-12
and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure
must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet (5' x 10') and must
secure sides and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the
sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet. The
enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
(e) The owner shall conspicuously display a sign(s) on the
premises warning that there is a "dangerous" dog on the property. This
sign(s) shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway
or thoroughfare.
(f) A dangerous or vicious dog may be off the owner's premises
only if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not
exceeding six feet (6') in length attached to a sturdy collar or halter and
under the direct control of a responsible adult. The muzzle must be made
in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or
animal.
(g) The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog shall present to the
city recorder and animal control officer proof that the owner has procured
liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) covering each twelve (12) month period. This policy shall
contain a provision requiring that the City of Newport be named an
additional insured for the sole purpose that the city be notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the
policy.
(4) Declaring a dog as dangerous or vicious--procedure. (a) The court
may rule a particular dog as dangerous following an examination of all
facts, information, and evidence offered by animal control, the dog's
owner, and any witnesses at a hearing held for that purpose. A dog's
"breed" alone is not sufficient evidence to declare it as dangerous or
vicious.
(b) If the animal suspected to be dangerous or vicious has been
involved in an attack upon a human being the animal control officer shall
attempt to capture and impound the dog. If the dog is captured alive and
impounded in the city animal shelter or a local veterinary hospital or
clinic, the animal control officer shall notify the city judge of the incident
and the condition of the victim. The city judge shall then set an
appropriate date for a dangerous or vicious dog hearing and issue a
summons to the owner to appear.
(c) If the animal in question is killed during the capture on the
complaint is based upon reasonable suspicion that it meets the criteria
set forth in the subsection on dangerous dogs and vicious dogs of this
chapter, the animal control officer shall issue the owner a citation and
assign a date consistent with the city court's regularly scheduled court
calendar.
10-13
(5) Time limits to comply with dangerous and vicious dog
requirements. (a) The owner of any dog ruled as dangerous or vicious by the
court, unless the dog is destroyed (euthanized), shall immediately comply
with the "requirements for keeping a dangerous or vicious dog."
(b) An impounded dog ruled as dangerous or vicious by the court
will not be released until the following requirements are met:
(i) A certificate of inspection is issued by animal control
or code's enforcement stating that the pen or structure for the
animal's confinement is in compliance with the guidelines in this
chapter under "requirements for keeping a dangerous or vicious
dog."
(ii) A certificate of liability insurance is presented to the
court, with a copy on file with animal control.
(iii) All impound fees, fines and penalties are paid in full.
(6) Penalties. (a) If the dog was involved in an unprovoked attack on
a human being, the penalty shall be confiscation and destruction of the
animal and a fine of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00).
(b) If the dog is ruled dangerous for any other reason the fine
shall be no less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars
($50.00) and the "requirements for keeping a dangerous or vicious dog"
shall be imposed.
(c) If a dog previously ruled to be dangerous or vicious is found
to be at large or improperly leashed and muzzled in a public place the fine
shall be no less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first offense. The fine shall be doubled for each
succeeding offense with confiscation and destruction of the animal in
addition to any fine upon a third offense violation.
(7) Liability of parents. If the owner of a dangerous or vicious dog is
a minor, the parents or guardian of that of that minor shall be responsible for
compliance with the specifications of the section for the care and housing of the
animal and shall also be liable for all injuries and property damage sustained
by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by the dog.
(8) Optional action. If the owner of a dog that has been designated
dangerous is unwilling or unable to comply with this section for keeping such
an animal, then he or she should have the animal humanely euthanized at his
or her expense by a licensed veterinarian or may request that the animal shelter
director have the procedure performed following the payment to the city of a
twenty-five to thirty dollars ($25.00/$30.00) euthanasia fee.
(9) Dogs involved in provoked attacks. (a) A dog that has inflicted
injuries under circumstances which indicate that the animal was
provoked shall be required to be kept by the owner as outlined for
dangerous or vicious dogs with the exception of the tattooing.
(b) No dog will be declared dangerous or vicious if the threat,
injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was
10-14
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by
the owner of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the dog, or has in the past, been observed or reported to have teased,
tormented, abused, or assaulted to commit a crime.
(10) Issuance of the "requirements for keeping a dangerous or vicious
dog." (a) A copy of the requirements for keeping a dangerous or vicious dog shall
be issued to each person the city court rules owns a dangerous dog.
(b) The animal control officer shall be responsible for supplying
the city recorder's office with a supply of these requirements for insurance
to the appropriate owners.
(11) Adoption of dangerous or vicious dog. (a) Any dog that has been
designated as dangerous or vicious under this section may not be offered
to the public for adoption.
(b) This shall include dogs which the animal control officer has
in impound of an unclaimed nature and of unknown origin which through
conduct or demeanor leads the animal control officer to believe that the
animal is dangerous or vicious. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-222. Impoundment. (1) Impoundment; redemption; citations.
(a) Any animal found to be at large within the City of Newport,
shall be picked up by the animal control officer and impounded in the city
animal shelter and there be confined in a humane manner for a period of
not less than three (3) days/seventy-two (72) hours (as required by state
law).
(b) Animals which are not claimed by their owner or an
authorized agent, so identified in writing by the owner, after the
expiration of three (3) days, may be adopted to another party under the
provisions of this section. If after three (3) days the animals are not
claimed as provided for above, they may be disposed of at the discretion
of the Director of the Newport Animal Shelter in a humane method.
(c) When animals are found running at large, and their
ownership is known to animal control, such animals need not be
impounded, but the animal control officer may, at his discretion, cite the
owner of such animals to appear in court to answer to charges of violation
of this section.
(2) Compliance with vaccination requirement; redemption by owner.
The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded animal
belonging to him on compliance with the vaccination requirements of the city,
and upon payment of any and all fines as are hereafter set forth.
(3) Impoundment fees. (a) Any dog impounded hereunder may be
redeemed, as provided above, upon payment by the owner to the Newport
Animal Shelter the sum of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50), pick-up
fee, ten dollars ($10.00), owner claim fee and the additional sum of three
dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per day for each day such animal has been
10-15
maintained by the city animal shelter. Impound fees set forth herein
shall be collected for the City of Newport and maintained for the
maintenance and expenses of the Newport Animal Shelter. In addition,
if the animals have not been vaccinated prior to being released from the
shelter. The burden of proof as to the vaccination of an impounded
animal shall be upon the party attempting to redeem the animal from the
shelter.
(b) Any person redeeming unvaccinated animals shall after
payment of the fee assessed herein and prior to taking possession of the
animal, cause said animal to be vaccinated in accordance with the
regulation of the City of Newport, and the cost for expense of such
vaccination fee shall be paid by the party redeeming such animal and
shall be in addition to the fees herein set.
(c) Animal control (animal shelter) shall keep complete and
accurate records of all animals impounded, and should an owner's animal
be impounded a second time, then in such event, animal control, prior to
releasing said animal, shall require a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to be
paid by such owner, plus ten dollars ($10.00), plus three dollars and fifty
cents ($3.50) per day. Upon each subsequent impoundment of said
owner's animal, the animal control officer shall not release said dog until
the owner shall have paid a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus ten
dollars ($10.00), plus three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per day. Upon
a fourth impoundment, the animal may be seized and placed for adoption
or euthanized.
The continual allowing of an animal to run at large shall be prima
facie evidence of the owner's refusal to comply with the City of Newport
Animal Control Codes.
(4) (a) Any animal impounded under provisions of this section and
redeemed by its owner within three (3) days/seventy-two (72) hours may
be adopted and the title to the animal transferred to some responsible
and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this
section and such other regulations as may be fixed by the shelter's
adoption contact or the State of Tennessee.
(b) Any person adopting an animal impounded in the city
animal shelter shall be exempt from any impound fees associated with
that animal and shall be required to pay only the adoption fee for said
animal fifty dollars ($50.00) for a canine, (dog or puppy), and twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for a feline, (cat or kitten).
(c) The Newport Animal Shelter reserves the authority to refuse
any person the right to adopt any animal in the city shelter, for any
reason(s). (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-223. Fraudulent redemption or adoption of animals. (1) If any
person shall obtain possession, custody, or adoption of any animal impounded
10-16
in the city animal shelter or in the custody of the animal control officer for on or
behalf of the owner thereof for the purpose of avoiding payment of the fees and
penalties imposed upon the owner by this section, both the owner of such animal
and the person so obtaining possession, custody or adoption of the dog for the
owner shall be deemed to have violated the terms of this section.
(2) Upon conviction of fraudulent redemption or adoption of an animal
the owner shall be responsible for any fees or penalties due prior to the
fraudulent redemption and both the owner and the person so obtaining
possession, custody or adoption of the animal shall be fined no less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) each.
(Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-224. Failure or refusal to redeem an impounded dog. (1) Should
the owner of an animal impounded in the city animal shelter be known and
made aware of his animal's impoundment or should identify himself as the
owner to the animal control officer or shelter staff and then refuse or fail to
redeem the impounded animal and pay the associated fees and penalties said
owner shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
(2) Upon conviction an owner failing or refusing to redeem an animal
shall be fined no less than the amount consistent with the appropriate impound
fee for that dog, plus three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per day for each day
held in the shelter for kennel care plus thirty dollars ($30.00) euthanasia fee
regardless of the eventual disposition of the impounded animal by animal
control. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-225. Euthanasia of animals. (1) The animal control officer or
shelter director shall be authorized to euthanize or have euthanized any animal
which remains in impound and unclaimed for a period of three (3) days or more.
(2) The animal control officer shall be authorized to euthanize or have
euthanized any animal which is found or reported to be injured to such an
extent that it is suffering with little hope of recovery and the owner of which is
unknown or not readily available to assume responsibility for the animal.
(3) The animal control officer shall be authorized to euthanize any
stray or animal at large which is taken into custody that has no identity of
ownership and which in the opinion of the animal control officer or shelter
director is so disease ridden or physically impaired as to be suffering and
impoundment of which would only prolong the condition.
(4) The animal shelter staff shall euthanize or have euthanized
animals by a method approved by local licensed veterinarians and shall dispose
of the remains in a sanitary way approved by the city under the state
regulations. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-226. Veterinary care of sick or injured animals. (1) It shall be
the duty of the animal shelter staff and/or animal control officer to seek prompt
10-17
veterinary care and treatment for any sick, injured, abused or neglected animal
which is taken into custody or impounded in the city shelter.
(2) Expenses for such veterinary care shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the animal if known, otherwise such expenses shall be paid by the City
of Newport.
(3) The animal control officer shall also be authorized to call upon any
of the locally licensed veterinarians for advice or assistance as may be
necessary. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-227. Adoption disclaimer. (1) Although the animal control officer
or shelter director shall make a reasonable effort through observation and
routine care of animals impounded at the city animal shelter for obvious signs
of disease and/or injury neither the city nor the animal control officer or shelter
director can guarantee the medical, physical, emotional soundness of any animal
adopted under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Newport Animal Shelter will not knowingly permit the
adoption of an unfit animal. (Ord. #93-5, June 1993)
10-228. Removal and disposal of dog or cat feces from public or
private property regulated. (1) Defecation on public or private property. No
person owning or in charge of any dog or cat shall cause or allow such dog or cat
to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, riverbank, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where
people congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any
private property without the permission of the owner of said private property.
(2) Removal of feces. Any person owning or in charge of any dog or cat
which soils, defiles, defecates or commits any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, riverbank, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place
where people congregate or walk or upon public property whatsoever or upon
any private property without the permission of owner or said property shall
immediately remove feces deposited by any such dog or cat by any sanitary
method approved by the local enforcement authority. Sanitary methods for
removing all feces are mechanical devices such as poop scoopers, small shovels,
etc.
(3) Sanitary disposal of feces. (a) The owner or person in charge of
such dog or cat shall remove and dispose of all feces in a sealed,
nonabsorbent, leak proof container, such as a sealed plastic bag. Such
material shall not be disposed in public trash receptacles or storm drains.
(b) Any owner or person in charge of a dog or cat being walked
upon any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, riverbank, passageway,
bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate must have
in their possession their cleanup device and nonabsorbent leak proof
container(s).
10-18
Plus court costs, or damages if any. 1
(4) Exceptions. Legally blind persons who may use dogs as guides
shall be exempt from provisions of this section.
(5) Violations and penalties. Any person that violates the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. #2006-9,
Oct. 2006)
10-229. Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of
this chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Newport shall be fined a
sum not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. #93-5, June 1993, modified) 1
11-1
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES¹
CHAPTER
1. MISDEMEANORS OF THE STATE ADOPTED.
2. ALCOHOL.
3. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET.
4. INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL.
5. FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES.
6. TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC.
7. MISCELLANEOUS.
8. OBSCENITY, MORALS.
9. LOITERING, ETC.
10. GAMBLING.
11. PANHANDLING.
CHAPTER 1
MISDEMEANORS OF THE STATE ADOPTED
SECTION
11-101. Misdemeanors of the state adopted.
11-102. Adoption of state traffic statues.
11-101. Misdemeanors of the state adopted. All offenses against the state which are
defined by state law to be misdemeanors are hereby designated and declared to be the laws and
ordinances of the city and any violation of any such state law within the corporate limits is also a
violation of this section. (1973 Code, § 12-1)
11-102. Adoption of state traffic statues. By the authority granted under Tennessee
Code Annotated §16-18-302, the City of Newport, Tennessee adopts by reference as if fully set
§§55-8-101 through 55-8-131, and §§55-8-133 through 55-8-180. Additionally, the City of
Newport, Tennessee adopts Tennessee Code Annotated §§55-8-181 through 55-8-193, §§55-9-
601 through 55-9-606, §55-12-139 and §55-50-351 by reference as if fully set forth in this
section. (Ordinance #2013-02, March 2013)
_____________________
¹ Municipal code references 1
Animal control: title 10.
Housing and utility codes: title 12.
Traffic offenses: title 15.
Streets and sidewalks (non-traffic): title 16.
11-2
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOL¹
SECTION
11-201. Public drinking and public display of alcoholic beverage prohibited.
11-201. Public drinking and public display of alcoholic beverage prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage or visibly and openly possess,
display, exhibit, or show an unsealed bottle containing any alcoholic beverage in any restaurant,
eating place or tavern, or in the parking area of any drive-in restaurant, or on any public street, or
sidewalk, or in any public park, playground, auditorium, theater, stadium, school, or school
ground or in any other public place. (Ord. #__, 1983)
_____________________
¹ Municipal code references 1
Sale of alcoholic beverage, including beer: title 8.
11-3
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
SECTION
11-301. Disturbing the peace.
11-302. Anti-noise regulations.
11-303. Engine compression braking devices prohibited in city.
11-304. Fireworks restrictions.
11-301. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb, tend to disturb, or aid in
disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive, or obstreperous conduct, and no
person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him or
under his control. (1973 Code, § 12-2)
11-302. Anti-noise regulations. Subject to the provisions of this section, the creating of
any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise within the city is unlawful. Noise of
such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or
in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is unlawful.
(1) The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and
unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive:
(a) Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another
vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or
as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of
any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(b) Radios and phonographs. The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical
instrument or sound device, including but not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for
reproduction or amplification of sound, either independently or in connection with motion
pictures, radio, or television, in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours
between 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of
persons in any office or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any
person in the vicinity.
(c) Yelling and shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public
street, particularly between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., or at any time or place so as
to annoy or disturb the 11-4 quiet, comfort, or repose of any persons in any hospital, dwelling,
hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
(d) Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which, by causing frequent or long
continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity.
(e) Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or in such a manner as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other
noise.
11-4
(f) Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon
request of the proper city authorities.
(g) Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or
other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) Building operations. The erection, including excavation, and the demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building in any residential area or section or the construction or repair
of streets and highways in any residential area or section, other than between the hours of 7:00
A.M. and 6:00 P.M. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health and safety, and then only with a permit from the recorder which permit may be granted for
a period not to exceed thirty (30) days while the while the emergency continues. If the recorder
should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways
between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., and if he shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest through delay, he may grant permission for
such work to be done between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. upon application being
made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the process of the work.
(i) Noises near schools, hospitals, and similar institutions. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church, or court while it is in session.
(j) Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud and excessive noise in
connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates, and other containers.
(k) Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or
sale or display of merchandise.
(l) Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or
amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes.
(2) None of the terms or prohibitions of this section shall apply to or be enforced against:
(a) City vehicles. Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business.
(b) Public improvements. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways, by or on
behalf of the city, the county, or the state, during the night when the public welfare and
convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day.
(c) Noncommercial use of loudspeakers or amplifiers. The reasonable use of amplifiers or
loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character and in the
course of advertising functions sponsored by nonprofit organizations. However, no such use shall
be made until a permit therefore is secured from the recorder. Hours for the use of an amplifier
or public address system shall be designated in the permit so issued and the use of such systems
shall be restricted to the hours so designated in the permit. (1973 Code, § 12-21)
11-303. Engine compression braking devices prohibited in city.
(1) All truck tractor and semi-trailers operating within the City of Newport shall conform
to the visual exhaust system inspection requirements, 40 C.F.R 202.22, of the Interstate Motor
Carriers Noise Emission Standards.
11-5
(2) A motor vehicle does not conform to the visual exhaust system inspection
requirements referenced in subsection (1) of this section if inspection of the exhaust system of
the motor carrier vehicle discloses that the system:
(a) Has a defect that adversely affects sound reduction, such as exhaust gas leaks or
alteration or deterioration of muffler elements (small traces of soot on flexible exhaust pipe
sections shall not constitute a violation); or
(b) Is not equipped with either a muffler or other noise dissipative device, such as a
turbocharger (supercharger driven by exhaust by gases); or
(c) Is equipped with a cut out, bypass, or similar device, unless such device is designed as
an exhaust gas driven cargo unloading system.
(3) Violations of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per offense.
(4) This section shall be supplemental to other noise control ordinances and regulations
of the city, and shall be effective upon its final passage. (Ord. #2006-16, Jan. 2007)
11-304. Fireworks Restrictions. Definition. Fireworks means and shall include any
combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation.
Use restricted. The following restrictions shall apply for the use of fireworks within the
corporate limits of the City of Newport:
1) It shall be unlawful to use or explode any fireworks within the corporate limits of the City
of Newport except from July 3rd thru July 5th on which the time shall be no later than
11:00 PM and from December 31st New Year’s Eve on which the time shall be no later
than January 1st 12:30 AM.
2) It shall be unlawful to explode or ignite fireworks on or onto another person’s property unless
permission is obtained from the owner or occupant of said property.
3) It shall be unlawful to explode or ignite fireworks within six hundred (600) feet of any
church, hospital, funeral home, public or private school, or within two-hundred (200) feet of
where fireworks are stored, sold, or offered for sale.
4) It shall be unlawful to ignite or discharge fireworks from or within a motor vehicle. It shall be
unlawful for any person to place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at a motor
vehicle, or at or near any person or group of persons. (Ordinance #2018-16, November 2018)
11-6
CHAPTER 4
INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION
11-401. False emergency alarms.
11-402. Escape from jail.
11-401. False emergency alarms. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally
make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or to
aid or abet in the commission of such act. (1973 Code, § 12-9)
11-402. Escape from jail.¹ It shall be unlawful for any person, while 1 a prisoner in the
city jail or otherwise in custody of and confined by the city, to escape or attempt to escape or for
any other person to assist or encourage such person to escape or attempt to escape from such
custody or confinement. (1973 Code, § 12-10)
__________________________
¹State law reference
Escape: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-16-605.
11-7
CHAPTER 5
FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
SECTION
11-501. Assault and battery; assault with a weapon.
11-502. Throwing missiles.
11-503. Weapons.
11-501. Assault and battery; assault with a weapon.¹ It shall be 1 unlawful for any
person to maliciously beat, strike, wound or otherwise inflict violence on another or to assault
another with a lethal weapon, instrument or thing with intent to commit upon the person of
another any bodily injury. (1973 Code, § 12-3)
11-502. Throwing missiles.² It shall be unlawful for any person to 2 maliciously throw
any stone, snowball, or any other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or
private property or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place or enclosed or
unenclosed ground.(1973 Code, § 12-8)
11-503. Weapons.³ (1) It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to 3 carry in any
manner on or about his person or in his portfolio or purse, with the intent of going armed, any
razor, dagger, slingshot, black jack, chain, nightstick, pipe, stick, sword, cane, ice pick, spear,
knuckles made of any metal or any hard substance, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, spring knife,
throw blade knife, knife with a blade over four (4) inches in length or with an overall length of
eight (8) inches, pistol, gun, revolver, or any like instrument unless the person is performing the
official duties of a duly appointed police officer for the city, county, state or federal
governments, or the armed forces of the United States, or is authorized by law to go armed.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge or fire a firearm unless the
person is performing an official duty as a duly appointed police officer for the city, county, state
or federal governments, or the armed forces of the United States. (1973 Code, § 12-19)
_______________________
¹State law reference
Assaults: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-13-101 and § 39-13-102.
²State law reference
Throwing or casting missiles: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-14-413.
³State law reference
Weapons: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-13-1302.
11-8
CHAPTER 6
TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE
WITH TRAFFIC
SECTION
11-601. Trespassing.
11-601. Trespassing. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously,
wantonly or negligently injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto
or movable or personal property, belonging to the city or to any person in the city. (1973 Code, §
12-4)
11-9
CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
11-701. Spitting.
11-702. Conspiracy.
11-703. Posting notices, etc.
11-704. Curfew on persons under eighteen.
11-705. Disturbing the record's court.
11-706. Burials in other than cemeteries prohibited; establishment of new cemeteries.
11-701. Spitting. It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate on any
sidewalk within the city. (1973 Code, § 12-17)
11-702. Conspiracy. It shall be unlawful for any persons within the city to assemble
together and agree or conspire to do any unlawful act, with force or violence, against the
property or person of another or against the peace of the city. (1973 Code, § 12-18)
11-703. Posting notices, etc. No person shall fasten, in any way, any show-card, poster,
or other advertising device upon any public or private property in the city unless legally
authorized to do so. (1973 Code, § 12-5)
11-704. Curfew on persons under eighteen. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years to be upon or remain on any street or other public place of
the city after the hour of 12:00 midnight, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, legal
custodian or other person having the custody of the minor, or unless the person shall be a
member of the armed forces.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of fifteen (15) years to be upon or
remain upon any street or public place of the city after the hour of 10:00 P.M., unless
accompanied by a parent, guardian or legal custodian.
(3) No child or minor person shall be placed in confinement for a violation of this section
until the child or minor person shall have first been taken to his home or place of residence to
ascertain whether the parent, guardian or other legal custodian wishes to either refuse or accept
responsibility for the child or minor.
(4) It shall be the duty of the recorder to determine the proper steps to be taken after the
refusal or acceptance by the parent, guardian or legal custodian of minor thus charged, pursuant
to subsection (3). (1973 Code, § 12-16)
11-705. Disturbing the recorder's court. It shall be unlawful for any person to create a
disturbance of any trial before the recorder's court by any loud or unusual noise or any
indecorous, profane or blasphemous language. (1973 Code, § 12-20)
11-10
11-706. Burials in other than cemeteries prohibited; establishment of new
cemeteries. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish any graveyard or cemetery, public or
private, or to bury any dead body within the city except within cemeteries already lawfully in
existence or hereafter created or established by the board of mayor and aldermen. (1973
Code, § 12-22)
11-11
CHAPTER 8
OBSCENITY, MORALS
SECTION
11-801. Disorderly houses.
11-802. Prostitution and lewdness.
11-803. Indecent or improper exposure or dress.
11-804. Window peeping.
11-805. Profanity, etc.
11-801. Disorderly houses. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house
or house of ill fame for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness or where drunkenness,
quarrelling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of
others. (1973 Code, § 12-12)
11-802. Prostitution and lewdness. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit or
offer or agree to commit or to secure or offer another for the purpose of committing, a lewd or
adulterous act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion; nor shall any person knowingly
transport or direct or offer to transport or direct any person to any place or building for the
purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion. No person shall
knowingly receive, or offer or agree to receive any person into any place or building for the
purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion, or to knowingly
permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose. (1973 Code, § 12-11)
11-803. Indecent or improper exposure or dress. It shall be unlawful for any person to
publicly appear naked or in any dress not appropriate to his sex, or in any indecent or lewd dress,
or to otherwise make any indecent exposure of his or her person. (1973 Code, § 12-15)
11-804. Window peeping.¹ It shall be unlawful for any person to look, 1 peer, or peep
into or be found loitering around or within view of, any window not on his own property with the
intent of watching or looking through the window. (1973 Code, § 12-13)
11-805. Profanity, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any vulgar, profane or
indecent language in any public street or other public place or in any place of business open to
public patronage. (1973 Code, § 12-14)
_______________________
¹State law reference
Observation without consent: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-13-607.
11-12
CHAPTER 9
LOITERING, ETC.
SECTION
11-901. Loitering.
11-901. Loitering. It shall be unlawful for any person to be found loitering or strolling in,
about or upon any street, alley or other public way or public place or at any public gathering or
assembly, or in or around any store, shop, or business or commercial establishment, or on any
private property or place, without lawful business or while conducting himself in a lewd, wanton
or lascivious manner in speech or behavior or while unable to reveal a visible means of support
or give a satisfactory account of himself. (1973 Code, § 12-6)
11-13
CHAPTER 10
GAMBLING
SECTION
11-1001. Gambling.
11-1001. Gambling.¹ It shall be unlawful for any person to play at any 1 game of hazard
or chance for money or other valuable thing or to make or accept any bet or wager for money or
other valuable thing. It shall be unlawful for any person to encourage, promote or assist any other
person in gambling. It shall also be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any
gambling table or other device whatever for the enticement of any person to gamble. (1973
Code, § 12-7)
______________________
¹State law reference
Gaming: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-17-501, et seq.
11-14
CHAPTER 11
PANHANDLING
SECTION
11-1101. Generally.
11-1102. Definitions.
11-1103. Time of panhandling.
11-1104. Place of panhandling.
11-1105. Manner of panhandling.
11-1106. False or misleading solicitation.
11-1107. Accosting persons or obstructing traffic.
11-1108. Penalties for violation.
11-1101. Generally. The purpose of this section and legislation is to regulate and punish
violations of the act of panhandling, rather than the status of the person and is not intended to
restrict the exercise of protected free speech.
Exclusion. The activities of panhandling do not include a person who passively stands or sits
with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations, without addressing any solicitation
to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person. Nothing in this section
shall abrogate or abridge provisions of Chapter 11, pertaining to public solicitation, or the laws
of state and federal government, or those laws regulating nonprofit, religious, educational, civic
or benevolent organizations. (Ordinance #2015-10, October 2015).
11-1102. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
1) Assault means assaultive offenses as set out in T.C.A. §§ 39-13-101, 39-13-102 and 39-13-
103, and classed as criminal offenses. For purposes of this City Code section 11-1101, the term
"assault" does not apply to manner of panhandling as set out in paragraph (1106) hereunder and
classified as a misdemeanor.
2) Abusive solicitation means to do one or more of the following while engaging in solicitation
or immediately thereafter:
a) Coming closer than three (3) feet to the person solicited unless and until the person
solicited indicates that he or she wishes to make a donation;
b) Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;
c) Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside of him or her so
as to continue soliciting after the person solicited declines to make a donation;
d) Threatening the person or accompanying person solicited with physical harm by word or
gesture and the person would regard the threat as offensive or provocative;
e) Abusing the person solicited with words which are offensive and inherently likely to
provoke an immediate violent reaction;
f) Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent and a reasonable
person would regard the contact as offensive or provocative;
g) Engaging in solicitation activity in any of the prohibited places specified in restricted
geographical areas.
11-15
3) Accost means to approach and speak in a challenging and aggressive manner.
4) Aggressively beg means to beg with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money
or goods with actual or implied threats, or menacing actions.
5) ATM or Automated Teller Machine means a device, linked to a financial institution's account
records, which is able to carry out cash transactions.
6) Bank means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking
association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated
under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
7) Beg means to ask for money or goods as a charity, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs,
or other means.
8) Check cashing business means any person duly licensed to engage in the business of cashing
checks, drafts or money orders for consideration.
9) Coerce means:
a) To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to
believe that the person is being threatened with:
1) Imminent bodily injury; or
2) The commission of a criminal act upon the person or another person, or upon
property in the person's immediate possession;
b) To persist in a solicitation after the person solicited has given a negative response;
c) To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited
person;
d) To engage in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force
a solicited person to accede to demands.
10) Credit union means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts
of which are insured by the administrator of the National Credit Union Administration.
11) Donation means any item of value, monetary or otherwise, accepted by a panhandler and
shall also include the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value under
circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a
gift.
12) Exempt organizations means any nonprofit, religious, civic or benevolent organization
described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
13) Health care institution means any agency, institution, facility or place, whether publicly or
privately owned or operated, that provides health services and that is one of the following:
nursing home; recuperation center; hospital; ambulatory surgical treatment center; birthing
center; mental health hospital; mental retardation institutional habilitation facility; home care
organization or any category of service provided by a home care organization for which
authorization is required under this chapter; outpatient diagnostic center; rehabilitation facility;
residential hospice; or nonresidential methadone treatment facility as defined in the Tennessee
Code.
14) Health service means clinically related services such as diagnostic, treatment or rehabilitative
services.
15) Intimidate means to engage intentionally in conduct which would make a reasonable person
fearful or feel compelled.
11-16
Also, for purposes of this chapter, a person commits the offense of intimidating others from
exercising civil rights who:
a) Injures or threatens to injure or coerces another person with the intent to unlawfully
intimidate another from the free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured
by the constitution or laws of the state; or
b) Injures or threatens to injure or coerces another person with the intent to unlawfully
intimidate another because that other exercised any right or privilege secured by the
Constitution or laws of the United States or the constitution or laws of the state.
16) Panhandler means any person, other than an exempt organization, acting on his/her own
behalf or on behalf of another, requesting an immediate donation of money or exchange of any
services; or any person, acting on his/her own behalf, attempting to sell an item for an amount far
exceeding its value, or where said item is already offered free of charge to the general public,
and a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation.
17) Panhandling is the solicitation of any item of value, monetary or otherwise, made by a
person, other than an exempt organization, acting on his/her own behalf, requesting an
immediate donation of money or exchange of series; or any person, acting on his/her own behalf,
attempting to sell an item for an amount far exceeding its value, or an item which is already
offered free of charge to the general public, and under circumstances a reasonable person would
understand that the purchase is in substance a donation.
18) Pedestrian interference means the obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic by
aggressively begging which impedes the passageway or a pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
19) Public place means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges,
buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public
including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
20) Savings and loan association includes a building and loan association, a federal or state
savings and loan association, a federal savings bank, and any other financial institution, the
accounts of which are insured by the federal savings and loan insurance corporation (FSLIC) or
any successor of such corporation (T.C.A. § 1-3-105).
21) Self-service car wash means a structure:
a) At which a vehicle may be manually washed by its owner or operator with equipment
that is activated by the deposit of money in a coin-operated machine;
b) That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public.
22) Self-service fuel pump means a fuel pump:
a) From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by its
owner or operator, without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which
the fuel pump is located;
b) That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public.
23) Sidewalk means all portions of any public street where the same has no curb line and as to
any public street having a curb line includes all portions situated between each curb line and the
nearest property line regardless of whether the sidewalk is improved or unimproved.
24) Solicit and Solicitation means to make any request in person while in a public place, for an
immediate grant of money, goods or any other form of gratuity from another person(s) when the
person making the request is not known to the persons who are the subject of the request, or to
engage in such activity on private property.
11-17
However, the terms "solicit" and "solicitation" shall not mean the act of passively standing or
sitting with a sign or other indicator that a donation of money, goods, or any other form of
gratuity is being sought without any vocal request other than a response to an inquiry by another
person. (Ordinance #2015-10, October 2015)
11-1103. Time of panhandling. It is unlawful for any person to panhandle between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ordinance #2015-10, October 2015)
11-1104. Place of panhandling. Outside the boundaries of the panhandling prohibited zone,
any person who panhandles when the person solicited is in any of the following places is guilty
of a misdemeanor:
1) Within 50 feet of:
a) any entranceway into or exit from any health care institution or health facility;
b) any entranceway into or exit from any bank, savings and loan association, credit union,
check cashing business or other financial institution buildings;
c) an automatic teller machine (ATM), provided that when an automated teller machine is
located within an automated teller machine facility; such distance shall be measured from
the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility;
2) Within 25 feet of:
a) the entrance to a religious assembly;
b) any parking lot;
c) any entranceway into or exit from any building open to the public. Where any such
entranceway or exit is recessed from the public sidewalk, the 25 feet shall be measured
from the point at which the building abuts the sidewalk;
d) any marked crosswalk;
e) any outdoor dining area or outdoor merchandise area, if such areas are in active use at
the time;
f) self-service fuel pump;
g) a self-service car wash;
3) At or within 20 feet of any vendor location;
4) While seated on or leaning against any public bench, planter, monument or other public
property;
5) While seated on or leaning against any privately owned property without the property owner's
or tenant's permission;
6) In any vehicle on the street;
7) On private property, unless the panhandler has permission from the owner or occupant.
(Ordinance #2015-10, October 2015)
11-1105. Manner of panhandling. Any person who in a public place panhandles in any of
the following ways or manner is guilty of a misdemeanor:
1) By coming within three (3) feet of the person solicited, unless that person has indicated that
he/she does wish to make a donation;
2) By touching the person being solicited without that person's consent;
3) By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal;
11-18
4) By following or walking alongside a person who walks away from the panhandler and a
reasonable person would regard this as offensive or provocative;
5) By blocking the path of a person who attempts to walk or drive away from the panhandler;
6) By panhandling in a group of two or more persons;
7) By any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation
of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat;
8) By intimidating, obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
9) By assaulting or aggressively begging;
10) While under the influence of alcohol, illegal narcotic or a controlled substance.
(Ordinance #2015-10, October 2015)
11-1106. False or misleading solicitation.
1) Any person who knowingly makes any false, misuse, or misleading representation in the
course of soliciting a donation is guilty of a misdemeanor. False or misleading representations
include, but are not limited to, the following:
a) Stating that the donation is needed to meet a specific need, when the solicitor already has
sufficient funds to meet the need and does not disclose that fact;
b) Stating that the donation is needed to meet a need which does not exist;
c) Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded, when that is not true;
d) Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military service, when the solicitor is
neither a present nor former member of the service indicated;
e) Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability, when the solicitor does not
suffer the disability indicated;
f) Use of any makeup or device to simulate any deformity;
g) Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he is not;
h) Stating the donation is for food but in reality is used for alcohol, "sidewalk" drugs, or
illegal contraband;
i) Using and exposing minors/children and animals to hazardous conditions (i.e., cold, heat,
animals, weather and/or strangers), to solicit funds; or
j) To offer to sell newspapers, magazines, periodicals, pamphlets for a price, which are
offered free of charge to the general public.
2) Any person who solicits a donation stating that the funds are needed for a specific purpose and
then spends the funds received for a different purpose is guilty of a misdemeanor.
3) This chapter and section establish a single offense. Evidence which establishes beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant violated this chapter or section is sufficient for conviction
and need not establish which section or subsection was violated.
(Ordinance #2015-10, October 2015)
11-1107. Accosting persons or obstructing traffic. Every person who commits any of the
following acts is guilty of a misdemeanor:
1) Who assaults, aggressively begs, intimidates, or accosts other persons in any public place or in
any place open to the public, for the purpose of panhandling or soliciting a donation for
immediate payment.
2) Who obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or interferes at a time when a person, or the
vehicle, is not in a position to walk or drive away.
11-19
3) Who accosts other persons in any public place, or in any place open to the public, for
donations if it is a general and known fact to all reasonable people that appropriate institutions,
organizations, or charity groups exist who make available the same daily necessities and needs at
no cost. (Ordinance #2015-10, October 2015)
11-1108. Penalties for violation. Any person found violating of any one or all of the
above subsections of section 11-1101 are deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof subject to penalties as set under City Code section 3-202. (Ordinance #2015-10, October
2015)
12-1
Municipal code references 1
Fire protection: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: title 18.
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 2
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES
CHAPTER
1. BUILDING CODE.
2. PLUMBING CODE.
3. ELECTRICAL CODE.
4. GAS CODE.
5. HOUSING CODE.
6. AMUSEMENT DEVICE CODE.
7. SWIMMING POOL CODE.
8. UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE.
9. MECHANICAL CODE.
10. EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE.
11. ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE.
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE1
SECTION
12-101. Adopted.
12-102. Modifications.
12-103. Amendments.
12-104. Filing.
12-105. Violations.
12-101. Adopted. For the purpose of regulating the construction,
alteration, repair, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and
demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenance connected or
attached to any building or structure, the Standard Building Code, 1999 2
edition, as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as if set out at length in this chapter and
12-2
shall be the building code of the city. (1973 Code, § 6-17, as amended by
Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-102. Modifications. Whenever the building code adopted in this
chapter refers to the "chief appointing authority" or the "chief administrator,"
it shall be deemed to be a reference to the board of mayor and aldermen; when
the "building official" or "director of public works" is named, it shall, for the
purposes of the building code, mean such person as the board of mayor and
aldermen shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the building code. (1973 Code, § 6-18)
12-103. Amendments. The building code of the city as adopted in this
chapter, is amended in the following respects:
Section 107.2. Failure to Obtain a Permit. This section is amended to
read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any work on a
building or structure before obtaining the necessary permit therefor from
the city.
Section 107.4. Schedule of Permit Fees. This section is amended to read
as follows:
On all buildings, structures or alterations requiring a building
permit, as set forth in section 105, a fee shall be paid as required at the
time of filing application, in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) Permit fees.
1. Where the valuation does not exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00), no fee shall be required unless an
inspection is necessary, in which case there shall be
a one dollar ($1.00) fee.
2. For a valuation over one hundred dollars ($100.00)
up to and including two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00), the fee shall be one dollar ($1.00)
per five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fraction thereof.
3. For a valuation over two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00), the fee shall be five dollars
($5.00) for the first two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each additional
thousand or fraction thereof.
(b) Moving of building or structures. For the moving of any
building or structure, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
(c) Demolition of buildings or structures. For the demolition of
any building or structure, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
Section 114. Violations and Penalties. This section is deleted in its
entirety. (1973 Code, § 6-19, as amended by Ord. #90-9-B, Oct. 1990)
12-3
12-104. Filing. One (1) copy of the building code adopted in this chapter,
with the modifications and amendments thereof are on file in the recorder's
office and shall be kept there for the use and inspections of the public. (1973
Code, § 6-20, modified)
12-105. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the building code adopted in this chapter, as
modified and amended in this chapter. (1973 Code, § 6-21)
12-4
Charter references 1
Newport Utilities Board: § 1.18.
Sewer charges: § 1.20.
Waterworks and sewers: § 1.19.
Municipal code references
Cross connections: title 18.
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 2
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE1
SECTION
12-201. Adopted.
12-202. Modifications.
12-203. Amendments.
12-204. Filing.
12-205. Compliance required.
12-201. Adopted. For the purpose of regulating plumbing installations
including alterations, repairs, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and the
appurtenances thereto, within and without the city when such plumbing is, or
is to be, connected with the city public water or sewerage systems, the Standard
Plumbing Code, 1997 edition, as prepared and adopted by the International 2
Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if set out at
length in this chapter and shall be referred to as the plumbing code. (1973
Code, § 6-64, as amended by Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-202. Modifications. (1) Whenever the plumbing code adopted in this
chapter refers to the "chief appointing authority," the "administrative authority"
or the "governing authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference to the board
of mayor and aldermen.
(2) When the "city engineer" is named in the plumbing code adopted
in this chapter, it shall mean the "superintendent of streets."
(3) The "plumbing official" or "inspector," as used in the plumbing code
adopted in this chapter, shall be such person as the board of mayor and
aldermen shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the plumbing code. (1973 Code, § 6-65)
12-5
12-203. Amendments. The plumbing code adopted in this chapter is
amended in the following respects:
Section 106.2. Failure to Obtain a Permit. This section is amended to
read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any plumbing
installation before obtaining the necessary permit therefor from ___________.
Section Violations and Penalties. This section is deleted in its
entirety. (1973 Code, § 6-66)
12-204. Filing. One (1) copy of the plumbing code adopted in this
chapter, with the modifications and amendments thereof, has been placed on file
in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the
public. (1973 Code, § 6-67, modified)
12-205. Compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate or fail to comply with any provision of the plumbing code adopted in this
chapter by reference, as modified and amended. (1973 Code, § 6-68)
12-6
Municipal code references 1
Fire protection: title 7.
Copies of this code may be purchased from the National Fire Protection 2
Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101.
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-301. Adopted.
12-302. Filing.
12-303. Compliance required.
12-304. Permit required.
12-305. Enforcement.
12-301. Adopted. For the purpose of providing a practical minimum
standard for the safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their contents
from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power, radio,
signaling and for other purposes, the National Electrical Code, 1971 edition, as 2
prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as if set out at length in this chapter, and shall be
referred to as the electrical code. (1973 Code, § 6-32)
12-302. Filing. One (1) copy of the electrical code adopted in this
chapter is on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1973 Code, § 6-33, modified)
12-303. Compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
do or authorize any electrical work or to use any electricity in such a manner or
under such circumstances as not to comply with the requirements and the
standards prescribed by the electrical code adopted in this chapter. (1973 Code,
§ 6-34)
12-304. Permit required. No person shall make any electrical
installation in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Newport Utilities Board in conformity with the rules of the board. (1973 Code,
§ 6-35)
12-305. Enforcement. The electrical inspector shall be such person as
the board of mayor and aldermen shall appoint or designate for that office. It
shall be the electrical inspector's duty to enforce compliance with the electrical
code as adopted in this chapter; he is authorized and directed to make such
12-7
inspections of electrical equipment and wiring as are necessary to insure
compliance with the electrical code and may enter any premises or building at
any reasonable time for the purpose of discharging his duties. The electrical
inspector is authorized to refuse or discontinue electrical service to any person
or place not complying with the electrical code. (1973 Code, § 6-36)
12-8
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 1
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 4
GAS CODE
SECTION
12-401. Adopted.
12-402. Amendments.
12-403. Filing.
12-404. Installation or repair permit required.
12-405. Permit fee.
12-406. Enforcement.
12-407. Violations.
12-401. Adopted. For the purpose of regulating the installation of
consumer's gas piping and gas appliances, the Standard Gas Code, 1997 1
edition, as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as if set out at length in this chapter and
shall hereinafter be referred to as the gas code. (1973 Code, § 6-47, as amended
by Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-402. Amendments. The gas code adopted in this chapter is hereby
amended in the following respects:
Section 103. Qualified installing agency. This section is amended to read
as follows:
Installation and replacement of a consumer's gas piping or gas
appliances and repair of a consumer's gas appliances shall be performed
only by a qualified agency which has filed with the city evidence of a
liability bond or insurance policy in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) which indemnifies and saves harmless the city and all
persons therein from any loss, cost or damage caused by negligent,
inadequate, imperfect or defective work done by the agency while acting
in the scope and course of its employment. By the term "qualified agency"
is meant any individual, firm, corporation, or company which either in
person or through a representative is engaged in and is responsible for
the installation, replacement or repair of consumer gas piping, or the
connection, installation, repair or servicing of gas appliances, and who is
experienced in such work and familiar with all precautions required.
(1973 Code, § 6-48)
12-9
12-403. Filing. One (1) copy of the gas code adopted in this chapter has
been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public. (1973 Code, § 6-40, modified)
12-404. Installation or repair permit required. No property owner
shall cause or permit, nor shall any person install, modify, change or repair any
house gas piping or any gas appliance or fixture within the city or its gas service
territory until the person proposing to do the work shall have first obtained a
permit therefor from the city. (1973 Code, § 6-50)
12-405. Permit fee. There shall be charged a fee of one dollar ($1.00)
for each permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The fee shall include the costs
of one (1) inspection to be made by the gas inspector. Should additional
inspections be necessary, there shall be an added charge of one dollar ($1.00) for
each such inspection. (1973 Code, § 6-51)
12-406. Enforcement. The gas inspector shall be such person as the
board of mayor and aldermen shall appoint or designate to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the gas code; he shall inspect the installation,
modification or repair of all gas piping, connections, appliances and fixtures; he
may enter any building or premises at any reasonable time for the discharge of
his duties. The gas inspector shall not approve any gas piping installation,
connection, repair, modification or appliance which fails to meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter or the gas code. Immediately upon completion of
the inspection, the gas inspector shall notify the owner, his agent or the
occupant of the inspected property as to whether or not the inspection has been
satisfactory. When the inspection reveals defective workmanship, material or
any violations of this chapter or the gas code, written notice of the same thereof
shall be given by the gas inspector and he shall refuse gas service until the
defects have been corrected. (1973 Code, § 6-52)
12-407. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to do or
authorize any gas installation or repair work or to use any gas in such a manner
or under such circumstances as not to comply with this chapter and/or the
requirements and standards prescribed by the gas code. (1973 Code, § 6-53)
12-10
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 1
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 5
HOUSING CODE
SECTION
12-501. Housing code adopted.
12-502. Modifications.
12-503. Available in recorder's office.
12-504. Violations.
12-501. Housing code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of securing the public safety, health, and general welfare through structural
strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light, and ventilation in dwellings,
apartment houses, rooming houses, and buildings, structures, or premises used
as such, the Standard Housing Code, 1997 edition, as prepared and adopted by 1
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the housing code.
(Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-502. Modifications. (1) Definitions. Wherever the housing code
refers to the "housing official" it shall mean the person appointed or designated
by the mayor to administer and enforce the provisions of the housing code.
Wherever the "department of law" is referred to it shall mean the city attorney.
Wherever the "chief appointing authority" is referred to it shall mean the board
of mayor and aldermen.
(2) Penalty clause deleted. Section 108 of the housing code is deleted.
12-503. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the housing code has
been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for the use and
inspection of the public.
12-504. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the housing code as herein adopted by reference
and modified.
12-11
Municipal code references 1
Fire protection: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: title 18.
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 2
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 6
AMUSEMENT DEVICE CODE1
SECTION
12-601. Amusement device code adopted.
12-602. Modifications.
12-603. Available in recorder's office.
12-604. Violations.
12-601. Amusement device code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for
the purpose of regulating the installation, construction, alteration, repair,
removal, operation and use of amusement rides and devices. The Standard
Amusement Device Code, 1997 edition, as prepared and adopted by the 2
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the amusement device code.
(Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-602. Modifications. Definitions. Whenever the amusement device
code refers to the "chief administrator," it shall be deemed to be a reference to
the board of mayor and aldermen. When the "building official" is named it shall,
for the purposes of the amusement device code, mean such person as the board
of mayor and aldermen has appointed or designated to administer and enforce
the provisions of the amusement device code.
12-603. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the amusement
device code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there
for the use and inspection of the public.
12-604. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the amusement device code as herein adopted
by reference and modified.
12-12
Municipal code references 1
Fire protection: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: title 18.
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 2
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 7
SWIMMING POOL CODE1
SECTION
12-701. Swimming pool code adopted.
12-702. Modifications.
12-703. Available in recorder's office.
12-704. Violations.
12-701. Swimming pool code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted
by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the
purpose of setting standards for the design, construction, or installation,
alteration, repair or alterations of swimming pools, public or private and
equipment related thereto. The Standard Swimming Pool Code, 1997 edition, 2
as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted
and incorporated by reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred
to as the swimming pool code. (Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-702. Modifications. Definitions. Whenever the swimming pool code
refers to the "administrative authority," it shall be deemed to be a reference to
the building official or his authorized representative. When the "building
official" is named it shall, for the purposes of the swimming pool code, mean
such person as the board of mayor and aldermen has appointed or designated
to administer and enforce the provisions of the swimming pool code.
12-703. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the swimming pool
code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept there for
the use and inspection of the public.
12-704. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the swimming pool code as herein adopted by
reference and modified.
12-13
CHAPTER 8
UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE
SECTION
12-801. Findings of board.
12-802. Definitions.
12-803. "Public official" designated; powers.
12-804. Initiation of proceedings; hearings.
12-805. Orders to owners of unit structures.
12-806. When public official may repair, etc.
12-807. When public official may remove or demolish.
12-808. Lien for expenses; sale of salvage materials; other powers not limited.
12-809. Basis for a finding of unfitness.
12-810. Service of complaints or orders.
12-811. Enjoining enforcement of orders.
12-812. Additional powers of public official.
12-813. Powers conferred are supplemental.
12-814. Structures unfit for human habitation deemed unlawful.
12-801. Findings of board. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-21-101, et seq., the person designated by the board of mayor and alderman
finds that there exist in the city structures which are unfit for human occupation
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to the health, safety, and morals, or otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the city. (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-802. Definitions. (1) "Governing body" shall mean the board of
mayor and aldermen charged with governing the city.
(2) "Municipality" shall mean the City of Newport, Tennessee and the
areas encompassed within existing city limits or as hereafter annexed.
(3) "Owner" shall mean the holder of title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
(4) "Parties in interest" shall mean all individuals, associations,
corporations, and others who have interest of record in a dwelling and any who
are in possession thereof.
(5) "Public authority" shall mean any housing authority, officer, or
official who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the
city or state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities
concerning structures in the city.
12-14
(6) "Public official" shall mean the officer or officers who are
authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and
pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-21-101, et seq.
(7) "Structures" shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof,
used for human occupation and intended to be so used, and includes any
outhouses, outbuildings, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith. (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-803. "Public official" designated; powers. There is hereby
designated and appointed a "public official," to be the code enforcement official
of the city, to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, which powers shall
be supplemental to all others held by the code enforcement officer.
(Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-804. Initiation of proceedings; hearings. Whenever a petition is
filed with the public official by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents
of the city charging that any structure is unfit for human occupancy or use, or
whenever it appears to the public official (on his own motion) that any structure
is unfit for human occupation or use, the public official shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served
upon the owner of, and parties in interest of, such structure a complaint stating
the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the public official (or his designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not
less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the service of the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the time
and place fixed in the complaint; and the rules of evidence prevailing in courts
of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public official.
(Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-805. Orders to owner of unfit structures. (1) If, after such notice
and hearing as provided for in the preceding section, the public official
determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human occupancy
or use, they shall state in writing his finding of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order;
(2) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not exceeding
fifty percent [50%] of the reasonable value), requiring the owner, during the
time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or move such structure to render it
fit for human occupancy or use or to vacate and close the structure for human
occupancy or use; or
(3) If the repair, alteration or improvement of said structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not to exceed
fifty percent [50%] of the value of the premises), requiring the owner within the
12-15
time specified in order, to remove or demolish such structure. (Ord. #03-01-14C,
Jan. 2003)
12-806. When public official may repair, etc. If the owner fails to
comply with the order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close the
structure as specified in the preceding section hereof, the public official may
cause such structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and
closed; and the public official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of
any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building for
human occupancy or use is prohibited and unlawful." (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan.
2003)
12-807. When public official may remove or demolish. If the owner
fails to comply with an order, as specified above, to remove or demolish the
structure, the public official may cause such structure to be removed and
demolished. (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-808. Lien for expenses; sale of salvaged materials; other
powers not limited. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public
official shall be assessed against the owner of the property, and shall upon the
filing of the notice with the officer of the Register of Deeds of Cocke County, be
a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the
state, county and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special
assessments, and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded
or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be
collected by the municipal tax collector or county trustee at the same time and
in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected. If the owner
fails to pay the cost, they may be collected at the same time, in the same manner
as delinquent property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same
penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. In addition, the municipality
may collect the cost assessed against the owner through a action for debt filed
in any court of competent jurisdiction. The municipality may bring one (1)
action for debt against more than one (1) or all of the owners of properties
against who said cost have been assessed and the fact that multiple owners have
been joined in one action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of
parties. If the structure is removed or demolished by the public official, he or
she shall sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of
such a sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, any balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Chancery Court of Cocke County by the public official,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be
disbursed by such court provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City of Newport to
12-16
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by
summary proceedings or otherwise. (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-809. Basis for a finding of unfitness. The public official defined
herein shall have the power and may determine that a structure is unfit for
human occupancy and use if he finds that the conditions exist in such structure
which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the
occupants or users of such structure, the occupants or users of neighboring
structures or other residents of the City of Newport; such conditions may include
the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing); defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects; and uncleanness (Ref. Standard Housing Code). (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan.
2003)
12-810. Service of complaints or orders. Complaints or orders issued
by the public official pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons,
either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such person is
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public official in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public official shall make an affidavit
to that affect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. In addition, a copy of
such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also
be filed for record in the register office of Cocke County, Tennessee, and such
filing shall have the same force and affect as other liens pending notices
provided by law. (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-811. Enjoining enforcement of orders. Any person affected by an
order issued by the public official served pursuant to this chapter may file a suit
in chancery court for an injunction restraining the public official from carrying
out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon filing of such suit, issue
a temporary injunction restraining the public official pending the final
disposition of the cause; provided, however, that within sixty (60) days after the
posting and service of the order of the public official, such person shall file such
suit in the court. The remedy provided herein shall be the exclusive remedy and
no person affected by an order of the public official shall be entitled to recover
any damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the public official, or
because of noncompliance by such person with any order of the public official.
(Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-17
12-812. Additional powers of public official. The public official, in
order to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter,
shall have the following powers in addition to those otherwise granted herein:
(1) To investigate conditions of the structures in the city in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as they deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents whom they may designate. (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan.
2003)
12-813. Powers conferred is supplemental. This chapter shall not
be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the city with regard to the
enforcement of the provisions of its charter or any other ordinances or
regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers
conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers
conferred by the charter and other laws. (Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-814. Structures unfit for human habitation deemed unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of record to create, maintain or permit to be
maintained in the city structures which are unfit for human occupancy due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities,
lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions
rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to
the health, safety and morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the city. Violations of this section shall subject the offender to a
penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day a
violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. #03-01-14C, Jan. 2003)
12-18
Charter references 1
Newport Utilities Board: § 1.18.
Sewer charges: § 1.20.
Waterworks and sewers: § 1.19.
Municipal code references
Street excavations: title 16.
Wastewater treatment: title 18.
Water and sewer system administration: title 18.
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 2
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 9
MECHANICAL CODE1
SECTION
12-901. Mechanical code adopted.
12-902. Modifications.
12-903. Available in recorder's office.
12-904. Violations.
12-901. Mechanical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of regulating the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations,
repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or
appurtenances thereto, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning,
and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, the
Standard Mechanical Code, 1997 edition, as prepared and adopted by the 2
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the mechanical code.
(Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-902. Modifications. Definitions. Wherever the mechanical code
refers to the "building department," "mechanical official," or "building official,"
or "inspector" it shall mean the person appointed or designated by the board of
mayor and aldermen to administer and enforce the provisions of the mechanical
code.
12-903. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the mechanical code
has been placed on file in the city recorder's office and shall be kept there for the
use and inspection of the public.
12-19
12-904. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the mechanical code as herein adopted by
reference and modified.
12-20
Municipal code references 1
Fire protection: title 7.
Planning and zoning: title 14.
Streets and other public ways and places: title 16.
Utilities and services: title 18.
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 2
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 10
EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE1
SECTION
12-1001. Existing buildings code adopted.
12-1002. Modifications.
12-1003. Available in recorder's office.
12-1004. Violations.
12-1001. Existing buildings code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for
the purpose of providing a concise set of regulations and procedures to effect
safety in occupancy, the Standard Existing Buildings Code, 1997 edition, as 2
prepared by the International Code Council, is adopted and the same is
incorporated herein by reference, subject to modifications as hereinafter
provided, and shall be known and referred to as the standard existing buildings
code. (Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-1002. Modifications. Whenever the standard existing buildings
code refers to the "chief appointing authority" it shall be deemed to be a
reference to the board of mayor and aldermen of the city and whenever the same
refers to the "chief administrator" it shall be deemed to be a reference to the
board of mayor and aldermen of the city. Whenever the standard existing
buildings code shall refer to the "building official" it shall mean such person
designated by the board of mayor and aldermen to administer and enforce the
provisions of the various standard codes of the city.
12-1003. Av ailable in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements
of the Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the standard
existing buildings code shall be placed on file in the office of the recorder and the
same shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
12-1004. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or
fail to comply with any provision of the standard existing buildings code or any
12-21
final order made pursuant thereto. Such violation is declared an offense against
the city and for which punishment shall be a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for each such violation. Each day that a violation occurs shall be
deemed a separate offense. The building official or his or her deputy or assistant
is empowered to issue citations to answer in the municipal court of the city by
any person, firm or corporation found to be in such violation.
12-22
Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the 1
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
CHAPTER 11
ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE
SECTION
12-1101. One and two family dwelling code adopted.
12-1102. Modifications.
12-1103. Available in recorder's office.
12-1104. Violations.
12-1101. One and two family dwelling code adopted. Pursuant to
authority granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506
and for the purpose of regulating the fabrication, erection, construction,
enlargement, alterations, repair, location, and use of detached one and two
family dwellings and their appurtenances and accessory structures, the One and
Two Family Dwelling Code, 1997 edition, as prepared and adopted by the 1
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the dwelling code.
(Ord. #99-08-A, Aug. 1999)
12-1102. Modifications. Whenever the words "building official" are
used in the dwelling code, they shall refer to the person designated by the board
of mayor and aldermen to enforce the dwelling code. Section R-106 of the
dwelling code is hereby deleted.
12-1103. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the
dwelling code has been placed on file in the recorder's office and shall be kept
there for the use and inspection of the public.
12-1104. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail
to comply with any provision of the dwelling code as herein adopted by reference
and modified.
13-1
Municipal code references 1
Animal control: title 10.
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. STORAGE, ABANDONMENT AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
13-101. Health officer.
13-102. Clearance of lots.
13-103. Screening of junkyards.
13-104. Health and sanitation nuisances
13-105. Butchering to comply with state law.
13-106. Food service establishments.
13-107. Milk and milk products.
13-101. Health officer. The "health officer" referred to in this code shall
be such city, county or state officer as the board of mayor and aldermen may
appoint or designate to enforce applicable health and sanitation laws within the
city; he shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed for the office in this
code and in the general laws of the state. (1973 Code, § 10-1)
13-102. Clearance of lots. (1) The existence within the city of lots and
parcels of land overgrown with noxious weeds or burdened with accumulations
of rubbish and refuse are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or
having control of property in the city to permit or suffer weeds or other
vegetation to grow, or trash, rubbish and refuse to accumulate on the property
to such an extent that such a nuisance is created.
(3) In complying with subsections (1) and (2), it shall be unlawful to
rake up, cut up or pile up weeds and rubbish that might interfere with the vision
of vehicle operators or pedestrians or impair proper water drainage.
(4) Upon failure of any property owner, lessee or other person in
charge of premises to comply with this section, it shall be the duty of the
recorder to serve notice upon the owner, lessee, or other person in possession
13-2
and control of the property that such a nuisance is declared, either by a
representative of his office or by posting the notice on the property upon which
the nuisance is declared and to give five (5) days in which to correct the
conditions. (1973 Code, § 12-23)
13-103. Screening of junkyards. (1) Any person who shall have upon
his premises more than three (3) disabled vehicles or is in the business of
buying, selling, sorting, baling, processing or storing any type of scrap metal or
other related items, shall be hereby classified as a junk dealer.
(2) Any person using property inside the city as a junk dealer shall be
required to purchase from the office of the recorder a license authorizing him to
act in the business of "junk. " The cost of the license shall not exceed the amount
set forth by the general law of the state.
(3) Any property used for the business of a junk dealer shall be
required to be fenced in or around all of the properties used for such purposes.
The fence shall be of such construction as to obscure the junkyard from public
view and not less than six (6) feet in height.
(4) It shall be the duty of the recorder, upon the filing of a complaint
either by his office or by owners or leasee of surrounding properties, to see that
all the provisions of this section are carried out. (1973 Code, § 12-24)
13-104. Health and sanitation nuisances. It shall be unlawful for any
person to allow premises owned by him or under his control to become a public
health or sanitation nuisance because of a particular use or because of a failure
to properly maintain the premises. (1973 Code, § 10-2)
13-105. Butchering to comply with state law. It shall be unlawful
for any person to butcher any cattle, hog or sheep within the city unless the
butchering is done in strict accordance with the applicable state laws, rules and
regulations in effect at the time. (1973 Code, § 10-18)
13-106. Food service establishments. (1) Minimum standards
adopted. The inspection of eating and drinking establishments within the city
or its police jurisdiction, the issuing, suspension and revocation of permits for
the operation of such establishments, the sale of adulterated, misbranded, or
unwholesome food and drink and the enforcement of this section shall be
regulated in accordance with the terms of the unabridged form of the 1962
edition of the U. S. Public Health Service Ordinance Food Service Sanitation
Ordinance as set out in the Food Service Sanitation Manual, 1962 edition,
published by the United States Public Health Service. Three (3) copies of which
publication have been filed with the recorder in accordance with the provisions
of state law.
13-3
(2) "Municipality," as used in code, defined. Wherever the term
"municipality of . . ." shall appear in the food service code adopted in this
chapter, it shall mean the City of Newport.
(3) Parenthetical expressions deleted from code. All parenthetical
expressions referring to grading shall be deleted from the food service code
adopted in this section.
(4) Amendments to code. The food service code adopted in this section
is hereby amended as follows:
Section E, subsection 4, shall read as follows:
4. Toilet facilities: Each food-service establishment
shall be provided with adequate, conveniently located toilet
facilities for its employees, conforming with the requirements of
the state department of public health. Toilet fixtures shall be of
sanitary design and readily cleanable. Toilet facilities, including
rooms and fixtures, shall be kept in a clean condition and in good
repair. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be selfclosing. Toilet
tissue shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be
provided for waste materials, and such receptacles in toilet rooms
for women shall be covered. Where the use of nonwater-carried
sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the health
authority, such facilities shall be separate from the establishment
and shall comply with the standards of the state department of
public health. When toilet facilities are provided for patrons, such
facilities shall meet the requirements of this subsection.
Section H, subsection 7, shall read as follows:
7. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating
any provisions of this code shall, upon conviction, be punished in
accordance with the provisions of the general penalty clause of the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Newport. (1973 Code, § 10-24--
10-27)
13-107. Milk and milk products. (1) Milk code adopted; filing. The
production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination,
grading, labeling and sale of all milk and milk products sold for the ultimate
consumption within the city or its police jurisdiction, the inspection of dairy
herds, dairy farms, and milk plants, the issuing and revocation of permits to
milk producers, haulers and distributors, shall be regulated in accordance with
the provisions of part I of the Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance-1965
Recommendations of the United States Public Health Service, which is hereby
adopted by reference. Three (3) copies of which code shall be filed in the office
of the recorder.
(2) "Municipality," as used in milk code, defined. Whenever the term
"municipality" is used in the milk code adopted in this division, it shall mean the
City of Newport.
13-4
(3) Amendments to milk code. The milk code adopted in this division
is hereby amended in the following respects:
Section I. Definitions. The following amendments are made to this
section:
Subsection A. Milk. This subsection is amended to read as
follows:
A. Milk. Milk is hereby defined to be the lacteal
secretion, practically free from colostrum, obtained by the complete
milking of one or more healthy cows, which contains not less than
eight and one-half percent (8 ½) milk solids-not-fat and not less
than three and one-half percent (3 ½) milkfat. (Milkfat or butterfat
is the fat of milk.)
Subsection D. Reconstituted or recombined milk and
milk products. This subsection is deleted.
Subsection I. Fortified milk and milk products. This
subsection is deleted.
Subsection O. Milk products. The first paragraph of
this subsection is amended to read as follows:
O. Milk products. Milk products include cream, light
cream, coffee cream, table cream, whipping cream, light whipping
cream, heavy cream, heavy whipping cream, whipped cream,
whipped light cream, whipped coffee cream, whipped table cream,
sour cream, cultured sour cream, cottage cheese, creamed cottage
cheese, half-and-half, sour half-and-half, cultured half-and-half,
concentrated milk, concentrated milk products, skim milk,
skimmed milk, lowfat milk, vitamin D milk and milk products,
homogenized milk, flavored milk or milk products, buttermilk,
cultured buttermilk, cultured milk, cultured whole milk
buttermilk, and acidified milk and milk products.
Subsection X. Health authority. This subsection is
amended to read as follows:
X. Health authority. The health authority shall mean
the Director of the Cocke County Health Department or his
authorized representative. The term "health authority," wherever
it appears in this code, shall mean the appropriate agency having
jurisdiction and control over the matters embraced within this
code.
Subsection EE. Cottage cheese. This subsection is
added and shall read as follows:
Cottage cheese: Cottage cheese is the soft uncured
cheese obtained by adding lactic-acid producing bacteria, with or
without enzymatic action, to pasteurized skim milk, pasteurized
lowfat milk or pasteurized reconstituted skim milk. It shall contain
13-5
not more than eighty percent (80%) moisture. Cottage cheese may
be seasoned with salt.
Subsection FF. Creamed cottage cheese. This
subsection is added and shall read as follows:
Creamed cottage cheese: Creamed cottage cheese is
prepared by mixing cottage cheese with a pasteurized creaming
mixture consisting of pasteurized cream and milk, dry milk
products, concentrated skim milk, skim milk, or lowfat milk, to
which salt, lactic acid, and flavor producing bacteria, rennet, lactic
acid, citric acid, phosphoric acid or stabilizer may be added. The
quantity of milkfat added in the creaming mixture shall be not less
than four percent (4%) by weight of the finished creamed cottage
cheese. Dry milk products or concentrated skim milk may be
added, provided the amount of added solids does not exceed three
percent (3%) of the weight of the creaming mixture. Creamed
cottage cheese shall contain not more than eighty percent (80%)
moisture.
Section 3. Permits. This section is amended by deleting therefrom
the fourth paragraph, which commences with the words, "Upon written
application . . . ." Any other references in the milk code providing for
hearings before a permit may be suspended are similarly deleted.
Section 5. Inspection of dairy farms and milk plants. This section
is amended by revising the last sentence of the first paragraph to read as
follows:
"Any violation of the same requirement of section 7 on such
reinspection shall call for a permit suspension in accordance with
section 3, as amended, and/or court action."
Section 9. Milk and milk products which may be sold. This section
is amended to read as follows:
"From and after February 12, 1970, only Grade A
pasteurized milk and milk products shall be sold to the final
consumer or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores or
similar establishments; however, in an emergency the sale of
pasteurized milk and milk products which have not been graded,
or the grade of which is unknown may be authorized by the health
authority; in which case, such milk and milk products shall be
labeled 'ungraded'."
Section 16. Penalty. This section shall be amended to read as
follows :
"Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
code shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as prescribed in penalty provisions of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Newport and such persons may be
13-6
enjoined from continuing such violations. Each day upon which
such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation."
Section 17. Repeal and date of effect. This section is amended to
read as follows:
"All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
chapter are hereby repealed, and this chapter shall be in full force
and effect; upon its adoption and publication, as provided for by
law." (1973 Code, §§ 10-33--10-35)
13-7
CHAPTER 2
STORAGE, ABANDONMENT AND
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
SECTION
13-201. Definitions.
13-202. Storage of vehicles on public property.
13-203. Abandonment of vehicles.
13-204. Wrecked or discarded vehicles.
13-205. Impoundment.
13-206. Notice of impoundment and repossession.
13-207. Disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
13-208. Penalties.
13-201. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
(1) "Abandoned motor vehicle." A motor vehicle that is over four (4)
years old and is left unattended on public property for more than thirty (30)
days, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a
period of more than forty-eight (48) hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained
on private property without consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
(2) "Person." Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
(3) "Property." Any real property within the city which is not a street
or highway.
(4) "Vehicle." Any machine propelled by power other than human
power designated to travel along the ground by use of wheels, tread, runners,
or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include,
without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and
wagon. (Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan. 2003)
13-202. Storage of vehicles on public property. No person shall use
any street, sidewalk, alley, or other publicly owned property within the city for
the purpose of storing vehicles. This chapter shall not be construed as affecting
in any way the right of any person to park a vehicle temporarily in any space set
aside and designated as a parking space for vehicles. Any vehicle which is
permitted to remain on any street, sidewalk, alley, or other publicly owned
property for a period of forty-eight (48) hours without being moved, shall be
presumed to be stored in the meaning of this chapter. (Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan.
2003)
13-8
13-203. Abandonment of vehicles. No person shall abandon any
vehicle on any property within the city or leave any vehicle at any place within
the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle
reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. (Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan. 2003)
13-204. Wrecked or discarded vehicles. No persons in charge or
control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee or otherwise, shall allow any dismantled, partially dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such property
longer than ten (10) days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any
property within the city for a longer time than ten (10) days, except that this
chapter shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and
manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or a
vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the city. (Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan. 2003)
13-205. Impoundment. The person designated by the board of mayor
and aldermen is hereby empowered to remove any vehicle found in violation of
this chapter to a safe and secure place designated by them for that purpose.
(Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan. 2003)
13-206. Notice of impoundment and repossession. Whenever the
person designated by the board of mayor and aldermen removes any vehicle, by
authority of this chapter, they shall there upon undertake to determine the
owner of such vehicle. Upon ascertaining the name of the owner, he shall give
notice to them, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the vehicle is
being held. Any owner may thereupon present to the city manager or recorder
sufficient evidence of ownership and upon payment of cost of removal of such
vehicle, including notice and mailing costs and a reasonable cost not to exceed
five dollars ($5.00) per diem per day for the storage thereof, the same shall be
released to the owner thereof. (Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan. 2003)
13-207. Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In the event a vehicle
removed from public property under this chapter is not claimed during the
period of thirty (30) days from date of removal, the city recorder shall proceed
to sell such vehicle at public auction for cash to the highest bidder and out of the
proceeds of the sale, he shall first defray the expenses of the sale, the expenses
of removal and storage of the vehicle and the remainder, if any, shall be
deposited back into the clean-up of the City of Newport's Zoning, Building, and
Codes Compliance budget. (Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan. 2003)
13-9
13-208. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
under the general penalty clause of this code. (Ord. #03-01-14D, Jan. 2003)
14-1
TITLE 14
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
CHAPTER
1. MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
2. ZONING ORDINANCE.
3. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
14-101. Created; designated.
14-102. Composition; appointment of members.
14-103. Composition of members.
14-104. Terms of members.
14-105. Vacancies and removals.
14-106. Organization, powers and duties generally.
14-101. Created; designated. Pursuant to the provisions of state law, there is hereby
created a planning commission for the city, to be known as hereinafter referred to as the Planning
Commission for the City of Newport. (1973 Code, § 13-16)
14-102. Composition; appointment of members. The planning commission shall
consist of seven (7) members. One (1) member shall be the mayor and one (1) member shall be
an alderman selected by the board of mayor and aldermen; the other five (5) members shall be
appointed by the mayor and aldermen. (1973 Code, § 13-17) (Ordinance 2016-07, August 2016)
14-103. Compensation of members. All members of the planning commission shall be
compensated at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month. Each member will only be compensated if
said member attends the meeting. (Ordinance #2016-07, August 2016)
14-104. Terms of members. Except for the initial appointments, the terms of the five (5)
appointive members of the planning commission shall be for five (5) years each. The five (5)
appointive members first appointed shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3),
four (4) and five (5) years respectively so that the term of one (1) member expires each year. The
term of the member selected from the board of mayor and aldermen shall run concurrently with
his membership on the board of mayor and aldermen. (1973 Code, § 13-19)
14-105. Vacancies and removals. Any vacancy in an appointive membership of the
planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor who shall also have
authority to remove any appointive member at his pleasure. (1973 Code, § 13-20)
14-2
14-106. Organization, powers and duties generally. The planning commission shall
have such organization, rules, staff, powers, functions, duties and responsibilities as are
prescribed in the general laws of the state relating to municipal planning commissions in
Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13. (1973 Code, § 13-21)
14-3
CHAPTER 2
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance.
14-201. Land use to be governed by zoning ordinance. Land use within the City of
Newport shall be governed by the "Zoning Ordinance, Newport, Tennessee," and any
amendments thereto¹, and is included in this municipal code as Appendix A.
__________________________
Amendments to the zoning map are of record in the office of the city recorder.
Subdivision regulations are published as a separate document and available in the office
of the city recorder.
14-4
CHAPTER 3
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
SECTION
14-301. Flood damage control to be governed by flood damage prevention
ordinance.
14-301. Flood damage control to be governed by flood damage prevention
ordinance. Regulations governing flood damage control within the City of Newport shall be
governed by ordinance #92-6, titled "Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance" and any amendments
thereto. ¹
_____________________________________________
¹Ordinance #92-6 and any amendments thereto, are published as separate documents and
are of record in the office of the city recorder.
15-1
Municipal code reference 1
Excavations and obstructions in streets, etc.: title 16.
TITLE 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
3. TRAFFIC DIVISION.
4. OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
5. ACCIDENTS.
6. PROCEDURE ON ARREST.
7. TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
8. OPERATION.
9. SPEED LIMITS.
10. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
11. RIGHT-OF-WAY.
12 PEDESTRIANS.
13. BICYCLES.
14. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.
15. PARKING METERS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
15-101. Definitions.
15-102. Required obedience to this chapter.
15-103. Application of this chapter to public employees.
15-104. Application of this chapter to persons propelling pushcarts or riding
animals.
15-105. Use of coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar devices
restricted.
15-106. Play streets.
15-107. Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
15-108. Unlawful riding.
5-101. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them:
15-2
State law references 1
Adoption and enforcement of traffic laws by municipalities: Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-10-307, et seq.
Motor and other vehicles: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-1-101, et seq.
Rules of the Road: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-101, et seq.
(1) "Authorized emergency vehicle" shall mean fire department or fire
patrol vehicles, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of
the city departments or public service corporations as are so designated or
authorized by the chief of police.
(2) "Bicycle" shall mean every device propelled by human power upon
which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is
more than twenty (20) inches in diameter.1
(3) "Business district" shall mean the territory contiguous to and
including a highway when within any six hundred (600) feet along such highway
there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not
limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings
which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1) side or
three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
(4) "Commercial vehicle" shall mean every vehicle designed,
maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property.
(5) "Controlled-access highway" shall mean every highway, street or
roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of, abutting lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points
only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
(6) "Crosswalk" shall mean:
(a) That part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from
the edges of the traversable roadway;
(b) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface.
(7) "Curb loading zone" shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers
or materials.
(8) "Driver" shall mean any person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
(9) "Freight curb loading zone" shall mean a space adjacent to a curb
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
15-3
(10) "Highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines
of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for the purposes of vehicular travel. The terms "street" and "highway" are
synonymous and interchangeable.
(11) "Intersection" shall mean:
(a) The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of
the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately
at, right angles, or the areas within which vehicles traveling upon
different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
(b) Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet
or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of the divided
highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate
intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two (2)
roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2)
roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
(12) "Laned roadway" shall mean a roadway which is divided into two
(2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(13) "Motorcycle" shall mean any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle
for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels
in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
(14) "Motor-driven cycle" shall mean any motorcycle, including any
motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five (5) brake
horsepower and every bicycle with a motor attached.
(15) "Motor vehicle" shall mean any vehicle which is self-propelled and
every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.
(16) "Official time standard" shall mean, whenever certain hours are
designated in this chapter, standard time or daylight-saving time, as may be in
current use in the city.
(17) "Official traffic-control devices" shall mean all signs, signals,
markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter or state law, placed or
erected by authority of a public body official having jurisdiction, for the purpose
of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
(18) "Park" or "parking" shall mean, when prohibited, the standing of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
(19) "Passenger curb loading zone" shall mean a place adjacent to a curb
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
(20) "Pedestrian" shall mean any person afoot.
(21) "Police officer" shall mean any officer of the city police department
or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
15-4
(22) "Private road or driveway" shall mean any way or place in private
ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express
or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(23) "Railroad" shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars,
other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
(24) "Railroad train" shall mean a steam engine, electric or other motor,
with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(25) "Residential district" shall mean the territory contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business district, when the property on
the highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is in the main
improved with residences.
(26) "Right-of-way" shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the
roadway.
(27) "Roadway" shall mean that portion of a highway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or
shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways,
the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not all such
roadways collectively.
(28) "Safety zone" shall mean the area or space officially set apart
within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or
is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a safety zone.
(29) "Sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curb
lines or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended
for the use of pedestrians.
(30) "Stand" or "standing" shall mean, when prohibited, the halting of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
(31) "Stop" shall mean, when required, the complete cessation from
movement.
(32) "Stop" or "stopping" shall mean, when prohibited, any halting, even
momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
(33) "Street or highway" shall mean the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open
to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. The terms "street"
and "highway" are synonymous and interchangeable.
(34) "Through highway" shall mean any highway or portion thereof' on
which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way and at the entrances
to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield
the right-of-way to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop
sign or a yield sign.
15-5
State law reference 1
Required obedience to state traffic laws: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-8-103.
(35) "Traffic" shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals,
vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together while using any
highway for the purposes of travel.
(36) "Traffic-control signal" shall mean any device, whether manually,
electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to
stop and to proceed.
(37) "Traffic division" shall mean the traffic division of the police
department of the city or, in the event a traffic division is not established, then
the term shall be deemed to refer to the police department of the city.
(38) "Vehicle" shall mean any device in, upon or by which, any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1973 Code, § 11-1)
15-102. Required obedience to this chapter. It shall be unlawful for
any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this
chapter. (1973 Code, § 11-2) 1
15-103. Application of this chapter to public employees. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or
used in the service of the United States government, any state or any political
subdivision thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any
of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter
or by state statute. (1973 Code, § 11-2)
15-104. Application of this chapter to persons propelling
pushcarts or riding animals. Each person propelling any pushcart or riding
an animal upon a roadway or each person driving any animal-drawn vehicle,
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can
have no application. (1973 Code, § 11-4)
15-105. Use of coasters, roller skates and skateboards and similar
devices restricted. (1) No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means
of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, such person shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a
play street as authorized by this chapter.
15-6
(2) Skateboard use shall be restricted to the designated skateboard
park, private driveways (with owner's permission), and private parking lots
which have a sign posted "Skateboarding Allowed."
(3) Skateboarding is prohibited on all city sidewalks, city streets, city
parks, and city parking lots or other city property other than the skateboard
park on private parking lots not displaying a "Skateboarding Allowed" sign.
(4) Skateboarders using the skateboard park must be registered users
with the park and be in compliance with the park and recreation rules and
ordinances, safety rules, safety equipment, liability release consent forms and
other rules governing skateboard park use. All patrons using the skateboard
park shall wear their safety helmets at all times while on the park. The safety
helmet shall display the park and recreation department issued registration
number and seal on the helmet to readily identify them as a registered
skateboard park user. Helmets shall not be loaned to non-registered users.
(5) All liability from skateboard use on private property rests with the
private property owner.
(6) Violators of the provisions of this section of code, including the
skateboard park and recreation rules ordinance referenced who are over the age
of eighteen (18) shall be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per offense. In
addition, if the violation occurred on the skateboard park facility, they may also
lose skateboard park privileges as determined by the park and recreation
director.
(7) Violators of the provisions of this section of code, including the
skateboard park and recreation rules ordinance referenced who are under the
age of eighteen (18) shall be cited to juvenile court. In addition, if the violation
occurred on the skateboard park facility, they must also lose skateboard park
privileges as determined by the park and recreation director. (1973 Code,
§ 11-5, as amended by Ord. #2006-14, Dec. 2006)
15-106. Play streets. (1) The city traffic engineer shall have authority
to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs
or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the play street.
(2) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon the street or a
portion thereof except the driving of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area and then, the driver shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon a play street or portion thereof. (1973 Code,
§ 11-6)
15-107. Boarding or alighting form vehicles. No person shall board
or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1973 Code, § 11-7)
15-108. Unlawful riding. No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any
portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This
15-7
provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of
a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise. (1973 Code, § 11-8)
15-8
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-201. City traffic engineer.
15-202. Establishment of through intersections.
15-203. Establishment of safety lanes and crosswalks.
15-204. Establishment and designation of one-way streets.
15-205. Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain
periods.
15-206. Establishment of traffic lanes; observance.
15-207. Traffic commission.
15-208. Emergency and experimental regulations.
15-209. Authority of police and fire department officials.
15-210. Obedience to police and fire department officials.
15-201. City traffic engineer. (1) The office of city traffic engineer is
hereby established. The chief of police shall, in the absence of a traffic engineer,
serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions and shall exercise
the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter.
(2) It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine
the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to
conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial
measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the
operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the city and to cooperate with
other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this
code or other ordinances of the city. (1973 Code, § 11-19)
15-202. Establishment of through intersection. The city traffic
engineer shall have the authority to establish through streets and to designate
those streets and intersections where stop or yield signs shall be placed. (1973
Code, § 11-20)
15-203. Establishment of safety lanes and crosswalks. The city
traffic engineer is authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at
such other places as he may deem necessary;
(2) To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (1973 Code,
§ 11-21)
15-9
State law reference 1
Driving on roadways laned for traffic: Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 55-8-123.
15-204. Establishment and designation of one-way streets.
Whenever this code or any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street
or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof
and no such provision shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(1973 Code, § 11-22)
15-205. Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets
during certain periods. (1) The traffic engineer is authorized to determine
and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon, upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one (1) direction during one (1) period and the
opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain
appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The
traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the
roadway.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in
violation of markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance
with subsection (1). (1973 Code, § 11-23)
15-206. Establishment of traffic lanes; observance. (1) The city
traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of
any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
(2) Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1973 Code, § 11-24) 1
15-207. Traffic commission. (1) There is hereby established a traffic
commission to serve without compensation, consisting of the city traffic
engineer, the chief of police, the city attorney and such other city officers and
representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined and appointed by the
mayor. The chairman of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and
may be removed by him.
(2) It shall be the duty of the traffic commission and to this end it shall
have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to coordinate
traffic activities, to carry on educational activities in traffic matters, to supervise
the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints having
15-10
to do with traffic matters and to recommend to the legislative body of the city
and to the city traffic engineer, the chief of police and other city officials, ways
and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and
enforcement of traffic regulations. (1973 Code, § 11-25)
15-208. Emergency and experimental regulations. (1) The chief of
police by and with the approval of the city traffic engineer is empowered to make
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic laws of the
city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. No temporary or experimental regulations
shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
(2) The city traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under
actual conditions of traffic. (1973 Code, § 11-26)
15-209. Authority of police and fire department officials. (1) It
shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are
assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all provisions of this chapter and all of
the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
(2) Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or
signal in conformance with traffic laws; however, in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police
department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing, traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. (1973 Code, § 11-27)
15-210. Obedience to police and fire department officials. No
person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of a police officer or fire department official. (1973 Code, § 11-28)
15-11
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC DIVISION
SECTION
15-301. Authority to establish; supervision.
15-302. Duties generally.
15-303. Records of traffic violations.
15-304. Investigation of accidents.
15-305. Traffic accident studies.
15-306. Traffic accident reports.
15-307. Drivers' files to be maintained.
15-308. Annual traffic-safety report.
15-309. Designation of method of identifying funeral processions.
15-301. Authority to establish; supervision. There may be
established in the police department of the city, a traffic division to be under the
control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief
of police. (1973 Code, § 11-34)
15-302. Duties generally. It shall be the duty of the traffic division,
with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department,
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all of the state vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and any
other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out those
duties specially imposed upon it by this chapter. (1973 Code, § 11-35)
15-303. Records of traffic violations. (1) The police department or
the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws
of the city or of the state vehicle laws for which any person has been charged,
together with a record of the final disposition of all alleged offenses. The record
shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each.
The record shall accumulate during at least a five (5) year period and from that
time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five
(5) year period.
(2) All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
(3) All records and reports required by this section shall be public
records. (1973 Code, § 11-36)
15-12
15-304. Investigation of accidents. It shall be the duty of the traffic
division, assisted by other police officers, to investigate traffic accidents, to
arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations
of law causing or contributing to such accidents. (1973 Code, § 11-37)
15-305. Traffic accident studies. Whenever the accidents at any
particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with
the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining
remedial measures. (1973 Code, § 11-38)
15-306. Traffic accident reports. The traffic division shall maintain
a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards
referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. The reports shall be
available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. (1973 Code,
§ 11-39)
15-307. Drivers' files to be maintained. (1) The police department
or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic
accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each
driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver
concerned.
(2) The traffic division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged
with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent
traffic accidents or any serious accident, shall attempt to discover the reasons
therefor and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the
violations or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked.
(3) Records kept pursuant to this section shall accumulate during at
least a five (5) year period and from that time on, such records shall be
maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year period. (1973
Code, § 11-40)
15-308. Annual traffic-safety report. The traffic division shall
annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor. The report
shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows:
(1) The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data;
(2) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the police;
(3) The plans and recommendations of the traffic division for future
traffic safety activities. (1973 Code, § 11-41)
15-309. Designation of method of identifying funeral processions.
The traffic division shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying
15-13
insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed, to identify the
vehicles in funeral processions. (1973 Code, § 11-42)
15-14
CHAPTER 4
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION
15-401. Authority of city traffic engineer to install traffic-control devices.
15-402. Standards.
15-403. When traffic signs required for enforcement purposes.
15-404. Obedience required.
15-405. Traffic-control signal legend.
15-406. Pedestrian-control signals.
15-407. Flashing signals.
15-408. Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
15-409. Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or
signals.
15-401. Authority of city traffic engineer to install traffic-control
devices. The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs,
signals and devices when and as required by this chapter to make effective the
provisions of this chapter and may place and maintain such additional
traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the
traffic laws of this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. (1973
Code, § 11-48)
15-402. Standards. All traffic-control devices and signals shall be in
conformity with regulations for such devices and signals as promulgated by the
state. (1973 Code, § 11-49)
15-403. When traffic signs required for enforcement purposes. No
provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against
an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official
sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person. Whenever a particular section of this chapter does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are
erected or in place. (1973 Code, § 11-50)
15-404. Obedience required. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the
instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto and placed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this chapter. (1973 Code, § 11-51)
15-405. Traffic-control signal legend. (1) Whenever traffic is
controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution" or
15-15
"Stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time or with
arrows, the following colors only shall be used and the terms and lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(a) Green alone or "Go": (i) Vehicular traffic facing the signal
may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at
the place prohibits either turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent
crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited.
(ii) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(b) Steady yellow alone: (i) Vehicular traffic facing the signal
is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited
immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter
or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is
exhibited.
(ii) Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised
that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway and any
pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles.
(c) Steady red alone, or "Stop": (i) Vehicular traffic facing the
signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection,
and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone.
(ii) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the
roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with
any vehicular traffic.
(d) Steady red with green arrow: (i) Vehicular traffic facing
such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way
to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic
lawfully using the intersection.
(ii) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the
roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with
any vehicular traffic.
(2) In event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained
at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be
applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. (1973 Code, § 11-52)
15-16
15-406. Pedestrian-control signals. Whenever special
pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk," "Wait" or "Don't Walk"
are in place, the signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) "Walk." Pedestrians facing such a signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
driver of any vehicle.
(2) "Wait" or "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such a signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone while the "Wait" signal is showing. (1973 Code, § 11-53)
15-407. Flashing signals. (1) Whenever an illuminated flashing red
or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows:
(a) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
(b) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may
proceed through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.
(2) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct
of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules as set forth in § 15-1108. (1973 Code, § 11-54)
15-408. Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
(1) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad
sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of , any official traffic-control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
(2) No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
(3) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official traffic-control
signs.
(4) Each sign, signal, or marking prohibited by this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the city traffic engineer is empowered to
15-17
remove the nuisance or cause it to be removed without notice. (1973 Code, § 11-55)
15-409. Interference with official traffic-control devices or
railroad signs or signals. No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt
to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or
insignia thereon or any other part thereof. (1973 Code, § 11-56)
15-18
State law reference 1
Accidents: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-101, et seq.
CHAPTER 5
ACCIDENTS1
SECTION
15-501. Immediate notice of accident.
15-502. Written report of accident.
15-503. When driver unable to report.
15-504. Garages to report.
15-505. Public inspection of reports relating to accidents.
15-501. Immediate notice of accident. The driver of a vehicle
involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property
damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more shall
immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of the
accident to the police department if the accident occurs within the city. (1973
Code, § 11-62)
15-502. Written report of accident. The driver of a vehicle which is
in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of
any persons or total property damage to an apparent extent of fifty dollars
($50.00) or more shall, within ten (10) days after the accident, forward a written
report of the accident to the police department or a copy of any report he is
required to forward to the state. The provisions of this section shall not be
applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police
officer while the driver was present thereat. (1973 Code, § 11-63)
15-503. When driver unable to report. (1) Whenever the driver of a
vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident as
required by this division and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the
time of the accident capable of doing so, the occupant, shall give or cause to be
given, the notice not given by the driver.
(2) Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written
report of an accident as required by this division and the driver is not the owner
of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in the accident shall,
within ten (10) days after learning of the accident, make the report not made by
the driver. (1973 Code, § 11-64)
15-504. Garages to report. The person in charge of any garage or
repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of
15-19
having been involved in an accident of which a report must be made to the state
or which has been struck by a bullet or otherwise apparently involved in
violence, shall report to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours
after the motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration
number and the name and address of the owner or operator of the vehicle, if
known. (1973 Code, § 11-65)
15-505. Public inspection of reports relating to accidents.
(1) All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by
garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for
the confidential use of the police department or other governmental agencies
having use for the records for accident prevention purposes or for the
administration of the laws of the state relating to the deposit of security and
proof of financial responsibility by persons driving or the owners of motor
vehicles, except that the identity of a person involved in an accident may be
disclosed when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies
his presence at the accident.
(2) All accident reports and supplemental information filed in
connection with the administration of the laws of the state relating to the
deposit of security or proof of financial responsibility shall be confidential and
not open to general public inspection, nor shall copying of lists of such reports
be permitted; however, such reports and supplemental information may be
examined by any person named therein or by his representative designated in
writing.
(3) No reports or information mentioned in this section shall be used
as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that
the police department shall furnish, upon demand of any party to the trial or
upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report
has or has not been made to the department in compliance with law. (1973
Code, § 11-66)
15-20
State law reference 1
Crimes and arrest: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-201 et seq.
CHAPTER 6
PROCEDURE ON ARREST
SECTION
15-601. Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests.
15-602. Procedure of police officers for the issuance of citations.
15-603. Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants and complaints.
15-604. Unlawful cancellations of traffic citations.
15-605. Audit of records and reports.
15-606. When copy of citation shall be deemed a lawful complaint.
15-607. Failure to obey citation.
15-608. Citations on unlawfully parked vehicle.
15-609. Presumption in reference to illegal parking.
15-610. When warrant to be issued.
15-611. Record of traffic cases; report of convictions to state department of
safety.
15-612. Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.
15-613. Driver's license in lieu of bail.
15-601. Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests. (1) The
recorder shall provide books to include traffic citation forms for notifying alleged
violators to appear and answer to charges of violating state traffic laws or the
provisions of this chapter or other city traffic ordinances in the recorder's court.
The books shall include serially numbered sets of citations in quadruplicate in
the form prescribed and approved jointly by the mayor and the chief of police.
(2) The recorder shall issue such books to the chief of police or his duly
authorized agent and shall maintain a record of each book so issued and shall
require a written receipt for each such book.1
(3) The chief of police shall be responsible for the issuance of the books
to individual members of the police department. The chief of police shall require
a written receipt for each book so issued and shall maintain a record of each
such book and each set of citations contained therein. (1973 Code, § 11-72)
15-602. Procedure of police officers for the issuance of citations.
Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a
person before a judge for the violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who
stops a person for such a violation, other than for the purpose of giving him a
warning or warning notice and does not take such person into custody under
arrest, shall take the name, address, and operator's license number of the
15-21
person, the registration number of the motor vehicle involved and such other
pertinent information as may be necessary and shall issue to him, in writing on
a form provided by the recorder, a traffic citation containing a notice to answer
to the charge against him in the recorder's court of the city at a time at least five
(5) days after the alleged violation, which time shall be specified in the citation.
The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer
as specified in the citation, shall release the person from custody. (1973 Code,
§ 11-73)
15-603. Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants and
complaints. (1) Each police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or of any
provision of this chapter, shall deposit the original and duplicate copy of the
citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to be
delivered to the recorder's court and the duplicate copy to the central records
section of the police department. The second duplicate copy of the citation shall
be retained in the traffic citation book and shall be delivered by the superior
officer to the recorder, together with the citation book when all the traffic
citations therein have been used.
(2) Upon the filing of the original citation in the recorder's court, the
citation may be disposed of only by trial in the court or by other official action
of the court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a fine to the traffic
violations bureau.
(3) The chief of police shall require the return to him of each traffic
citation and all copies thereof, except that copy required to be retained in the
book as provided in subsection (1) or which has been spoiled or upon which any
entry has been made and has not been issued to an alleged violator.
(4) The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in
connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the police
department, a record of the disposition of the charge by the recorder's court or
the traffic violations bureau.
(5) The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a
record of all warrants issued by the recorder or by any other court on the traffic
violation charges and which are delivered to the police department for service,
and of the final disposition of all such warrants.
(6) It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the
police department or other officer or public employee to dispose of, alter or
deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof or the record of the issuance or
disposition of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant, in a manner other than
as required in this chapter. (1973 Code, § 11-74)
15-604. Unlawful cancellation of traffic citations. It shall be
unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation
in any manner other than as provided by this chapter. (1973 Code, § 11-75)
15-22
State law reference 1
Audit required: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-204
15-605. Audit of records and reports. (1) Every record of traffic
citations, complaints thereon and warrants issued therefor required in this
chapter shall be audited at least quarterly by the recorder, who shall submit a
report of such audit together with a summary thereof to the mayor. Such reports
shall be public records.
(2) The recorder shall publish or cause to be published a quarterly
summary of all traffic citations issued by members of the police department, the
disposition of the complaints thereon and the issuance and disposition of all
warrants issued therefor in at least one (1) local newspaper of general
circulation.
(3) For the purpose of this chapter, the recorder or his duly authorized
representatives shall have access at all times to all necessary records, files and
papers of the recorder's court, its traffic violations bureau and the police
department. (1973 Code, § 11-76)
15-606. When copy of citation shall be deemed a lawful complaint.
In the event the form of citation provided under this division includes
information and is sworn to as required under the general laws of the state in
respect to a complaint charging commission of the offense alleged in the citation
to have been committed, then the citation, when filed with a court having
jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of
prosecution under this code. (1973 Code, § 11-77) 1
15-607. Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any person
to violate his written promise to appear in court after giving his promise to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1973 Code, § 11-78)
15-608. Citations on unlawfully parked vehicle. (1) Whenever any
motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of
the restrictions imposed by this chapter or by state law, the officer finding the
vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information
displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously
affix to the vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the recorder, for the
driver to answer to the charge against him within five (5) days, during the hours
and at a place specified in the citation.
(2) If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking
under the traffic laws of this state or this chapter does not appear in response
to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle pursuant to subsection (1)
within a period of five (5) days, the recorder shall send to the owner of the motor
15-23
vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the
violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a
period of five (5) days a warrant of arrest will be issued. (1973 Code, § 11-79)
15-609. Presumption in reference to illegal parking. (1) In any
prosecution charging a violation of any state law or provision of this chapter,
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of the law or provision of this
chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at
the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was
the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, the violation occurred.
(2) The presumption prescribed in subsection (1) shall apply only when
the procedure established in § 15-507 is followed. (1973 Code, § 11-80)
15-610. When warrant to be issued. In the event any person fails to
comply with a traffic citation given to him or attached to a vehicle pursuant to
this chapter or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an
appearance in the recorder's court or the traffic violations bureau, or if any
person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required within the time permitted by
law, the recorder shall issue a warrant for his arrest. (1973 Code, § 11-81)
15-611. Record of traffic cases; report of convictions to state
department of safety. (1) The recorder shall keep or cause to be kept a record
of every traffic complaint, traffic citation or other legal form of traffic charge
deposited with or presented to his court or the traffic violations bureau and shall
keep a record of every official action by the recorder's court or its traffic
violations bureau in reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of
every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal and the amount of fine
or forfeiture resulting from every traffic complaint or citation deposited with or
presented to the recorder's court or traffic violations bureau.
(2) Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a
person upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the recorder shall prepare and
immediately forward to the state department of safety an abstract of the record
of the court covering the case in which the person was so convicted or forfeited
bail, which abstract shall be certified by the recorder to be true and correct. A
report need not be made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or
standing of a vehicle.
(3) The abstract required by subsection (1) must be made upon a form
furnished by the state department of safety and shall include the name and
address of the party charged, the number if any of his operator's or chauffeur's
license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the
15-24
State law reference 1
Disposition of fines, penalties and forfeitures for state violations:
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-303.
offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment or whether bail was forfeited
and the amount of the fine or forfeiture, as the case may be. (1973 Code,
§ 11-82)
15-612. Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. All fines or
forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person
charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be paid
into the general fund of the city. (1973 Code, § 11-83) 1
15-613. Driver's license in lieu of bail. Whenever any person lawfully
possessed of a chauffeur or operator's license theretofore issued to him by the
Department of Safety, State of Tennessee, is issued a citation or arrested and
charged with the violation of any municipal ordinance regulation, traffic, except
driving under the influence of an intoxicant or narcotic drug or leaving the scene
of an accident, said person shall have the option of depositing his chauffeur's or
operator license with the officer or court demanding bail in lieu of any other
security required for his appearance in the city court in answer to any such
charge before said court.
All city officers and employees shall comply fully with the requirements
of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-50-801, et seq., and any implementing orders
of the Department of Safety, State of Tennessee. (Ord. #____, Jan. 1981)
15-25
CHAPTER 7
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
SECTION
15-701. Established.
15-702. Duties generally.
15-703. Designation of offenses within bureau's jurisdiction; fines.
15-704. When person charged may elect to appear at bureau or before court.
15-705. Records.
15-706. Procedure.
15-701. Established. A traffic violations bureau is hereby established
to assist the recorder with the clerical work of traffic cases. The bureau shall be
under the recorder. (1973 Code, § 11-89)
15-702. Duties generally. The following duties are hereby imposed
upon the traffic violations bureau in reference to traffic offenses:
(1) It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in
court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive court
appearance and give power of attorney;
(2) It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons
who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the
court docket and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present;
(3) It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which
each person has been guilty during the preceding twelve (12) months, whether
the guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations bureau. (1973 Code,
§ 11-90)
15-703. Designation of offenses within bureau's jurisdiction;
fines. The recorder shall designate the specified offenses under this chapter or
the state traffic laws in respect to which payments of fines may be accepted by
the traffic violations bureau in satisfaction thereof and shall specify by suitable
schedules the amount of fines for the first, second and subsequent offenses; the
fines shall be within the limits declared by state law or this code or other city
ordinance, the recorder shall also specify which offenses shall require an
appearance before the court. (1973 Code, § 11-91)
15-704. When person charged may elect to appear at bureau or
before court. (1) Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a
fine may be made to the traffic violations bureau shall have the option of paying
the fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the traffic violations
bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court, or
15-26
may have the option of depositing the required lawful bail and, upon a plea of
not guilty, shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law.
(2) The payment of a fine to the traffic violations bureau shall be
deemed an acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense and the bureau,
upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator
acknowledging payment thereof. (1973 Code, § 11-92)
15-705. Records. The traffic violations bureau shall keep records and
submit summarized monthly reports to the mayor of all notices issued and
arrests made for violations of the traffic laws of the state, the provisions of this
chapter and other ordinances of the city and of all the fines collected by it or the
court and of the final disposition or present status of every case of violation of
law. The records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the
totals of each and shall be public records. (1973 Code, § 11-93)
15-706. Procedure. The traffic violations bureau shall follow such
procedure as may be prescribed by this chapter or as may be required by any
laws of this state. (1973 Code, § 11-94)
15-27
State law reference 1
Rules of the Road: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-101.
CHAPTER 8
OPERATION
SECTION
15-801. Authorized emergency vehicles.
15-802. Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-803. Following fire apparatus prohibited.
15-804. Crossing fire hose.
15-805. Operation of motorcycles and motor-driven cycles.
15-706. Driving while under the influence of an intoxicant or drug.
15-807. Driving through funeral or other procession.
15-808. Duties of drivers in a procession.
15-809. Funeral processions to be identified.
15-810. Marked parking spaces reserved during funeral services only.
15-811. Vehicle not to be driven on a sidewalk.
15-812. Limitations on backing.
15-813. Clinging to vehicles.
15-814. Entering or exiting controlled-access roadways.
15-815. Driving through safety zone prohibited.
15-816. Restrictions upon use of streets by certain vehicles.
15-801. Authorized emergency vehicles. (1) The driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, when in
the pursuit of an actual or suspected violation of the law or when responding to,
but not upon returning from, a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth
in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section.
(2) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(a) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
(b) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(c) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property.
(d) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
(3) The exemptions granted by this section to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle while in motion sounds
such audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a 1
15-28
distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle, except that an
authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped
with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1973 Code,
§ 11-105)
15-802. Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized
emergency vehicles. (1) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the
requirements of this chapter or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making
use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close
as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
(2) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway. (1973 Code, § 11-106)
15-803. Following fire apparatus prohibited. The driver of any
vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus
traveling in response any fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive
into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to a fire alarm. (1973 Code, § 11-107)
15-804. Crossing fire hose. No vehicle shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private
driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire
department official in command. (1973 Code, § 11-108)
15-805. Operation of motorcycles and motor-driven cycles.
(1) Any person operating a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon the
public streets of the city shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat
attached thereto. No operator shall carry any other person nor shall any other
person ride on a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless the vehicle is designed
to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the
permanent and regular seat if the seat is designed for two (2) persons or upon
another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the vehicle. No passenger
shall be carried upon any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless foot rests are
15-29
provided and no passenger shall ride side saddle upon any such vehicle being
operated within the city.
(2) No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall operate any
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, within the city while any other person is a
passenger thereon.
(3) No person shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle or
motor-driven cycle within the city unless he is equipped with and wearing on his
head a safety helmet with a secured chin strap and suspension lining, which
helmet shall conform to the type and design manufactured for the use of the
operators and riders of such vehicles. (1973 Code, § 11-109)
15-806. Driving while under the influence of an intoxicant or
drug. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive or be in
physical control of any automobile or other motor-driven vehicle on any of the
streets or highways of the city while under the influence of an intoxicant, or
while under the influence of narcotic drugs or while under the influence of drugs
producing stimulating effects on the central nervous system.
(2) For the purpose of this section, drugs producing stimulating effects
on the central nervous system shall include the salts of barbituric acid, also
known as malonyl urea or any compound, derivatives or mixtures thereof that
may be used for producing hypnotic or somnifacient effects, and includes
amphetamine, desoxyephedrine or compounds or mixtures thereof, including all
derivatives of phenolethylamine or any of the salts thereof, except preparations
intended for use in the nose and unfit for internal use. (1973 Code, § 11-110)
15-807. Driving through funeral or other procession. No driver of
a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this division. This section shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or
police officers. (1973 Code, § 11-111)
15-808. Duties of drivers in a procession. Each driver in a funeral
or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as
practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
(1973 Code, § 11-112)
15-809. Funeral processions to be identified. A funeral composed
of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such
other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division.
(1973 Code, § 11-113)
15-30
15-810. Marked parking spaces reserved during funeral services
only. (1) The marked parking spaces on the west side of Purple Heart Avenue
shall be reserved for funeral use during funeral services only.
(2) Any funeral director is authorized to reserve these parking spaces
by cones or signs indicating that these parking spaces are for funeral use only.
(3) Other than funeral services the parking of Purple Heart Avenue
shall be restricted to parking for three (3) hours only.
(4) Any violation of the section will result in a ten dollar ($10.00) fine
and the vehicle occupying any reserved parking space may be towed at the cost
of the owner of the vehicle. (Ord. #2006-5, June 2006)
15-811. Vehicle not to be driven on a sidewalk. The driver of a
vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or
temporary driveway. (1973 Code, § 11-114)
15-812. Limitations on backing. The driver of a vehicle shall not back
the vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and
without interfering with other traffic. (1973 Code, § 11-115)
15-813. Clinging to vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle,
coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach his vehicle or himself to
any vehicle upon a roadway. (1973 Code, § 11-116)
15-814. Ent ering or exiting controlled-access roadways. No person
shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such
entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (1973 Code,
§ 11-117)
15-815. Driving through safety zone prohibited. No vehicle shall
at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. (1973 Code, § 11-118)
15-816. Restrictions upon use of streets by certain vehicles.
(1) The traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate those
heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway
by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized
traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
(2) When signs are so erected pursuant to subsection (1), no person
shall disobey the restrictions stated on the signs. (1973 Code, § 11-119)
15-31
CHAPTER 9
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION
15-901. General maximum speed limit.
15-902. Speed limit at intersections.
15-903. Speed limit in school zones and near playgrounds.
15-904. Speed limit in congested areas.
15-905. Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
15-906. Speed limit of trains.
15-901. General maximum speed limit. (1) It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle upon Highway 25/70 West
beginning at stoplight number 3 at the intersection of Highways 25/70 and
Highway 32, to the corporate limits of the City of Newport located at the
intersection of Highway 25/70 and Clevenger Cut-off Road at speeds in excess
of forty-five (45) mph. Sufficient signage indicating said speed limit shall be
posted.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor
vehicle upon Highway 32, commencing at stoplight 3, at the intersection of
Highway 25/70 and 32 to the intersection of Highway 32 and Epley Road, at
speeds in excess of forty (40) mph.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor
vehicle upon Highway 32 and Epley Road to the corporate limits of the City of
Newport, Tennessee, located at the intersection of new (current) Highway 32
and the old Highway 32 roadway, at speeds in excess of forty-five (45) mph.
(Ord. #98-07-A, July 1998)
15-902. Speed limit at intersections. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of
speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour unless the person is driving on a
through street or on one regulated by traffic-control signals or signs which stop
or require traffic to yield on the intersecting streets. (1973 Code, § 11-126)
15-903. Speed limit in school zones and near play grounds. It shall
be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle through any
school zone or near any playground in the city in excess of fifteen (15) miles per
hour when official signs indicating such speed limit have been posted by the
traffic engineer. The provisions of this section are applicable to school zones
where there are no playgrounds only when the children are out for recess or
when the children are going to or leaving school during its opening or closing
hours. (1973 Code, § 11-127)
15-32
State law reference 1
Establishment of speed zones: Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-8-153.
15-904. Speed limits in congested areas. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or drive a motor vehicle through any congested area at a rate
of speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour when official signs indicating
such speed limit have been posted by the traffic engineer. (1973 Code, § 11-128) 1
15-905. Regulation of speed by traffic signals. The traffic engineer
is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the
movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance
from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and
he shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (1973 Code, § 11-129)
15-906. Speed limit of trains. Is shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a train, locomotive or other vehicle on the railroad tracks within the city
limits of the City of Newport as a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour
either in an east bound direction or a west bound direction. The penalty for the
violation of said ordinance shall be not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more
than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each mile per hour in excess of the prescribed
limit. (Ord. #____, Jan. 1984)
15-33
CHAPTER 10
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-1001. Required position and method of turning at intersections.
15-1002. Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.
15-1003. Authority to restrict turns.
15-1004. Obedience to no-turn signs.
15-1005. Limitations on turning around.
15-1001. Required position and method of turning at
intersections. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall
do so as follows:
(1) Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
(2) Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic
is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the
right of the center line where it enters the intersection and, after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the
right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center
of the intersection.
(3) Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one (1) direction on one (1) or more of the roadways,
the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at the intersection shall approach
the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle and, after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly
as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (1973 Code, § 11-135)
15-1002. Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.
(1) The traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at the intersections, and the course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by state law or this
chapter.
(2) When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
15-34
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
(1973 Code, § 11-136)
15-1003. Authority to restrict turns. The traffic engineer is hereby
authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make a right, left, or "U" turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections.
The making of turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the hours shall be plainly indicated on
the signs or the signs may be removed when the turns are permitted. (1973
Code, § 11-137)
15-1004. Obedience to no-turns signs. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating that no right, left or "U" turn is permitted, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such signs. (1973 Code, § 11-138)
15-1005. Limitations on turning around. The driver of any vehicle
shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
street in a business district and shall not, upon any other, street, so turn a
vehicle unless the movement can be made in safety and without interfering with
other traffic. (1973 Code, § 11-139)
15-35
CHAPTER 11
RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION
15-1101. Signs required at through streets.
15-1102. Other intersections where stop or yield may be required.
15-1103. Stop signs and yield signs.
15-1104. Duty of driver of vehicle entering stop intersection.
15-1105. Duty of driver of vehicle entering yield intersection.
15-1106. Duty upon emerging from alley, driveway or building.
15-1107. Stop when traffic obstructed.
15-1108. Obedience to signal indicating approach of train.
15-1101. Signs required at through streets. Whenever this code or
any ordinance of this city designates and describes a through street, it shall be
the duty of the traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign or, on the basis
of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, on
each and every street intersecting the through street, unless traffic at the
intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; however, at the
intersection of two (2) through streets or at the intersection of a through street
and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the traffic engineer
upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (1973 Code, § 11-145)
15-1102. Other intersections where stop or yield may be required.
The traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate intersections
where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to
determine:
(1) Whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any
such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at each
place where a stop sign is required; or,
(2) Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at the intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected
a yield sign at each place where obedience thereto is required. (1973 Code,
§ 11-146)
15-1103. Stop signs and yield signs. (1) Every stop sign shall bear
the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. Every yield
sign shall bear the word "Yield" in letters not less than seven (7) inches in
height. Every stop sign and every yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous
by internal illumination or by a floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by
efficient reflecting elements in the face of the sign.
15-36
(2) Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the
nearest line of the intersecting roadway. (1973 Code, § 11-147)
15-1104. Duty of driver of vehicle entering stop intersection.
(1) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, each driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a
stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where
the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the intersection.
(2) The driver, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is
approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but
the driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so
proceeding. (1973 Code, § Code, § 11-148)
15-1105. Duty of driver of vehicle entering yield intersection.
(1) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions or shall
stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians legally
crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver, having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers
of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding; however, a driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping
and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required
herein. This subsection shall not relieve the drivers of other vehicles
approaching the intersection at such a distance as not to constitute an
immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision.
(2) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line,
but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. (1973 Code,
§ 11-149)
15-1106. Duty upon emerging from alley, driveway or
building. The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately
15-37
prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may
be necessary to avoid a collision and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (1973 Code, § 11-150)
15-1107. Stop when traffic obstructed. No driver shall enter an
intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1973 Code,
§ 11-151)
15-1108. Obedience to signal indicating approach of train.
(1) Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this subsection, the driver of
the vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from
the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
(a) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
(b) A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives
or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train;
(c) A railroad train approaching within approximately one
thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal
audible from the distance and the railroad train, by reason of its speed or
nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard;
(d) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
(2) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed
or is being opened or closed. (1973 Code, § 11-152)
15-38
CHAPTER 12
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION
15-1201. Subject to traffic-control signals.
15-1202. Right-of-way in crosswalks.
15-1203. To use right half of crosswalks.
15-1204. Manner of crossing.
15-1205. When pedestrian shall yield.
15-1206. Prohibited crossing locations.
15-1207. Obedience to railroad signals.
15-1208. Manner of walking along roadways.
15-1209. Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
15-1210. Drivers to exercise due care toward pedestrians.
15-1201. Subject to traffic-control signals. Pedestrians shall be
subject to traffic-control signals as provided for in this chapter, but at all other
places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the
restrictions stated in this chapter. (1973 Code, § 11-163)
15-1202. Right-of-way in crosswalks. (1) When traffic-control signals
are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half
of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
(2) No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety
and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield.
(3) Subsection (1) shall not apply under the conditions stated in
subsection (2) of § 15-1105.
(4) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (1973 Code, § 11-164)
15-1203. To use right half of crosswalks. Pedestrians shall move,
whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1973 Code, § 11-165)
15-1204. Manner of crossing. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at
any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest
route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. However, at intersections
where traffic-control signals have traffic stopped in all directions, these
15-39
provisions shall not apply to pedestrians crossing within the area common to
both intersecting roadways. (1973 Code, § 11-166)
15-1205. When pedestrian shall yield. (1) Each pedestrian crossing
a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
(2) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(3) The provisions in this section have no application under the
conditions stated in this chapter where pedestrians are prohibited from crossing
at certain designated places. (1973 Code, § 11-167)
15-1206. Prohibited crossing locations. (1) Between adjacent
intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall
not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
(2) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in
any business district. (1973 Code, § 11-168)
15-1207. Obedience to railroad signals. No pedestrian shall pass
through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade
crossing or bridge while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(1973 Code, § 11-169)
15-1208. Manner of walking along roadways. (1) Where sidewalks
are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway.
(2) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along
and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction. (1973 Code, § 11-170)
15-1209. Pedestrians soliciting rides or business. (1) No person
shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or
business from the occupant of any vehicle.
(2) No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked
or about to be parked on a street or highway. (1973 Code, § 11-171)
15-1210. Drivers to exercise due care toward pedestrians.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and
shall give warning by sounding the horn of his vehicle when necessary and shall
15-40
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway. (1973 Code, § 11-172)
15-41
CHAPTER 13
BICYCLES
SECTION
15-1301. Applicability of this chapter.
15-1302. Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.
15-1303. Obedience to traffic-control devices.
15-1304. Manner of riding on bicycles.
15-1305. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
15-1306. Speed.
15-1307. Carrying articles.
15-1308. Parking.
15-1309. Riding on sidewalks.
15-1310. Lamps and other equipment on bicycle.
15-1311. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
15-1301. Applicability of this chapter. This chapter shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein. (1973
Code, § 11-183)
15-1302. Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles. Each person
riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter
and the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles,
except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions
of state law and this chapter which, by their nature, can have no application.
(1973 Code, § 11-184)
15-1303. Obedience to traffic-control devices. (1) Any person
operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals,
signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
(2) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left
or "U" turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle
to make the turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians. (1973 Code, § 11-185)
15-1304. Manner of riding on bicycles. (1) A person propelling a
bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached
thereto.
15-42
(2) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. (1973 Code, § 11-186)
15-1305. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. (1) Each person
operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or
one proceeding in the same direction.
(2) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than
two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
(3) Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to
a roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
(1973 Code, § 11-187)
15-1306. Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (1973 Code,
§ 11-188)
15-1307. Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry
any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least
one (1) hand upon the handlebars. (1973 Code, § 11-189)
15-1308. Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other
than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to
support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to
afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1973 Code, § 11-190)
15-1309. Riding on sidewalks. (1) No person shall ride a bicycle upon
a sidewalk within a business district.
(2) No person fifteen (15) or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon
any sidewalk in any district.
(3) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1973 Code, § 11-191)
15-1310. Lamps and other equipment on bicycle. (1) Each bicycle
when in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall
emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to
the front and with a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible
from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
15-43
(2) No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell
or other device capable of giving audible sound for a signal a distance of at least
one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with or shall
any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
(3) Each bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (1973
Code, § 11-192)
15-1311. Responsibility of parent or guardian. The parent of any
child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any
such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (1973 Code,
§ 11-193)
15-44
CHAPTER 14
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
SECTION
15-1401. Manner of parking generally.
15-1402. Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
15-1403. Obedience to angle parking signs or markings.
15-1404. Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb.
15-1405. Lamps on parked vehicles.
15-1406. Locations where stopping, standing or parking prohibited.
15-1407. When parking signs required.
15-1408. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
15-1409. Parking in alleys.
15-1410. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
15-1411. Parking adjacent to schools.
15-1412. Parking may be prohibited on narrow streets.
15-1413. Standing or parking on one-way streets.
15-1414. Standing or parking on roadways laned for traffic.
15-1415. Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places.
15-1416. Opening and closing vehicle doors.
15-1417. Designation of curb loading zones.
15-1418. Observance of curb loading zones.
15-1419. Designation of public carrier stops and stands.
15-1420. Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.
15-1421. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
15-1422. Authority to impound unlawfully stopped vehicles; notice.
15-1423. Disabled or abandoned vehicles; removal.
15-1424. Handicapped parking.
15-1401. Manner of parking generally. Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are
adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such
vehicle parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right-hand curb. (1973
Code, § 11-204)
15-1402. Signs or markings indicating angle parking. (1) The
traffic engineer shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be
permitted and shall mark or sign the streets; however, angle parking shall not
be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within the city unless the
state department of highways and public works has determined that the
roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with
the free movement of traffic.
15-45
(2) Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place
where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left
side of the street. (1973 Code, § 11-205)
15-1403. Obedience to angle parking signs or markings. On those
streets which have been signed or marked by the traffic engineer for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway indicated by the signs or markings. (1973 Code,
§ 11-206)
15-1404. Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb.
(1) The traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to allow
the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of the permit. The
permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the
owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such persons the privilege as therein
stated and authorized in this section.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any
of the special terms or conditions of any permit issued pursuant to subsection
(1). (1973 Code, § 11-207)
15-1405. Lamps on parked vehicles. (1) Whenever a vehicle is
lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between one-half (½)
hour after sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise and in the event there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred
(500) feet upon the street or highway, no lights need be displayed upon the
parked vehicle.
(2) Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or
shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between one-half (½) hour after sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise and
there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of
five hundred (500) feet upon the highway, the vehicle so parked or stopped shall
be equipped with one (1) or more lamps meeting the following requirements: At
least one (1) lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the front of the vehicle and the same lamp or at
least one (1) other lamp shall display a red light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the rear of the vehicle and the location of the lamp shall
always be such that at least one (1) lamp or combination of lamps meeting the
requirements of this subsection is installed as near as practicable to the side of
the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle.
(3) Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed
or dimmed. (1973 Code, § 11-208)
15-46
15-1406. Locations where stopping, standing or parking
prohibited. (1) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following
places:
(a) On a sidewalk;
(b) In front of a public or private driveway;
(c) Within an intersection;
(d) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
(e) On a crosswalk;
(f) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(g) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(h) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
(30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone, unless the traffic engineer indicates a different length by signs or
markings;
(i) Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;
(j) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance.
(k) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(l) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
(m) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway
or within a highway tunnel;
(n) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(2) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.
(1973 Code, § 11-209)
15-1407. When parking signs required. Whenever by this code or any
other ordinance of the city, any parking time limit is imposed or parking is
prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to
erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be
effective unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged
offense. (1973 Code, § 11-210)
15-1408. Parking not to obstruct traffic. No person shall park any
vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (1973 Code, § 11-211)
15-47
15-1409. Parking in alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an
alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
(10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic
and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a
position as to block the driveway entrance to an abutting property. (1973 Code,
§ 11-212)
15-1410. Parking for certain purposes prohibited. No person shall
park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1973 Code, § 11-213)
15-1411. Parking adjacent to schools. (1) The traffic engineer is
authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any
street adjacent to any school property when parking would, in his opinion,
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
(2) When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either
side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized by subsection (1),
no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1973 Code,
§ 11-214)
15-1412. Parking may be prohibited on narrow streets. (1) The
traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet or upon
one (1) side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway
does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
(2) When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow
streets as authorized by subsection (1), no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of any such sign. (1973 Code, § 11-215)
15-1413. Standing or parking on one-way streets. The traffic
engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way
street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles and, when the signs are in
place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side in violation
of any such sign. (1973 Code, § 11-216)
15-1414. Standing or parking on roadways laned for traffic. In the
event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking. The traffic engineer is authorized
to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand
15-48
side of any one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. (1973
Code, § 11-217)
15-1415. Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or
congested places. (1) The traffic engineer is authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length
in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially
hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(2) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized by subsection (1), no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
such designated place. (1973 Code, § 11-218)
15-1416. Opening and closing vehicle doors. No person shall open
the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and
until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the
side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer
than necessary to load or unload passengers. (1973 Code, § 11-219)
15-1417. Designation of curb loading zones. The traffic engineer is
authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones
and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating
the hours during which the loading zones are in effect. (1973 Code, § 11-220)
15-1418. Observance of curb loading zones. (1) Passenger curb
loading zones. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers
in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to the curb loading zone are effective and then only for a
period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
(2) Freight curb loading zone. (a) No person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place
marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions
applicable to the zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading
and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(b) The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a
place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of
materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (1973
Code, § 11-221)
15-1419. Designation of public carrier stops and stands. The traffic
engineer is authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab
15-49
stands and stands for other passenger, common-carrier motor vehicles on such
public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of
the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Each bus stop, bus stand,
taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (1973
Code, § 11-222)
15-1420. Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs
regulated. (1) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park the vehicle upon
any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided in this
section.
(2) The operator of a bus shall not stop the vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as
provided in this section, except in the case of an emergency.
(3) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front
wheel of such vehicle not farther than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the
bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement
of other vehicular traffic.
(4) The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon
any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
in this section. This subsection shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers. (1973 Code, § 11-223)
15-1421. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. No person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a
taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially
designated and appropriately signed; however, the driver of a passenger vehicle
may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when the stopping does not interfere with any
bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. (1973 Code, § 11-224)
15-1422. Authority to impound unlawfully stopped vehicles;
notice. (1) Members of the police department are authorized to remove a
vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety,
to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise
maintained by the city under the following circumstances:
(a) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge,
viaduct, or causeway or in any tube or tunnel where the vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
15-50
(b) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(c) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(2) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized
in subsection (1) and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof,
the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the
owner of the fact of the removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to
which the vehicle has been removed. In the event any vehicle is stored in a
public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of the
garage.
(3) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this
section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or
for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in
subsection (2), and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within
a period of three (3) days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately
send or cause to be sent a written report of the removal by mail to the state
department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles and shall file a copy of the
notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be
stored. The notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date,
time and place from which removed, the reasons for the removal and name of
the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. (1973 Code, § 11-225)
15-1423. Disabled or abandoned vehicles; removal. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle which has
become disabled mechanically or which is not in regular use, for a period of more
than five (5) days, upon any of the streets or alleys of the city.
(2) In the event any person shall violate the provisions of subsection
(1), the police department is authorized and directed to cause the vehicle to be
removed after giving the owner thereof five (5) days written notice by certified
mail, postage prepaid, provided that the name of the owner can be learned. In
the event the name of the owner cannot be found upon reasonable inquiry, then
the required notice shall be waived. (1973 Code, § 11-226)
15-1424. Handicapped parking. It is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) to park in or block
access to areas designated as handicapped parking spaces within the City of
Newport, Tennessee. Said areas must be clearly marked by signs or by painting
on the streets that the area is reserved for handicapped persons.
15-51
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-21-108, is hereby incorporated in this
section as if same were incorporated herein and as may be amended from time
to time by the Legislature for the State of Tennessee, all as provided by § 11-101
of the Code of the City of Newport. (Ord. #___, March 1993)
15-52
CHAPTER 15
PARKING METERS
SECTION
15-1501. Parking meter zones established.
15-1502. Deposit of coins; time limits; meters to bear legend.
15-1503. When deposit of coins not required.
15-1504. Parking meter spaces.
15-1505. Occupancy of more than one space.
15-1506. Responsibility for installation and operation of meters.
15-1507. Unlawful parking.
15-1508. Use of slugs.
15-1509. Tampering with meters.
15-1510. Collection of coins.
15-1511. Use of revenue.
15-1512. Enforcement.
15-1501. Parking meter zones established. The parking of vehicles
upon the following named streets or parts of streets shall be regulated by
parking meters between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. on all days except
Sunday and Christmas:
(1) On the north and south sides of Broadway; beginning at Court
Avenue and extending west to Woodlawn Avenue; and from Woodlawn Avenue
on the north side of Broadway, to Mill Avenue.
(2) On the south side of West Main Street, beginning at Woodlawn
Avenue and extending eastwardly to Court Avenue; and on the north side of
East Main Street, beginning at Mims Avenue and extending eastwardly to
McSween Avenue.
(3) On the east and west sides of McSween Avenue between Broadway
and East Main Street.
(4) On the east and west sides of Mims Avenue, between Broadway
and East Main Street; and on the west side of Mims Avenue extending from
Broadway south to a point near the entrance to the Masonic Building.
(5) On the east and west sides of McMann Avenue beginning at
Broadway and extending north to Main Street.
(6) On the east and west sides of Woodlawn Avenue, beginning at
Broadway and extending north to Main Street. (1973 Code, § 11-232)
15-1502. Deposit of coins; time limits; meters to bear legend.
(1) No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space upon a street
alongside of and next to which a parking meter has been installed, between the
hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. on any day except Sundays and Christmas,
unless a coin or coins of United States currency of the appropriate denomination
15-53
as provided in this subsection shall have been deposited therein or shall have
been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time and the
meter has been placed in operation. The deposit of a coin or coins of United
States currency in the following denominations shall authorize lawful parking
only for the periods indicated:
(a) Upon the deposit of one (1) dime or two
(2) nickels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120 minute
(b) Upon the deposit of one (1) nickel. . . . . . . . . . . 60 minutes
(2) Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the
hours when the requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply, the value of the
coins to be deposited and the limited period of time for which parking is lawfully
permitted for various coins in the parking meter zone in which the meter is
located. (1973 Code, § 11-233)
15-1503. When deposit of coins not required. The placing of coins
in parking meters shall not be required of the owner or operator of any vehicle
while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of persons therefrom, if the
parking for such purpose is restricted to such length of time as is absolutely
necessary therefor, nor shall it be required in the case of commercial trucks
loading or unloading merchandise; however, such loading and unloading of
merchandise is continuous and shall be restricted to such length of time as
absolutely necessary therefor and to places of business where it is not possible
to load, unload, receive or deliver merchandise at a rear entrance. Nothing in
this section shall be so construed as to permit double parking at any time for
any purpose whatsoever. (1973 Code, § 11-234)
15-1504. Parking meter spaces. The traffic engineer shall be
responsible for having the parking space adjacent to each parking meter
designated by appropriate markings upon the curb or the pavement of the
street. Parking meter spaces so designated shall be of appropriate length and
width so as to be accessible from the traffic lanes of the street. (1973 Code,
§ 11-235)
15-1505. Occupancy of more than one space. No person shall park
a vehicle in any designated parking meter space during the restricted or
regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in which the parking meter
is located so that any part of such vehicle occupies more than one (1) such space
or protrudes beyond the markings designating such space, except that a vehicle
which is of a size too large to be parked within a single designated parking
meter zone shall be permitted to occupy two (2) adjoining parking meter spaces
when coins shall have been deposited in the parking meter for each space so
occupied, as is required in this chapter for the parking of other vehicles in such
spaces. (1973 Code, § 11-236)
15-54
15-1506. Responsibility for installation and operation of meters.
The traffic engineer shall be responsible for having all parking meters installed
upon the curb immediately adjacent to the parking space regulated and for
maintaining them that they shall display a signal showing lawful parking upon
deposit therein of a proper coin of the United States in conformity with the
requirements of this section, which said signal shall remain in evidence until
the expiration of the lawful parking period, at which time it will indicate by
automatic operation of a visible signal that said lawful parking period has
expired. (1973 Code, § 11-237)
15-1507. Unlawful parking. It shall be unlawful during the hours
between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., except on Sundays and Christmas, for any
person to park or permit a vehicle under his control to be parked in a designated
parking meter space while the parking meter for the space indicates that the
vehicle is illegally parked, whether the indication is the result of the failure to
deposit a coin or operate the lever or other actuating device of the meter, or is
the result of the automatic operation of the meter following the expiration of the
authorized parking time subsequent to depositing a coin therein at the time the
vehicle was parked. However, this section shall not apply to the act of parking
or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately thereafter a coin
in such meter. The fact that a vehicle is parked in a metered parking space
during the hours of limited parking without the meter time signal showing
permitted parking, shall he prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been
parked in the space longer than the lawful parking period. It shall be unlawful
for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be
unlawfully parked as set out in this section. (1973 Code, § 11-238)
15-1508. Use of slugs. No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in
any parking meter, any slug, button or any other device or substitute for a coin
of United States currency. (1973 Code, § 11-239)
15-1509. Tampering with meters. No person shall deface, injure,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter. (1973 Code, § 11-240)
15-1510. Collection of coins. Coins shall be collected weekly from
parking meters by such persons as the board of mayor and aldermen shall from
time to time designate. For the protection of themselves and the interest of the
city, the collectors shall always work in pairs. After collecting and counting the
parking meter revenue, the collectors shall deposit it to the city's account in
such bank as the board of mayor and aldermen shall designate. The bank
deposit slip shall be immediately delivered to the recorder. The collectors shall
retain duplicate deposit slips which they shall turn over to the board of mayor
and aldermen at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting. It shall be
15-55
unlawful for any person other than the collectors designated by the board of
mayor and aldermen to open a parking meter coin box. (1973 Code, § 11-241)
15-1511. Use of revenue. The coins required by this chapter to be
deposited in parking meters are levied and assessed as fees to cover and shall
be used to cover, the regulation and control of parking upon public streets; the
costs of parking meters, their installation, inspection, supervision, operation,
repair and maintenance; the control and use of parking spaces; for regulating
the parking of vehicles in parking meter spaces; the costs of acquiring,
establishing, improving, maintaining, and operating public off-street parking
facilities; and for other lawful purposes. (1973 Code, § 11-242)
15-1512. Enforcement. (1) It shall be the duty of the police officers to
report the following:
(a) The serial or identifying number of each parking meter
which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to
the parking meter is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter;
(b) The state license number of the vehicle;
(c) The time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter;
(d) Any other facts which are necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
(2) Each police officer shall attach to a vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this chapter
and instructing such owner or operator to report at the police headquarters of
the city with regard to the violation. Each owner or operator may, within
twenty-four (24) hours of the time when the notice was attached to the vehicle,
pay to the recorder as penalty for and in full satisfaction for the first such
violation, the sum of fifty cents ($0.50); for the second violation, if paid within
twenty-four (24) hours, the fine shall be one dollar ($1.00); and for the third, two
dollars ($2.00). The failure of an owner or operator to make such payment
within twenty-four (24) hours and, in any event, for any fourth or subsequent
ticket, the owner or operator shall be subject to arrest and punishment under
the penalty provisions of this municipal code. (1973 Code, § 11-243, modified)
TITLE 16
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS¹
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EXCAVATIONS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-101. Parades and funeral processions regulated.
16-102. "Vehicle" defined.
16-103. Load Restrictions Upon Vehicles Using Certain Streets.
16-101. Parades and funeral processions regulated. No funeral procession or parade
containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles, except the forces of
the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and
fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a
permit issued therefor by the chief of police. (1973 Code, § 16-1)
Definitions. The following words, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
(1). “Parade” is any meeting, parade, demonstration, exhibition, festival, homecoming,
assembly, or other such event to be held in or upon any street, park, or other public place in
Newport.
(2). “City” is the City of Newport.
(3). “Board of Mayor and Aldermen” is the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Newport.
(4). “City Recorder” is the city recorder of Newport.
(5). “Chief of Police” is the chief of police of Newport.
(6). “Parade permit” is a permit as required by this chapter.
(7). “Person” is any person, firm, group, partnership, association, corporation, company,
or organization of any kind.
_____________________
¹Municipal code reference
Related motor vehicle and traffic regulations: title 15.
16-2
Purposes. (1). The City of Newport recognizes the constitutional right of every citizen to
harbor and express beliefs on any subject whatsoever and to associate with others who share
similar beliefs.
(2). The city passes this chapter to regulate the time, place, and manner of parades.
(3). The city passes this chapter in the interest of all its citizens’ public safety, health,
welfare, comfort, and convenience.
(4). The City of Newport has limited resources and passes this chapter so that it may
properly allocate these resources among its citizens.
(5). The purpose of this chapter is to promote order, safety, and tranquility in the streets
of the City.
(6). This chapter is passes to help minimize traffic and business interruptions during
parades. (Ordinance #2002-, March 2002)
Permit. (1). No person shall parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the
Board of Mayor & Aldermen. Any parade held without the proper permit shall be unlawful.
(2). This chapter shall not apply to funeral processions, students going to and from school
classes or participation in education activities or other school activities such as sports events,
providing that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper
school authorities and a governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions and in
events sponsored by the city. (Ordinance #2002-, March 2002)
Application. (1) Any person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the city recorder on forms provided by the city recorder. The city recorder shall place the
request for a parade permit on the agenda of the next meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen
for action by it in the normal course of business.
(2). The application for a parade permit shall be filed in writing with the city recorder not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the contemplated parade or five (5) days prior to any regularly
scheduled called meeting of the board of mayor and aldermen. No permit shall be granted sooner
than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the contemplated parade. A copy of the application
shall be given to the chief of police who shall investigate and made a report to the board of mayor
and aldermen.
(3). The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(a). The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct a
parade or of the organization and its responsible heads;
(b). The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(c). The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(d). The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point;
(e). The approximate number of persons who and animals which, will constitute
such parade; the type of animal and description of the vehicles;
(f). The hours when the parade will begin and end:
(g). A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the
width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
(h). The location by streets of any assembly area(s);
(i). The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
assembly area(s);
16-3
(j). The interval of space to be maintained been units of the parade;
(k). If the parade is to be held on behalf of any person other than the
applicant, the authorization of that person; and
(l). Whether the applicant has been convicted for the violation of the city parade
ordinance of the City of Newport.
(4). The board of mayor and aldermen shall decide whether to grant the application for a
permit. The board of mayor and aldermen may consult with the chief of police in making their
decision.
(5). The board of mayor and aldermen in cooperation with the chief of police shall have
then authority to designate the starting point, route, terminal point, or other time, place, and
manner restrictions as deemed proper in consideration of minimum traffic interruptions, public
safety, health, welfare, convenience, peace, or order. (Ordinance #2002-, March 2002)
Standards for issuance. (1) The mayor and board of aldermen shall issue a parade
permit upon consideration of the application and other information obtained when they find that:
(a). The conduct of the parade will not unduly interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
(b). The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion or interruption of
essential or emergency municipal services, including police, fire, or ambulance
services;
(c). The parade is scheduled to move from it origin to its termination
expeditiously and without unreasonable delay.
(d). The applicant has satisfied the bond requirement; and
(e). No other permit has been granted for the same day.
(2). A permit shall be granted to the first person properly applying under the requirements
of this chapter.
(3). No permit shall be granted for a parade except those restricted to the following time:
No earlier than 11:00 a.m. and no later than 12:00 midnight prevailing time.
(4). No permit shall be granted to any person until the applicant has posted in advance a
two hundred fifty ($250.00) bond to cover the reasonable expenses incurred in the cleanup
efforts after the parade. The mayor and board of aldermen may waive this fee upon application
of a certified nonprofit organization.
(5). The city recorder shall notify the applicant within five (5) days after the action of the
board of mayor and aldermen whether the permit has been granted or denied if the permit has
been denied, the city recorder shall set forth the reasons why the board of mayor and aldermen
denied the permit.
(6). In computing any period of time set out in this chapter, no Saturdays, Sundays, or
holidays are to be computed in the time period. (Ordinance #2002-, March 2002)
Contents of permit. Each parade permit shall state the following:
(1). Assembly and disassembly time and place
(2). Starting time
(3). The route and the portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade
(4). Minimum speed
16-4
(5). Maximum speed
(6). Interval of space between parade unites
(7). The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof
(8). Other information as the board of mayor and aldermen in cooperation with the chief of
police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. (Ordinance #2002-, March
2002)
Duties of permittee (1). A permittee shall comply with all permit application
information, permit directions and conditions, and with all applicable laws and chapters.
(2). The permittee shall advise parade participants of such permit requirements.
(3). The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the
parade permit upon his person during the parade.
(4). All permittees who hold a parade permit that includes animals shall be responsible for
the clean up after the animals immediately after the parade.
(5). The applicant shall assure the board that neither the parade nor the assembly point
will interfere with or unreasonably obstruct the response capabilities of the firefighting equipment
and other emergency response vehicles. (Ordinance #2002-, March 2002)
Revocation of permit. (1) The board of mayor and aldermen or their designee shall have
the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder prior to the parade upon the application of
the standards for issuance as herein set forth if is found that:
(a). Applicant materially misrepresented facts or information in the application;
and/or
(b). Applicant failed to meet the standards for issuance set forth herein.
(2). The board of mayor and aldermen or their designee shall have the authority to revoke
the permit during the parade and disassemble the parade if:
(a). A public emergency arises requiring such revocation to protect the safety of
persons or property; or
(b). Disorderly conduct, riots, lawless activity, violence, or breach of the peace,
incited by the parade participants, occurs. (Ordinance #2002-, March 2002)
Notice to city officials. Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the city
recorder shall send a copy of the permit to the following:
(1). The mayor
(2). The city attorney
(3). The fire chief;
(4). The ambulance authority; and
(5). The chief of police. (Ordinance #2002-, March 2002)
Violation and penalty. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to parade without first
having obtained a permit as required by this chapter.
(2). It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade on the streets of Newport for
which a permit has not been granted.
(3). It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with all directions and conditions
of the parade permit.
16-5
(4). Any person violating the provisions of any section of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. (Ordinance #2002-,
March 2002)
16-102. "Vehicle" defined. "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon streets, roads, highways or public
thoroughfares, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks. (Ord. #2001-1-A,)
16-103. Load restrictions upon vehicles using certain streets.
(1) Definitions. (a) "Truck" means a vehicle or trailer possessing two or more rear axles
and/or weighing in excess of 10,000 pounds empty weight.
(b) "through truck traffic" means trucks entering the City of Newport from any point
outside the city and destined for any other point located outside the city proceeding entirely
through without unloading or loading freight within the city of Newport.
(c) "Local truck traffic" means trucks entering the City of Newport for the purpose of
unloading or loading freight. (Ordinance #2017-12, July 2017)
(2) Load restrictions on vehicles using certain streets. All streets in the City of Newport,
Tennessee, are restricted from "truck" passage unless such streets are designated as "through
truck traffic routes" or unless such streets are being used as "local truck traffic routes" in
accordance with Section 4 herein. (Ordinance #2017-12, July 2017)
(3) "Through truck traffic routes". The City of Newport shall cause "through truck traffic
routes" to be designated by appropriate signs. The following streets are hereby declared to be
through "truck traffic routes": Main Street, Highway 25 W / 70, Broadway Street, Highway 321,
North Street, and Cosby Highway. (Ordinance #2017-12, July 2017)
(4) "Local truck traffic routes". No local truck traffic shall drive on any street not
designated as a "through truck traffic route" with the following exemptions: (a) Trucks that seek
an egress and ingress to a location for the purpose of loading or unloading freight and provided
that the driver of such truck shall have in the cab of the truck a bill of lading, move ticket, work
order or receipt of service bearing an address along the route to or line of the restricted street.
(b) The operation of heavy trucks owned or operated by the city or contractor under
contract while engaged in repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or
street utilities within the city limits.
(c) The operation of school buses and buses used to transport persons to and from a place
of worship, which run a designated route.
All local truck traffic shall use the most direct and/or accessible route which connects a
"through truck traffic route" to the origination or destination address within the City of Newport.
All local truck traffic loading or unloading must be parked in a designated loading zone or
parking space(s) identified for loading or unloading. When available, rear entrances shall be used
for loading and unloading.
The only street excluded from this designation is McMahan Avenue for local and through
truck traffic that must travel east on Broadway to reach its destination. Right turns are prohibited
16-6
at the intersection of Broadway and McMahan. Only left turns are permitted for local and
through truck traffic. (Ordinance #2017-12, July 2017)
(5) Owners and operators of trucks held responsible. Whenever any truck is operated in
violation of this ordinance, the owner and/or driver of such truck shall be deemed guilty of such
violation and either or both the owner and driver of such truck may be prosecuted for such
violation. (Ordinance #2017-12, July 2017)
(6) Penalty. A violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a mandatory fifty dollar
($50.00) fine without eligibility for Driving Safety School. (Ordinance #2017-12, July 2017)
16-7
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION
16-201. Permit required.
16-202. Remedies for violation of this chapter.
16-201. Permit required. No person, including any public utility, shall dig any holes or
cut any pavement in the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the street superintendent.
Any person receiving a permit required by this section shall repair the excavated street,
sidewalk or alley in a manner satisfactory to the street superintendent or his designated agent.
(1973 Code, § 16-17)
16-202. Remedies for violation of this chapter. (1) Any person failing to repair a
damaged street, alley or sidewalk in a manner satisfactory to the street superintendent shall be
guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense and each day that a person fails to satisfactorily repair the
damaged property shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) In addition to the provisions of subsection (1), the person failing to restore the public
way shall be liable to the city for the amount required to repair the damage to the street, alley or
sidewalk. (1973 Code, § 16-18) pal code. (1973 Code, § 11-243, modified)
17-1
Municipal code reference 1
Property maintenance regulations: title 13.
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL1
CHAPTER
1. REFUSE.
CHAPTER 1
REFUSE
SECTION
17-101. Refuse defined.
17-102. Premises to be kept clean.
17-103. Storage.
17-104. Container--general provisions.
17-105. Enclosure--solid waste receptacles.
17-106. Containers--portable refuse containers.
17-107. Container--commercial refuse containers.
17-108. Disturbance and unauthorized use of containers.
17-109. Collection--general provisions.
17-110. Collection fees.
17-111. Collection vehicles.
17-112. Disposal.
17-113. Privately owned dumpsters.
17-101. Refuse defined. Refuse shall mean and include garbage, and
rubbish, leaves, brush, and refuse as those terms are generally defined except
that dead animals and fowls, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks,
shingles, asbestos based materials, and similar materials are expressly excluded
therefrom and shall not be stored therewith. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-102. Premises to be kept clean. (1) All persons within the City of
Newport are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition,
free from accumulations of refuse except when stored as provided in this
chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential
building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such residential
property for the open storage of an abandoned motor vehicle, furniture,
appliances, glass, building material, building rubbish, junk or similar items.
17-2
(3) It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or
occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove
from the premises all such abandoned items listed above, including but not
limited to weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc., within thirty (30) days upon
receiving notice from the City of Newport. For the purpose of this section an
"abandoned motor vehicle" is defined as a vehicle that is in a state of disrepair
and incapable of being moved under its own power.
(4) Any person failing to comply with the above provision shall be
guilty of a violation of this section and shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each day of violation. Each day's subsequent violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-103. Storage. No refuse shall be placed in a refuse container until
such refuse has been drained of all free liquids. Tree trimmings, hedge
clippings, and similar materials shall be cut to a length not to exceed four (4)
inches in diameter and eight (8) feet in length before being deposited for
collection. Leaves shall be securely tied in six (6) bushel plastic bags
constructed of 1.5 mil. strength for collection. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-104. Containers--general provisions. (1) Each owner, occupant,
or other responsible person using or occupying any building or other premises
within the City of Newport where refuse accumulates or is likely to accumulate,
shall provide and keep covered a maximum of three (3) refuse containers.
(2) Containers shall be maintained in good and sanitary condition.
Any container not conforming to the requirements of this chapter or having
ragged or sharp edges or any other likely condition to hamper or injure the
person collecting the contents shall be promptly replaced by the owner after
notice by the City of Newport. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-105. Enclosure--solid waste receptacles. (1) All property having
an industrial, commercial or apartment complex dumpster shall provide an
enclosure around all solid waste receptacles for the containment of waste
material, which shall meet the following design standards:
(a) The height of the enclosure shall be a minimum of one (1)
foot above the top of the solid waste receptacle.
(b) The width and depth of the enclosure shall be such as to
provide a two (2) foot space between the solid waste receptacle and the
structure enclosing it.
(c) The enclosure shall be constructed of an opaque material.
Chain link fences shall have opaque strips attached.
(d) The enclosure shall be constructed with a gate which will
provide sufficient access for removal of the solid waste receptacle and for
removal of the solid waste from the receptacle.
17-3
(e) The enclosure shall be located on the property so as to insure
sufficient access and as such that all other city codes are conformed to.
(2) A permit must be obtained from the codes administration officer
prior to location of the solid waste receptacle and construction of said enclosure.
(3) No permit shall be issued by the codes administration officer
without prior approval of the design by the City of Newport Sanitation
Department. The sanitation department shall determine specific site
requirements.
(4) All areas around and in the enclosure shall be maintained and
litter free. Routine cleaning and maintenance is a must.
(5) Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) with each day of
noncompliance constituting a separate violation. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-106. Containers--portable refuse containers. (1) The following
premises shall use portable refuse containers:
(a) Single family dwellings;
(b) Multi-family dwellings containing no more than two (2)
units;
(c) All businesses located in the central business district (C-1
Zone) whose containers are not serviceable by mechanical means.
(d) Any residential or commercial premises, which in the
opinion of the board of mayor and aldermen does not generate a sufficient
amount of refuse to warrant the placement of a commercial refuse
container on site, or does not have a suitable location for placement of a
commercial refuse container on site.
(2) Portable refuse containers shall be constructed of strong and
durable material, rodent and insect proof and not readily corrodible. Such
containers shall have a capacity of not more than thirty-two (32) gallons and not
less than twenty (20) gallons, and when filled, shall weigh not more than
seventy-five (75) pounds. Portable refuse containers shall be equipped with
tight fitting lids or covers to preclude the free access of flies and insects and to
prevent the containers from collecting water during rain or snow. The lids or
covers shall be kept in place at all times except when refuse is being deposited
therein or removed therefrom by the collector. Where alleys are used by the
refuse collectors, containers shall be placed on or within six (6) feet of the alley
line in such a position as not to intrude upon the traveled portion of the alley.
Where streets are used by the refuse collectors, containers shall be placed
adjacent to and back of the curb, or adjacent to and back of the ditch or street
line if there be no curb, at such times as shall be scheduled by the city for the
collection of refuse therefrom. As soon as practicable after such containers have
been emptied they shall be removed by the owner to within, or to the rear of, his
premises and away from the street line until the next scheduled time for
collection. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-4
17-107. Container--commercial refuse containers. All residential,
commercial, and industrial locations, excepting those set out in § 17-106, shall
use commercial refuse containers. Such containers shall be of welded steel
construction suitable for the storage of refuse, and shall be equipped with slots
or other devices capable of being engaged by a refuse truck designed for that
purpose. Commercial refuse containers shall have a maximum capacity of eight
(8) cubic yards. The property owner, lessee, or the user of the container shall
contact the sanitation department and make provisions to have the collection
from the container on such a schedule so that refuse does not accumulate so as
to overflow the confines of the container or restrict the closing of the container
cover. The board of mayor and aldermen shall approve the design, location,
capacity, wind and/or visual barrier, and the number of commercial refuse
containers in use at each site. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-108. Disturbances and unauthorized use of containers. (1) No
unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over or in any
other manner disturb any refuse container belonging to another. All refuse
containers in use on the premises of any commercial establishment shall be used
solely and only by that establishment as a receptacle for its commercial refuse.
No person shall use a commercial establishment's refuse container unless
specifically authorized by the commercial establishment.
(2) The city administrator shall cause to have signs printed stating
that such activity is a violation of this chapter and may be punished by a fifty
dollar ($50.00) fine. Such signs to be placed on containers by the operators of
the business establishment.
(3) It shall also be unlawful to deposit refuse in a public receptacle in
a park, except for a refuse normally generated from picnics and similar activities
carried on in the park. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-109. Collection--general provisions. All refuse accumulated
within the corporate limits shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of under
the supervision of such officer as the board of mayor and aldermen shall
designate. Collections shall be made regularly in accordance with an announced
schedule. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-110. Collection fees. The following fees apply to all refuse
collections provided by the City of Newport:
(1) From those premises using portable refuse containers, as set out
in § 17-106, refuse shall be collected once per week, free of charge.
(2) From those premises using commercial refuse containers, the
refuse from each such container shall be collected times per week free of
charge. Thereafter, any additional collections from such containers, whether
schedule on a regular basis by the owner or as deemed necessary by the board
of mayor and aldermen, shall be subject to a fee of dollars per
17-5
collection. For purposes of determining applicable charges, each container at
each location will be considered separately. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-111. Collection vehicles. All refuse collection vehicles shall utilize
closed beds and such coverings as will effectively prevent the scattering of refuse
over the street or alleys. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-112. Disposal. The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person
in any place, public or private, other than at the site or sites designated for
refuse disposal by the board of mayor and aldermen is expressly prohibited and
subjected to a fine for each separate offense. (Ord. # , May 1992)
17-113. Privately owned dumpsters. (1) It shall be unlawful for any
individual or group of individuals to use privately owned dumpsters for the
purpose of dumping trash, garbage, waste or any other kind of materials or
substances without the express consent of the owners thereof where the owner
or owners have posted a public notice prohibiting the public use of the
dumpsters or containers by the general public. Said notice shall expressly
provide that the dumpster is for the private use of the owner or owners and the
public is prohibited from using it.
(2) Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
(Ord. #94-5, March 1994)
18-1
Charter references 1
Newport Utilities Board: § 1.18.
Sewer charges: § 1.20.
Waterworks and sewers: § 1.19.
Municipal code references
Building, utility and housing codes: title 12.
Refuse disposal: title 17.
Municipal code reference 2
Plumbing code: title 12, chapter 2.
TITLE 18
WATER AND SEWERS1
CHAPTER
1. SEWER USE ORDINANCE.
2. CROSS CONNECTIONS.
CHAPTER 1
SEWER USE ORDINANCE2
SECTION
18-101. Purpose and policy.
18-102. Definitions.
18-103. Use of and connection to public sewers.
18-104. Private domestic wastewater disposal.
18-105. Applications for service--permits.
18-106. Commercial and industrial pretreatment.
18-107. Monitoring, reports, access, and safety.
18-108. Discharge regulations.
18-109. Wastewater charges, fees, and billing.
18-110. Enforcement and abatement.
18-101. Purpose and policy. The sewer use ordinance sets uniform
requirements for discharges into the wastewater collection system and
treatment works and enables the City of Newport, Tennessee to comply with the
provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
PL92-500, the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the applicable effluent limitations,
national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards,
and any other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by state or
federal law and to derive maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and
18-2
quantity of wastewater discharged into the wastewater collection system and
treatment works. This ordinance provides a means for determining wastewater
volumes, constituents and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and
the issuance of permits to certain users. The main purpose of this ordinance is
to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works (hereinafter referred to as POTW) which will interfere with the operation
of the POTW or contaminate the sewage sludge; and to prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the treatment works into
the receiving waters or into the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with
the treatment works. This ordinance provides guidelines for the establishment
of rates and a uniform procedure in the levying of the service and improvement
charges to maintain equity in the billing throughout the service area. The
ordinance establishes pretreatment requirements for industrial waste before
discharge into public sewers as required in title 40, part 403 of the Regulations
of the Environmental Protection Agency (Federal Register, Vol. 43, No. 123) and
any subsequent amendments thereof; establishes control over the contribution
of wastewater which requires greater treatment expenditures than those
necessary for equal volumes of normal domestic wastewater; and provides
measures for the enforcement of its provisions and abatement of violations
thereof. This ordinance shall supersede any other ordinances or portions thereof
which are in conflict with this ordinance. (Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-102. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance the following
phrases and words shall have meaning assigned below, except in those instances
where the content clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) "Act" or "the Act" means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act of 1977.
(2) "Approval authority," means the director in an NPDES state with
an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in
a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment
program.
(3) "BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand)" shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees C, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
(4) "Board." The Newport Utilities Board.
(5) "Building sewer," means the sewer conveying wastewater from the
building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
(6) "Categorical standards." National pretreatment standards.
(7) "City," means the City of Newport, Tennessee, a municipal
corporation.
(8) "Combined sewer" shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff
and sewage.
18-3
(9) "Compatible wastes," biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified
in the publicly-owned treatment works NPDES permit, for which the publiclyowned
treatment works is designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does
remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
(10) "Connection" shall mean any physical tie or hookup made to a
sewer line owned, operated and maintained by the board.
(11) "Control authority." The term "control authority" shall refer to the
"approval authority," defined hereinabove; or the general manager if the city has
an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
(12) "Cooling water" shall mean the water used for heat exchange and
discharged from any system of condensation, air conditioning, cooling,
refrigeration, or other such system, but which has not been in direct contact
with any polluting material.
(13) "Direct discharge." The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Tennessee.
(14) "Domestic use" of the facilities of the wastewater treatment system
shall be defined and limited to single family, multi-family, apartment or other
dwelling unit or dwelling unit equivalent containing sanitary facilities for the
disposal of domestic wastewater and used for residential purposes only.
(15) "Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA," means the agency of
the United States or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation of the administrator or other duly authorized officials of said
agency.
(16) "Extra strength wastewater" shall mean any wastewater that has
any characteristic or combination of characteristics exceeding the characteristics
of normal domestic wastewater and that require effort or expenditure over and
above that required for treatment of normal domestic wastewater.
(17) "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and
commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
(18) "General manager." The General Manager of the Newport Utilities
Board.
(19) "Holding tank waste." Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
(20) "Incompatible wastes," all pollutants other than compatible wastes
defined within.
(21) "Indirect discharge" means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the
Act, (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged
into the system) for treatment before direct discharge to the waters of the state.
18-4
(22) "Industrial user," means a source of indirect discharge which does
not constitute a "discharge or pollutant" under regulation issued pursuant to
section 402 of the Act.
(23) "Industrial wastes" are the liquid wastes, other than domestic
wastewater resulting from processes or operations employed in industrial
commercial establishments.
(24) "Interference," means inhibition or disruption of sewer treatment
system processes or operations or which contribute to the violation of any
requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes presentation of
sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of
the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act
or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by POTW.
(25) "Maximum concentration," a maximum amount of a specified
pollutant into the volume of water or wastewater.
(26) "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES
permit," a permit issued to a POTW pursuant to 402 of the Act.
(27) "National pretreatment standards" or "pretreatment standards,"
means regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial
users and/or this ordinance.
(28) "Natural outlet" shall mean any point of discharge into a water
course, pond, ditch, lake, stream, or other body of surface or ground water.
(29) "New source," any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the publication of proposed regulations prescribed in section 307(c)
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source, if
such standard is thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days
of a proposal and in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated
later than one hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means
any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of
promulgation of the standard.
(30) "Normal domestic wastewater," shall be regarded as normal for the
city, if analyses show daily average concentrations of suspended solids, BOD,
animal and vegetable oil and grease, and ammonia which do not exceed the
limitations on wastewater strength as established herein; and if it contains only
compatible pollutants as defined herein.
(31) "Person" or "owner." Any individual, partnership, co-partnership,
firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
government entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include feminine, the singular should include the plural
where indicated by the context.
18-5
(32) "pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. A pH value indicates the degree of
acidity or alkalinity.
(33) "Pollution." The man-made or man-induced alteration of the of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
(34) "Premises." A parcel of real estate or portion thereof including any
improvements thereon which is determined by the superintendent to be a single
user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for services.
(35) "Pretreatment." The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of the pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties and wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, changes or by other means, except if prohibited by 40 CFR section
403.6(d).
(36) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works" or "POTW," a treatment works
as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned in this instance by the
board. This definition includes any sewer that conveys wastewater to such a
treatment works, that does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to the facility providing treatment.
(37) "Public sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
(38) "Sanitary sewer" is a sewer intended to receive domestic
wastewater and industrial waste, without the admixture of surface water and
stormwater.
(39) "Sanitary wastewater" shall mean wastewater discharging from
the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, including apartment houses and hotels,
office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm and surface water.
(40) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(41) "Significant industrial user" shall mean any industrial user of the
board's wastewater treatment system whose flow exceeds twenty-five thousand
(25,000) gallons per day or whose discharge has a significant impact on the
operation and performance of the POTW.
(42) "Standard Industrial Code (SIC)," a classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
(43) "Storm sewer" or "storm drain" shall mean a pipe or conduit, ditch
or canal which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, cooling water or
other unpolluted water, but excludes wastewater.
(44) "Superintendent." The person designated by the general manager
to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works.
(45) "Suspended solids" shall mean solids that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in wastewater, and which are measurable as
prescribed by "standard methods" and expressed in milligrams per liter.
18-6
(46) "Toxic pollutant," any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator or the Environmental
Protection Agency under provisions 33 USC 1317.
(47) "Treatment works." Any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic wastewater and industrial
wastes of a liquid nature including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, sewer
collection systems, pumping, power or other equipment and appurtenances;
extension, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof;
elements essential to provide reliable recycle supply such as a stand-by
treatment unit and clear well facilities; and any works, including land, that will
be an integral part of a treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of
residues resulting from such treatment; and including combined stormwater and
sanitary sewer systems.
(48) "Twenty-four (24) hour flow of proportional composite sample." A
sample consisting of several effluent proportions collected during a twenty-four
(24) hour period in which the portions of a sample are proportional to the flow
and combined to form a representative sample.
(49) "Unpolluted water." Water to which no constituent has been
added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water
unacceptable to the State of Tennessee or the Environmental Protection Agency
having jurisdiction thereof for disposal to storm or natural drainage, or directly
to surface waters.
(50) "User," shall mean any occupied property or premise having a
connection to the sewer system or having access thereto.
(51) "Waste," includes sewage and any and all other waste substances,
liquid, solid, or gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, of
human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing
operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers or
whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.
(52) "Wastewater" shall mean the water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, singular or in
any combination, together with such ground, surface and storm water as may
be present.
(53) "Wastewater constituents and characteristics." The individual
chemical, physical, bacteriological, and radiological parameters, including
volume and flow rate and such other parameters as served to define, classify or
measure the contents, quantity, quality and strength of wastewater.
(54) Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-103. Use of and connection to public sewers. (1) Requirements.
18-7
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the service area
of the board, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable
waste; and it shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
service area of the board any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this ordinance. Except
as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
(2) Availability. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used
for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within
the service area and abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities, therein, and a direct
connection to the public sewer shall be made within thirty (30) days after date
of official notice to do so, provided the sewer is available. The sewer should be
considered available where the first floor of the building above or on ground
level can be served in accordance with the board's rules and regulations and
general practice. Where a sewer is available, it will be presumed that the
wastewater from the premises is discharged either directly or indirectly into the
sewer, and the property shall be billed for sewerage service. However, if the
making of connection is delayed, the property shall be subject to such charges
thirty (30) days after the sewer is accepted by the treatment works. Any septic
tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be
abandoned. An extension of time may be granted by the general manager for
cause.
(3) Connection to public sewer. (a) No unauthorized person shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenance therefore without first obtaining a
written permit from the general manager.
(b) A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear
of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard,
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended
to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
(c) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the rules and regulations the board may establish and
the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and
WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight. Any deviations from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the general manager before
installation.
18-8
(d) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the board. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice
No. 9 shall apply.
(e) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.
(f) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundations, drains, areaway drains, basement drains or other
sources of surface runoff groundwater to a building sewer which in turn
is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(g) All costs and expense incident to the installation, connection,
and inspection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The
owner shall indemnify the board from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
(4) Inspection of connections. The sewer connection and all sewer
laterals from the building to the sewer main line shall be inspected by an
inspector of the board before any underground portion is covered.
(5) Use and maintenance of building sewers. Building sewers that
have been previously used but have been abandoned due to the razing of the
building structure may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this ordinance. All others may be sealed to the specifications
of the board. Each individual property owner or user of the POTW shall be
entirely responsible for the maintenance of the building sewer located on private
property. This maintenance will include repair or replacement of the service
line as deemed necessary by the superintendent to meet specifications of the
board.
(6) Private wastewater disposal. Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this ordinance and
requirements of the Cocke County Health Department.
(7) Interruption of service. The board shall not be liable for any
damage resulting from failure or overflow of any sewer main, service pipes or
valves, or by discontinuing the operation of its wastewater collections, treatment
and disposal facilities for repair, extensions, or connections or from the
accidental failure of the wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities
18-9
from any cause whatsoever. In cases of emergency the board shall have the
right to restrict the use of its wastewater collection, treatment and disposal
facilities in any reasonable manner for the protection of the board and the
treatment works.
(8) Discontinuance of service and refusal to connect service. The board
shall, after written notice, and allowance of a reasonable time for remedial
action, have the right to discontinue service or to refuse to render service for a
violation of, or a failure to comply with, this ordinance, the rules and
regulations, the customer's application and agreement for service, or the
payment of any obligation due to the board. Such right to discontinue service
shall apply to all service received through a single tap or service, even though
more than one (1) customer or tenant is furnished service therefrom, and even
though the delinquency or violation is limited to only one such customer or
tenant. Discontinuance of service by the board for any causes stated in this
ordinance shall not release the customer from liability for service already
received or from liability for payments that thereafter become due under the
minimum bill provisions or other provisions of the customer's agreement. The
board shall have the right to refuse to render service to any applicant whenever
the applicant or any member of the household, apartment or dwelling unit to
which such service is to be furnished, is in default in the payment of any
obligation to the board or has heretofore had his service disconnected because
of a violation of this ordinance or the rules and regulations of the board.
(Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-104. Private domestic wastewater disposal. (1) Availability.
Within the service area of the board where a public sanitary sewer is available
under the provisions of this ordinance, the building sewer or sewer service the
premises shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying
with the provisions of this section.
(2) Requirements. (a) Within the service area of the board, septic
tanks and disposal fields are constructed or reconstructed only in
locations which have been approved by the board. The discharge from the
septic tank shall be disposed of in such manner that it shall not create a
nuisance on the surface of the ground, nor be permitted to discharge to
any natural outlets, or pollute the underground water supply.
(b) When a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer within ninety (90) days in compliance with this
ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material. In areas outside of the board's service area, septic tank and
disposal field systems shall be subject to rules and regulations of the
Cocke County Health Department.
18-10
(c) Plans and specifications for all private wastewater disposal
systems other than septic tanks and drainfields must be submitted to the
board for review and written approval by the general manager. The type,
capacity, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system
shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Department of
Environment and Conservation of the State of Tennessee. Any private
wastewater disposal system which discharges directly to any natural
outlet shall be subject to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System of the federal government.
(3) Wastewater disposal services. (a) Permit. No person, firm,
association, or corporation shall clean out, drain or flush any septic tank
or any other type of wastewater or excreta disposal system into the
POTW unless such person, firm, association or corporation obtains a
permit from the board to perform such acts or services. Any person, firm,
association or corporation desiring a permit to perform such services shall
file an application on the prescribed form. Upon any such application,
said permit shall be issued by the board when the conditions of this
ordinance have been met and providing the general manager is satisfied
the applicant has adequate and proper equipment to perform the services
contemplated in a safe and competent manner.
(b) Fees. For each permit issued under the provisions of this
ordinance, an annual service charge therefore shall be paid to the board
to be set as specified in § 18-109. Any such permit granted shall be for
one (1) full fiscal year or fraction of the fiscal year, and shall continue in
full force and effect from the time issued until the ending of the fiscal
year unless sooner revoked, and shall be nontransferable. The number
of the permit granted hereunder shall be plainly painted on each side of
each motor vehicle used in the conduct of the business permitted
hereunder.
(c) Designated disposal locations. The general manager or his
representative shall designate approved locations for the emptying and
cleansing of all equipment used in the performance of the services
rendered under the permit herein provided for, and it shall be a violation
hereof for any person, firm, association or corporation to empty or clean
such equipment at any place other than a place so designated.
(d) Revocation of permit. Failure to comply with all the
provisions of this ordinance shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of
such permit by the board. The possession within the board's service area
by any person of any motor vehicle equipped with a body type and
accessories of a nature and design capable of serving as a septic tank or
wastewater or excreta disposal system cleaning unit shall be prima facie
evidence that such person is engaged in the business of cleaning,
draining, or flushing septic tanks or other wastewater or excreta disposal
systems within the board's service area. (Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-11
18-105. Applications for service--permits. (1) Domestic use and
commercial use. A formal application for either original or additional service
must be made at the office of the general manager and be duly approved before
connection is made. The receipt by the board of a prospective customer's
application for service shall not obligate the board to render the service. If the
service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with this ordinance and the
board's rules and regulations and general practice, the connection charge will
be refunded in full, and there shall be no liability of the board to the applicant
for such service, except that conditional waivers for additional services may be
granted by the general manager for interim periods if compliance may be
assured within a reasonable period of time.
(2) Industrial use. (a) Application. An application for original,
additional, or continuation of service must be made at the office of the
general manager, and must be duly approved before connection is made.
The application shall be in the prescribed form of the board and shall
include to the extent reasonably available the estimated pH,
temperature, volume and concentration of BOD, COD, suspended solids,
grease, toxic substances and/or metals together with a drawing to
approximate scale showing plan of property, water distribution system
and sewer layout indicating existing and proposed pretreatment and/or
equalization facilities. The receipt by the board of a prospective
customer's application for service shall not obligate the board to render
the service. If the service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance
with this ordinance or the board's rules and regulations and general
practice, the application shall be rejected and there shall be no liability
of the board to the applicant of such service.
(b) Confidential information. All information and data on a
user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits
and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the
public or any other governmental agency without restriction unless the
user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the general manager that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes, or methods which would be detrimental
to the user's competitive position.
When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available to governmental agencies for use in making studies; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the
state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
Information accepted by the board, general manager, or
superintendent as confidential shall not be transmitted to any
18-12
governmental agency or to the general public by the board, general
manager, or superintendent until and unless prior and adequate
notification is given to the user.
(3) Industrial discharge permit. (a) Wastewater discharge permits
required. All industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge into
any part of the wastewater treatment system must first apply for a
discharge permit therefore. All existing industrial users connected to or
discharging to any part of the board's system must obtain a wastewater
discharge permit within ninety (90) days from and after the effective date
of this ordinance.
(b) Permit application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge
permit shall complete and file with the general manager, an application
in the form prescribed by the board, and accompanied by the applicable
fee. In support of this application, the user shall submit the following
information:
(i) Name, address, and SIC number of applicant;
(ii) Volume of wastewater to be discharged;
(iii) Wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(iv) Time and duration of discharge;
(v) Average and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
(vi) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation.
(vii) Description and quantities of all materials on the
premises which are, or could be, discharged.
(viii) Any other information as may be deemed by the
superintendent to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
The general manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the board may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms
and conditions provided herein.
(c) Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions by the board. The conditions of
wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance
with this ordinance, and applicable state and federal regulations. Permit
conditions will include the following:
(i) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees
for the wastewater to be discharged to the system.
(ii) The average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(iii) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements
for flow regulation and equalization.
18-13
(iv) Requirements for installation of monitoring facilities,
including flow monitoring and sampling equipment.
(v) Requirements for maintaining and submitting
technical reports and plant records relating to wastewater
discharges.
(vi) Daily average and daily maximum of discharge rates,
or other appropriate conditions when pollutants subject to
limitations and prohibitions are proposed or present in the user's
wastewater discharge.
(vii) Compliance schedules.
(viii) Other conditions to ensure compliance with this
ordinance.
(d) Duration of permit. Permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a
period of less than one (1) year, or may be stated to expire on a specific
date. If the user is not notified by the general manager thirty (30) days
prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall automatically be
extended for six (6) months. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification and change by the board during the life of the
permit, as limitations or requirements are modified and changed. The
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least
thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
(e) Transfer of a permit. Wastewater discharge permits are
issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises, or a new or changed operation.
(f) Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following
conditions of his permit or of this ordinance, or applicable state and
federal regulations, is subject to having the permit revoked. Violations
subjecting a user to possible revocation of permit include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(i) Intentional failure of a user to accurately report the
wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
(ii) Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater characteristics;
(iii) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
(iv) Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to
disclose fully all relevant facts; or
(v) Violation of conditions of the permit.
(4) Incomplete applications. The board will act only on applications
containing all the information required in this section. Persons who have filed
18-14
incomplete applications will be notified by the general manger that the
application is deficient and the nature of such deficiency and will be given thirty
(30) days to correct the deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected within thirty
(30) days or within such extended period as allowed by the general manager, the
general manager shall submit the application to the board with a
recommendation that it be denied and notify the applicant in writing of such
action. (Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-106. Commercial and industrial pretreatment. (1) Criteria for
pretreatment. Any wastewater discharge from a commercial or industrial user
of the wastewater treatment system whose discharge violates the provisions set
out in the prohibited wastewater discharges or the restricted wastewater
discharges of this ordinance shall pretreat at the point of origin in a private
wastewater treatment plant provided, maintained, and operated by the
discharger.
Any commercial or industrial wastewater discharge exceeding only the
limitations on wastewater strength provision of this ordinance may be
pretreated at the point of origin in a private wastewater treatment plant
provided, maintained, and operated by the discharger.
(2) Pretreatment facilities. (a) Design and construction. All
commercial or industrial users of the wastewater treatment works who
elect or are required to construct new or additional facilities for
pretreatment, shall submit plans, engineering reports and studies,
specifications, and other pertinent information relative to the proposed
construction to the general manager for review and approval. Plans and
specifications submitted for approval must bear the seal of a professional
engineer registered to practice engineering in the State of Tennessee.
Written approval of the general manager must be obtained before
construction of new or additional facilities may begin. The plans,
specifications, and other pertinent information submitted to the board for
approval will be retained as file material for future reference with one
approved copy returned to the user.
(b) Compliance schedule. In the event new additional
pretreatment facilities for existing sources are required under the
provisions of this ordinance, the users shall have two (2) years within
which to install and place such facilities into operation but during said
two (2) year period, shall submit written progress reports to the general
manager not less often than each six (6) months. In the event users are
making a good faith effort to comply but are prevented from compliance
due to the complexities of a given situation or other circumstances beyond
the user's control, this time may be extended by the general manager for
a period of time not exceeding the time limits imposed by federal
pretreatment regulations.
18-15
(c) Inspection of facilities. A permit for the operation of a new
or existing pretreatment or equalization system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the general
manager and written approval for operation is issued to the owner by the
general manager. The general manager or his representative shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any state of construction, and in any event,
the applicant for the permit shall notify the general manager when the
work is ready for final inspection. In addition, the general manager or
his representative shall be allowed to make periodic inspections of the
facilities in operation as he deems necessary.
The general manager or his representative may inspect the
facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this ordinance
is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall
allow the general manager or his representatives ready access at all
reasonable times to parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection
or sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The general
manager shall have the right to set up or the user's property such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. If the user
is found to be in violation of his discharge permit, then such user shall be
financially responsible and shall pay for any and all damages, including
sampling and analytical costs.
(d) Maintenance of facilities. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to maintain all wastewater treatment or equalization facilities in
good working order at all times. The board must be notified in writing
when pretreatment facilities will not be or are not operative by reason of
equipment malfunction, emergency or routine maintenance, or any
reason whatever. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to repair and
maintain all pretreatment facilities on a high priority basis. (Ord. # ,
Oct. 1980)
18-107. Monitoring, reports, access, and safety. (1) Monitoring
facilities. All users who propose to discharge wastewater with constituents and
characteristics different from normal domestic wastewater shall be required to
install a monitoring facility. Monitoring facility shall be a manhole or other
suitable facility approved by the general manager.
When, in the judgment of the general manager, there is a significant
difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by different
operations of a single user, the general manager may require that separate
monitoring facilities be installed for each separate source of discharge.
Monitoring facilities that are required to be installed shall be constructed
and maintained at the user's expense. The purpose of the facility is to enable
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of wastewater produced by a user.
If sampling or metering equipment is also required by the general manager, it
18-16
shall be provided and installed at the user's expense. However, such sampling
and metering equipment shall be required only after sampling and metering by
the general manager establishes the existence of significant variations in
concentrations or constituents of the user's discharge. Monitoring facility
operation maintenance, sampling, and testing performed by the general
manager shall be at the user's expense. Wastewater samples will be made
available to the industry if requested.
The monitoring facility will normally be required to be located on the
user's premises outside of the building. The general manager may, however,
when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user,
allow the facility to be constructed in the public street right-of-way with the
approval of the public agency having jurisdiction of that right-of-way and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall be
accommodations to allow safe and immediate access for the board's personnel.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the board's requirements and
all applicable local agency construction standards and specifications. When, in
the judgment of the general manager, an existing user requires monitoring
facility, the user will be so notified in writing. Construction must be completed
within one hundred eighty (180) days following written notification unless an
extension is granted by the general manager.
(2) Reports. Any industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard,
in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, after the compliance date of
such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencing
the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the general manager during the
months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the general manager, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited to such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record by all
daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow.
At the discretion of the general manager and in consideration of such factors as
local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc. the general manager
may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted.
The general manager may impose mass limitations on industrial users
who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by the above paragraph shall
indicate mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent
of the industrial user.
The reports required in this section shall contain the results of sampling
and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration of production and mass limits where requested by the general
18-17
manager of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the
applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the Environmental Protection Agency
under the provisions of section 304(h) of the Act [33 USC 1314 (h)] and
contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test
procedures approved by the Environmental Protection Agency, or the board.
(3) Maintenance of records. Any industrial user subject to the
reporting requirements established by this section shall maintain records of all
information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this section.
Such records shall include for all samples:
(a) The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the
names of persons taking the samples;
(b) The dates analyses were performed;
(c) Who performed the analyses;
(d) The analytical techniques/methods used; and
(e) The results of such analyses.
Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirement established in
this section shall be required to retain for a minimum of three (3) years any
records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring
activities are required by this section) and shall make such records available for
inspection and copying by the general manager, or his representative, Director
of the Division of Water Quality Control Tennessee Department of Environment
and Conservation, or the Environmental Protection Agency. This period of
retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
regarding the industrial user or when requested by the general manager, the
director, or the Environmental Protection Agency.
(4) Entry on private property. The general manager or his
representative bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The
general manager or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or
other industrial beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
sources of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
(5) Safety. While performing the necessary work on private properties,
the general manager or his representative shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall
be held harmless for injury or death to the board's employees and the board
shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the
board's employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury
or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
monitoring and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
18-18
(6) Easement. The general manager or his representative bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the board holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of the portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved. (Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-108. Discharge regulations. (1) Applicability. All users of the
facilities of the POTW shall comply with the board's regulations and restrictions
before discharging or causing to be discharged any wastewater to the public
sewer system. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods."
(2) Prohibited wastewater discharges. No person shall discharge or
deposit or cause or allow to be discharged or deposited into the wastewater
treatment system any wastewater which contains the following:
(a) Any water or wastes having explosive properties, containing
toxic or poisonous substances, or noxious or malodorous gas, which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of causing an
obstruction, or which may in any other way cause any interference with
the proper operation of the POTW.
(b) Any polluted water including, but not limited to, water from
cooling systems or of stormwater origin, which will increase the hydraulic
load of the treatment system.
(c) Wastes with objectionable color not removable by the
treatment process.
(d) Oil and grease if concentration and dispersion results in
separation and adherence to sewer structures and appurtenances in
excess of normal domestic wastewater.
(e) Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity to the
POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities
that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds 40o
Centigrade (104 Fahrenheit). Unless a higher temperature is allowed in o
the user's wastewater discharge permit, no user shall discharge into any
sewer line or other appurtenance of the POTW wastewater with a
temperature exceeding 65.5 Centigrade (150 Fahrenheit). o o
(f) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of POTW.
(g) No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged any
radioactive waste into a public sewer except:
18-19
(i) When the person is authorized to use radioactive
materials by the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation or the Nuclear Regulatory Commission;
(ii) When the waste is discharged in strict conformity
with applicable laws and regulations of the aforementioned
agencies, or any other agency having jurisdiction; and
(iii) When a copy of permits received from said regulatory
agencies having been filed with the general manager.
(h) Wastewater at a flow rate or containing such concentration
or quantities of pollutants that exceeds for any time period longer than
fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24)
hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation and that
would cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment
efficiency.
(i) Garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow
conditions normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle
greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
(j) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which cause
obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other interference with the
operation of or which cause injury to the POTW, including waxy or other
materials which tend to coat and clog a sewer line or other appurtenances
thereto.
(3) Restricted wastewater discharges. Standards for restricted
wastewater discharges shall be adopted by the board which will enable it to
comply with the Act and its amendments. As a minimum, pretreatment
standards shall be adopted for the parameters listed in the following table.
No person or user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the
pretreatment standards for restricted discharges established by the board,
unless an exception is permitted as provided by this ordinance. Dilution of any
wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of the board
shall be considered in violation of this ordinance.
Parameter
Antimony
Arsenic
Cadmium
Chromium (total)
Copper
Cyanide
Lead
Mercury
Nickle
Selenium
18-20
Silver
Surfactants, as MBAS
Zinc
Phenols
(4) Protection of treatment plant influent. The general manager shall
initiate technical studies to establish protection criteria for the POTW influent,
in terms of maximum allowable concentrations of the parameters listed in the
table (and other parameters applicable) to prevent interference with and
inhibition of the treatment process including sludge disposal and to prevent
violation of the NPDES permit for the POTW.
A schedule of protection criteria for the parameters listed shall be adopted
by the board. Industrial users shall be subject to reporting and monitoring
requirements regarding these parameters as set forth in this ordinance. In the
event that the influent at the POTW reaches or exceeds protection criteria
established by the board, the general manager shall initiate additional technical
studies to determine the cause of the POTW influent violation and shall
recommend to the board the necessary remedial measures; including, but not
limited to, recommending the establishment of new or revised pretreatment
standards for these parameters. The general manager shall also recommend
changes to the board to any of these criteria in the event that: the POTW
effluent standards are changed, there are changes to any applicable law or
regulation affecting same, or changes are needed for more effective operation of
the POTW.
Parameter
Boron
Cadmium
Chromium (total)
Chromium (hexavalent)
Copper
Cyanide
Lead
Nickel
Zinc
(5) Right to establish more restrictive criteria. No statement in this
ordinance is intended or may be construed to prohibit the board from
establishing specific wastewater discharge criteria to be more restrictive where
wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the facilities of the POTW
or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge of the POTW to violate
effluent or stream quality standards, or interfere with the use or handling of
sludge, or to pass through the POTW resulting in a violation of the NPDES
permit, or to exceed industrial pretreatment standards for discharge to
18-21
municipal wastewater treatment systems as imposed or as may be imposed by
the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation and/or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
(6) Special agreements. Nothing in this section shall be construed so
as to prevent any special agreement or arrangement between the board and any
user of the wastewater treatment system whereby wastewater of unusual
strength or character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject
to any payments or user charges as may be applicable. The making of such
special agreements or arrangements between the board and the user shall be
strictly limited to the capability of the POTW to handle such wastes without
interfering with unfit operations or sludge use and handling or allowing the pass
through of pollutants which would result in a violation of the NPDES permit.
(7) Limitations on wastewater strength. It is the intent of this
ordinance to regulate all discharges of compatible wastes in excess of normal
domestic wastewater, the major parameters as determined by twenty-four (24)
hour composite samples, shall be as follows:
Pollutant
Daily Average
Concentration (mg/l)
BOD 250
SS 250
Oil and Grease 100
Ammonia 30
(8) Exceptions to discharge criteria. (a) Application for exception.
Non-residential users of the POTW may apply for a temporary exception
to the prohibited and restricted wastewater discharge criteria listed in
§§ 18-108(2) and (3) of this chapter. Exceptions can be granted according
to the following guidelines subject to the appeals procedure provided in
§ 18-110.
The general manager shall allow applications for temporary
exception at any time. However, the general manager shall not accept an
application that the applicant has submitted the same or substantially
similar application within the preceding year and the same has been
denied by the board.
All applications for an exception shall be in writing, and shall
contain sufficient information for evaluation of each of the factors to be
considered by the board in its review of the application.
(b) Conditions. All exceptions granted under this subsection
shall be temporary and subject to revocation at any time by the general
manager upon reasonable notice.
The user requesting the exception must demonstrate to the general
manager that the user is making a concentrated and serious effort to
maintain his standards of operation control, housekeeping levels, etc. so
18-22
that discharges to the POTW are being minimized. If negligence is found,
permits will be subject to termination. The user requesting the exception
must demonstrate that compliance with stated concentration and
quantity standards is technically or economically infeasible and the
discharge, if exempted, will not:
(i) Interfere with the normal collection and operation of
the wastewater treatment system;
(ii) Limit the sludge management alternatives available
and increase the chance of providing adequate sludge
management.
(iii) Pass through the POTW in quantities and/or
concentrations that would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit.
The user must show that the exception, if granted, will cause the
discharger to violate its in-force federal pretreatment standards unless
exception is granted under the provisions of the applicable pretreatment
regulations.
A surcharge shall be applied to any exception granted under this
subsection. These surcharges shall be applied for that concentration of
pollutant for which the variance has been granted in excess of the
concentration stipulated in this ordinance based on the average daily flow
of the user.
At such time that the levels of pollutants must be reduced because
of violations of any of the provisions in this section, the following methods
shall be used to reduce the discharge levels: All users shall be required
to reduce their discharge levels by a sufficient amount to meet the
standards being violated. Users shall be required to reduce their
discharge levels proportion to their contribution to the system.
(c) Review of application by the general manager. All
applications for an exception shall be reviewed by the general manager.
If the application does not contain sufficient information for complete
evaluation, the general manager shall notify the applicant of the
deficiencies and request additional information. The applicant shall have
thirty (30) days following notification by the general manager to correct
such deficiencies. This thirty (30) day period may be extended by the
general manager upon application and for just cause shown. Upon
receipt complete application, the general manager shall evaluate same
within this thirty (30) days and shall submit his recommendations to the
board at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(d) Review of application by the board. The board shall review
and evaluate all applications for exceptions and shall take into account
the following factors:
(i) Whether or not the applicant is subject to a National
Pretreatment Standard containing discharge limitations more
18-23
stringent than those in § 18-108 of this chapter and grant an
exception only if such exception may be granted within limitations
of applicable federal regulations.
(ii) Whether or not the exception would apply to
discharge of a substance classified as a toxic substance under
regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency
under the provisions of section 307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317),
and then grant an exception only if such exception may be granted
with the limitations of applicable federal regulations;
(iii) Whether or not the granting of an exception would
create conditions that would reduce the effectiveness of the
treatment works taking into consideration the concentration of
said pollutant in the treatment works' influent and the design
capability of the treatment works;
(iv) The cost of pretreatment or other types of control
techniques which would be necessary for the user to achieve
effluent reduction, but prohibitive and alone shall not be the basis
for granting an exception;
(v) The age of equipment and industrial facilities
involved to the extent that such factors affect the quality or
quantity of wastewater discharge;
(vi) The process employed by the user and process
changes available which would affect the quality or quantity of
wastewater discharge;
(vii) The engineering aspects of various types of
pretreatment or other control techniques available to the user to
improve the quality or quantity of wastewater discharge.
(9) Relaxation of discharge criteria. The general manager shall, to the
maximum extent feasible, recommend to the board a relaxation of criteria
established in this ordinance in the event that the POTW effluent standards are
changed or if the POTW removals are such that a relaxation will not cause
violation of the effluent standards.
(10) Accidental discharges. (a) Protection from accidental discharge.
All industrial users shall provide such facilities and institute such
procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the
potential for accidental discharge into the POTW of waste regulated by
this ordinance from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and
rail car loading and unloading areas, from inplant transfer or processing
and materials handling areas, and from diked areas or holding ponds of
any waste regulated by this chapter. The wastewater discharge permit
of any user who has a history of significant leaks, spills, or other
accidental discharge of waste regulated by this ordinance shall be subject
on a case-by-case basis to a special permit condition or requirement for
the construction of facilities or establishment of procedures which will
18-24
prevent or minimize the potential for such accidental discharge.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing
the facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the general
manager for review, and shall be approved by the general manager before
construction of the facility.
The review and approval of such plans and operating procedures
will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of
this ordinance.
(b) Notification of accidental discharge. Any person causing or
suffering from any accidental discharge shall immediately notify the
general manager or his representative by telephone and enable
countermeasures to be taken by the superintendent to minimize damage
to the POTW, the health and welfare of the public, and the environment.
This notification shall be followed, within five (5) days of the date
of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the cause of the
accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future
occurrence.
Such notification will not relieve the user of liability for any
expected loss, or damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any
fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this
ordinance or state or federal law.
(c) Notice to employees. In order that employees of users be
informed of the board's requirements, users shall make available to their
employees copies of this ordinance together with such other wastewater
information and notices which may be furnished by the board from time
to time directed toward more effective pollution control. A notice shall be
furnished and permanently posted on the user's bulletin board advising
employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of
this ordinance.
(d) Preventive measures. Any direct or indirect connection or
entry point for persistent or deleterious wastes to the user's plumbing or
drainage system shall be eliminated. (Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-109. Wastewater charges, fees, and billing. (1) Purpose of charges
and fees. A schedule of charges and fees shall be adopted by the board which
will enable it to comply with the revenue requirements of the Act and its
amendments. Charges and fees shall be determined in a manner consistent
with regulations of the Act and policies of the board to insure that sufficient
revenues are collected to defray the board's cost of operating and maintaining
adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide sufficient
18-25
funds for capital outlay, bond service costs, capital improvements, depreciation,
and equitable industrial cost recovery of EPA administered federal grants.
(2) Classification of users. All users are to be classified by the board
either by assigning each one to a "user classification" category according to the
principal activity conducted on the user's premises, by individual user
analyzation, or by a combination thereof. The purpose of such collective and/or
individual classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharges
based on wastewater constituents and characteristics, to provide an effective
means of source control, and to establish a system of charges and fees which will
insure an equitable recovery of the board's cost.
(3) Types of charges and fees. The charges and fees as established in
the board's schedule of charges and fees, may include, but not be limited to:
(a) User classification charges;
(b) Fees for monitoring, maintenance, and analysis;
(c) Fees for permits;
(d) Surcharge fees;
(e) Industrial cost recovery charge;
(f) Local capital recovery charges;
(g) Discharge permit fees.
(4) Charges and billing. (a) Wastewater service charge. The
wastewater service charge for normal domestic wastewater is based on
the water discharged to the POTW as measured by the public water
supply meter, or meters, and/or by any supplementary meter, or meters,
necessary to measure the amount of water discharged. The basic
wastewater service charge shall be determined upon the metered flow
and the schedule of charges and fees adopted by the board.
(b) Extra strength surcharge. Users who discharge or cause to
be discharged extra strength wastes to the sewer system in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance without appropriate permit
therefore will be subject to surcharges to compensate the POTW for above
normal operating and maintenance expense incurred in treating and
disposing of the discharge with credit for any reduced operating cost as
a result of the constituents or characteristics discharged by the user. The
surcharge for extra strength wastes will be assessed in accordance with
the schedule of charges and fees adopted by the board. Users who
discharge extra strength wastes without a permit shall be subject to the
provisions of § 18-112(8) of this chapter.
(c) Sampling, flow monitoring, and analysis. Users who are
required by the general manager to have sampling and fee monitoring
devices installed (temporary or permanent) shall, if applicable be charged
to compensate the board for operating and maintaining equipment and
for performing analytical tests on their discharge.
(d) Industrial cost recovery charges. All nongovernmental users
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office
18-26
of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under
Division A (agriculture, forestry and fishing), Division B (mining),
Division D (manufacturing), Division E (transportation, communications,
electric gas, and sanitary services), and Division I (services), which
discharge to the sanitary sewers wastes other than domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences shall be assessed a federal industrial
cost recovery charge in connection with federally funded projects as
required in title 40, part 35 of the U.S. EPA regulations, based on a
schedule of charges and fees which shall be adopted by the board. The
federal ICR charge will not be assessed until required by applicable
federal regulations.
(e) Local capital recovery charges. All such users identified in
subsection (4)(d) of this section shall also be assessed a local capital
recovery charge in connection with both federally funded and nonfederally
funded projects. The local capital recovery charges shall be
based on a schedule of charges and fees which shall be adopted by the
board to recover the portion of the project capital cost applicable to each
such user.
(f) Billing. The billing for normal domestic wastewater shall
consist of a minimum wastewater service charge with rates as specified
by the board, subject to net and gross rates. Wastewater discharges with
above normal strength characteristics will be subject to an extra strength
surcharge in addition the wastewater service charge. In addition, certain
industrial users will be liable for payment of industrial cost recovery,
sampling, flow monitoring, and analysis charges, and other charges as
applicable.
(i) Minimum charges. The minimum charge for sewer
service will be stated in the schedule of rates and charges as
established by the board.
(ii) Estimated billing. If a meter fails to register
properly, or if a meter is removed to be tested or repaired, or if
water is received other than through a meter the board reserves
the right to render an estimated bill based on the best information
available. The board also reserves the right to require metering of
any water discharged into the sewer system.
(iii) Supplemental water supply. In the event that any
customer uses water from a source other than the public water
supply and discharges the wastewater into the POTW, the
customer must install or have installed according to the board's
specifications and maintain a supplementary meter to measure the
amount of water so used and the amounts so used shall be
computed in determining the wastewater service charge.
(iv) Adjustments and correction of errors. Adjustments to
billing for over or under registration of meters, for leaks, for the
18-27
determination of water use by consumers when meters have been
inoperative, for an obviously incorrect meter reading, or for other
recognized and proper adjustments as are granted to water
consumers by the board will be accepted by the board and such
adjustments for water use shall be applied in obtaining the
indicated adjusted billing of sewer charges. All other requests for
adjustments of sewer charges made to the board shall be referred
to the general manager who will handle such complaints. Any
adjustments or decision thus authorized by the general manager
shall be made to the customer affected thereby.
(v) Exemptions. Claims for exemption from the sewer
service charge because of nonavailability of sewers may be made
to the general manager. Exemptions from the charge will
retroactive to the commencement date of the sewer service charge.
(5) Computation and assessments. The computation of and
assessment of surcharges, monitoring charges, maintenance charges and testing
or analysis charges shall be subject to the appeals procedure provided in this
ordinance. (Ord. # , Oct. 1980)
18-110. Enforcement and abatement. (1) Issuance of cease and desist
orders. When the general manager finds that a discharge of wastewater has
taken place in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this ordinance, or the
provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the general manager shall issue
an order to cease and desist, and direct that these persons not complying with
such prohibitions, limits, requirements, or provisions to:
(a) Comply forthwith;
(b) Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the
superintendent; or
(c) Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event
of a threatened violation;
(d) Surrender his applicable user's permit if ordered to do so
after a show cause hearing.
(2) Submission of time schedule. When the general manager finds that
a discharge of wastewater has been taking place, in violation of prohibitions or
limitations prescribed in this ordinance, or wastewater source control
requirements, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the provisions
of a wastewater discharge permit, the general manager shall require the user
to submit for approval, with such modifications as it deems necessary, a detailed
time schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to prevent or
correct a violation of requirements.
(3) Hearings/appeals. (a) Except in those emergency situations as
provided for in subsection (9) of this section the general manager shall
afford any user an opportunity for a hearing and shall provide not less
18-28
than forty-eight (48) hours notice thereof, before terminating service for
any reason other than nonpayment.
(b) Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any
decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders,
made by the general manager interpreting or implementing the
provisions of this ordinance or in the granting or refusing of any permit
issued hereunder, a file with the general manager a written request for
reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action, or
determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's
request for reconsideration. The general manager's decision, action, or
determination shall remain in full force and effect during such period of
reconsideration and during the appeal therefrom unless modified or
suspended by the city.
(c) If the ruling made by the general manager is unsatisfactory
to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten (10) days
after notification of the action, file a written appeal to the city. The
written appeal shall be heard within thirty (30) days from the date of
filing. The board shall make a final decision on the appeal within thirty
(30) days of the close of the meeting. The decision, action, or
determination of the board shall remain in effect during the pendency of
any appeal to the courts unless the same is modified or suspended by a
court of competent jurisdiction after notice and any evidentiary hearing.
(4) Notice to user. Notice of a discharge in violation of this ordinance
shall be served on the owner, user, and/or permit holder by certified mail, return
receipt requested, as well as and in addition to any other means of
communication that the board has available to notify the party of said violation
and the need for corrective action.
(5) Public nuisance. Discharges of wastewater in any manner in
violation of this ordinance or of any order issued by the general manager as
authorized by this ordinance is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
corrected or abated as directed by the general manager. Any person creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city codes or ordinances
governing such nuisance.
(6) Correction of violation and collection of costs. In order to enforce
the provisions of this ordinance, the general manager shall correct any violation
hereof. The cost of such correction shall be added to any sewer service charge
payable by the person violating the ordinance or the owner or tenant of the
property upon which the violation occurred, and the board shall have such
remedies for the collection of such costs as it has for the collection of sewer
service charges.
(7) Damage to facilities. When a discharge of wastes causes an
obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to facilities, the general manager
shall assess a charge against the user for the work required to clean or repair
the facility and add such charge to the user's sewer service charge.
18-29
(8) Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of
the provisions of this ordinance or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a
condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance, the general manager may
petition the circuit or chancery court for the issuance of a preliminary or
permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the
continuance of such discharge.
(9) Termination of service. In order to effect its powers, the general
manager or his representative may enter upon private property for the purpose
of inspection and maintenance of sanitary and waste disposal facilities and may
terminate service to property in which a violation of any rule or regulation of
this ordinance is found to exist.
Prior to termination of service, however, the general manager shall notify,
in writing, the owner and tenant, if any, of such property that service is
intended to be so terminated and conduct a hearing thereon as herein provided.
In the event of an emergency that, in the opinion of the general manager,
threatens harm to the facilities or endangers the public health, the general
manager shall notify the owner and/or tenant and immediately take action to
terminate service to the property. In such cases, a hearing shall be held with
the general manager on said termination within twenty-four (24) hours to allow
the user an opportunity to demonstrate to the general manager that the
emergency situation has been abated or corrected and that the danger to the
facilities or public health no longer exists.
(10) Civil liabilities. Any person or user who intentionally or
negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, requirements or conditions
set forth in permit duly issued, or who discharges wastewater which causes
pollution or violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation,
national standard of performance, pretreatment or toxicity standard, shall be
liable civilly. Said civil liability may be in a sum of not to exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) for each day in which such violation occurs.
The general manager may petition the circuit or chancery court to impose,
assess, and recover such sums. In determining such amount, the court shall
take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the nature and persistence of the
violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs, and the corrective
action, if any.
(11) Penalties. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit specified by the general manager shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such
violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense, unless the fact of such
violation is being appealed as herein provided.
(12) Falsifying of information. Any person or user who knowingly
makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan or other
document filed with the general manager or who falsifies, tampers with or
18-30
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this ordinance, is hereby declared to be in violation of this ordinance, and
subject to the civil liberties imposed under subsection (10). (Ord. # , Oct.
1980)
18-31
Charter references 1
Newport Utilities Board: § 1.18.
Sewer charges: § 1.20.
Waterworks and sewers: § 1.19.
Municipal code references
Plumbing code: title 12.
Sewer use: title 18, chapter 1.
CHAPTER 2
CROSS CONNECTIONS1
SECTION
18-201. Definitions.
18-202. Standards.
18-203. Construction, operation, and supervision.
18-204. Statement required.
18-205. Inspections required.
18-206. Right of entry for inspections.
18-207. Correction of existing violations.
18-208. Use of protective devices.
18-209. Unpotable water to be labeled.
18-210. Violations.
18-201. Definitions. The following definitions and terms shall apply in
the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
(1) "Auxiliary intake." Any piping connection or other device whereby
water may be secured from a source other than that normally used.
(2) "Bypass." Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the
water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant.
(3) "Cross connection." Any physical connection whereby the public
water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public
or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner
that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the
manipulation of valves or because of any other arrangement.
(4) "Interconnection." Any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain,
conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain
sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply.
(5) "Person." Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, or association, and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
18-32
(6) "Public water supply." The waterworks system furnishing water
to the City of Newport for general use and which supply is recognized as the
public water supply by the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-202. Standards. The Newport Public Water Supply is to comply with
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 68-221-701 through 68-221-720 as well as the
Rules and Regulations for Public Water Supplies, legally adopted in accordance
with this code, which pertain to cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses,
and interconnections, and establish an effective ongoing program to control
these undesirable water uses. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-203. Construction, operation, and supervision. It shall be
unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, to be made, or allow one to
exist for any purpose whatsoever, unless the construction and operation of same
have been approved by the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation and the operation of such cross connection, auxiliary intake,
bypass or interconnection is at all times under the direct supervision of the
general manager of the Newport Public Water Supply. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-204. Statement required. Any person whose premises are supplied
with water from the public water supply and who also has on the same premises
a separate source of water supply, or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary
storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a
piping system, shall file with the general manager a statement of the
non-existence of unapproved or unauthorized cross connections, auxiliary
intakes, bypasses, or interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an
agreement that no cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass, or interconnection
will be permitted upon the premises. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-205. Inspections required. It shall be the duty of the general
manager of the public water supply to cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the
public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
reinspections, based on potential health hazards involved, shall be established
by the general managers of the Newport Public Water Supply and as approved
by the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. (Ord. #85-2,
Feb. 1985)
18-206. Right of entry for inspections. The general manager or
authorized representative shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time,
any property served by a connection to the Newport Public Water Supply for the
purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems therein for cross connections,
auxiliary intakes, bypasses, or interconnections. On request, the owner, lessee,
18-33
or occupant of any property so served shall furnish the inspection agency any
pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be
deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-207. Correction of existing violations. Any person who now has
cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses, or interconnections in violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be allowed a reasonable time within which
to comply with provisions of this chapter. After a thorough investigation of
existing conditions and an appraisal of time required to complete the work, the
amount of time shall be designated by the general manager of the Newport
Public Water Supply.
The failure to correct conditions threatening the safety of the public water
system as prohibited by this chapter and Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 68-221-711, within a reasonable time and within the time limits set by the
Newport Public Water Supply, shall be grounds for denial of water service. If
proper protection has not been provided after a reasonable time, the utility shall
give the customer legal notification that water service is to be discontinued and
physically separate the public water supply from the customer's on-site piping
system in such a manner that the two systems cannot again be connected by an
unauthorized person.
Where cross connections, interconnections, auxiliary intakes, or bypasses
are found that constitute an extreme hazard of immediate concern of
contaminating the public water system, the management of the water supply
shall require that immediate corrective action be taken to eliminate the threat
to the public water system. Immediate steps shall be taken to disconnect the
public water supply from the on-site piping system unless the imminent
hazard(s) is (are) corrected immediately. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-208. Use of protective devices. Where the nature of use of the
water supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed:
(1) Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation.
(2) That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot, or is not
willing, to demonstrate to the official in charge of the water supply, or his
designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the
plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the water
supply.
(3) That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such
that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing.
(4) There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted,
altered, or disconnected.
The general manager of the Newport Public Water Supply or his
designated representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device
on the service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that
18-34
may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective
devices shall be reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by the
Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation as to manufacture,
model, and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices shall
be approved by the general manager of the public water supply prior to
installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation. The installation shall be at the
expense of the owner or occupant of the premises.
Personnel of the Newport Public Water Supply shall have the right to
inspect and test the device or devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed
necessary by the general manager, or his designated representative. Water
service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the
occupant of the premises.
Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations
or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to
avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective
device or devices. Where it is found that only one (1) unit has been installed and
the continuance of service is critical, the general manager shall notify, in
writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and
arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The
Newport Public Water Supply shall require the occupant of the premises to
make all repairs indicated promptly, to keep the unit(s) working properly, and
the expense of such repairs shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the
premises. Repairs shall be made by qualified personnel acceptable to the
general manager of the Newport Public Water Supply.
The failure to maintain backflow prevention device(s) in proper working
order shall be grounds for discontinuing water service to a premises. Likewise,
the removal, bypassing, or altering of the protective device(s) or the installation
thereof so as to render the device(s) ineffective shall constitute grounds for
discontinuance of water service. Water service to such premises shall not be
restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or
defects to the satisfaction of the general manager of the public water supply.
(Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-209. Unpotable water to be labeled. In order that the potable
water supply made available to premises served by the public water supply be
protected from possible contamination as specified herein, any water outlet
which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
WATER UNSAFE
FOR DRINKING
18-35
The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters at least one (1) inch high
located on a red background. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985)
18-210. Violations. The requirements contained herein shall apply to
all premises served by the Newport Water System whether located inside or
outside the corporate limits and are hereby made a part of the conditions
required to be met for the city to provide water services to any premises. Such
action, being essential for the protection of water distribution system against
the entrance of contamination which may render the water unsafe healthwise,
or otherwise undesirable, shall be enforced rigidly without regard to location of
the premises, whether inside or outside the Newport corporate limits.
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
therefor, shall be fined under the general penalty clause for this municipal code
of ordinances. (Ord. #85-2, Feb. 1985, modified)
19-1
TITLE 19
ELECTRICITY AND GAS
[RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
20-1
TITLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
2. FAIR HOUSING.
3. EMERGENCY ALARM DEVICES.
4. PARK AND RECREATION PROGRAM OPERATION.
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION
SECTION
20-101. Newport Public School System created.
20-102. Board of education established; composition; appointment and terms
of members.
20-103. Recorder to be secretary and treasurer of board of education.
20-104. Meetings of the board of education.
20-105. Fiscal controls.
20-101. Newport Public School System created. There is hereby
established for the city, in accordance with the applicable laws of the state, a
system of public schools known as the Newport Public School System. (1973
Code, § 15-1)
20-102. Board of education established; composition;
appointment and terms of members. The power and authority to control
and manage the public school system is hereby delegated to the Newport Board
of Education. The board of education shall have five (5) members, all appointed
by the board of mayor and aldermen. Each member shall receive ten dollars
($10.00) per meeting, not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. The original
members of the board of education having been appointed in May of 1905, one
(1) for three (3) years; two (2) for two (2) years and two (2) for one (1) year; all
subsequent members have been and shall continue to be appointed for three (3)
year terms except when appointed to fill a vacancy. Any member appointed to
fill a vacancy shall serve the unexpired term of the member he replaces. The
term of one (1) or two (2) members shall expire each May, but he or they shall
continue to serve until his or their successors are appointed. (1973 Code, § 15-2)
20-103. Recorder to be secretary and treasurer of board of
education. The recorder shall be ex-officio the secretary and treasurer of the
20-2
board of education and shall keep a full and complete record of all its
proceedings. (1973 Code, § 15-3)
20-104. Meetings of the board of education. The board of education
shall hold regular quarterly meetings in the recorder's office and at its first
regular meeting each year, shall elect a president. The president may call
special meetings at any time he deems it necessary and or expedient. However,
when a special meeting is called, each member shall be notified thereof in
writing, which notice shall set our the purposes of the meeting and no other
business shall be transacted at that meeting. (1973 Code, § 15-4)
20-105. Fiscal controls. The board of education shall operate within
the appropriation annually made by the board of mayor and aldermen for school
purposes and school funds shall be disbursed only on orders of the board of
education, evidenced by vouchers signed by the recorder and countersigned by
the president of the board. (1973 Code, § 15-5)
20-3
CHAPTER 2
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION
20-201. Title.
20-202. Definitions.
20-203. Purposes of law, construction; effect.
20-204. Unlawful housing practices.
20-205. Blockbusting.
20-206. Exemptions from housing provisions.
20-207. Provisions of enforcement.
20-208. Agency no defense in proceeding against real estate dealer.
20-209. Establishment of procedures for conciliation.
20-210. Findings of hearing board; nature of affirmative action.
20-211. Investigations, powers, records.
20-212. Conspiracy to violate this chapter unlawful.
20-201. Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City
of Newport "Fair Housing Ordinance." (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-202. Definitions. Except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following terms as used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
(1) "Conciliation agreement" means a written agreement or statement
setting forth the terms of the agreement mutually signed and subscribed to by
both complainant(s) and respondent(s) and witnessed by a duly authorized
enforcing agent.
(2) "Conciliation failure" means any failure to obtain a conciliation
agreement between the parties to the discrimination charge or a breach thereof.
(3) "Discrimination" means any direct or indirect act or practice of
exclusion, distinction, restriction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or any
other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a person
or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex, or aiding,
abetting, inciting, coercing, or compelling thereof.
(4) "Hearing board" means that body of citizens duly appointed by the
board of mayor and aldermen to hear, make determination, and issue findings
in all cases of discriminatory practices in housing resulting from conciliation
failure.
(5) "Housing accommodations" includes improved and unimproved
property and means a building, structure, lot or part thereof which is used or
occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home
or residence of one or more individuals.
20-4
(6) "Real estate broker" or "real estate salesman" means an individual
whether licensed or not who, on behalf of others, for a fee, commission, salary
or other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of
receiving or collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or
leases real estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others such an activity; or who
advertises or holds themselves out as engaged in such activities; or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others a loan secured by
mortgage or other encumbrances upon a transfer or real estate, or who is
engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection
of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the
sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate through its listing in a
publication issued primarily for such purpose, or an individual employed by or
acting on behalf of any of these.
(7) "Real estate operator" means any individual or combination of
individuals, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, partnerships,
associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, trust, unincorporated organizations, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers or other legal or commercial entity, the city or county or any of its
agencies or any owner of real property that is engaged in the business of selling,
purchasing, exchanging, renting or leasing real estate, or the improvements
thereof, including options, or that derives income, in whole or in part, from the
sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate; or an individual
employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
(8) "Real property" includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands,
tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments,
corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest in the above. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-203. Purposes of law, construction; effect. (1) The general
purposes of this chapter are:
(a) To provide for execution within the City of Newport of the
policies embodied in title VIII of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968 as
amended.
(b) To safeguard all individuals within the city from
discrimination in housing opportunities because of race, color, religion,
national origin, or sex; thereby to protect their interest in personal
dignity and freedom from humiliation; to secure the city against domestic
strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions; to
preserve the public health and general welfare; and to further the
interests, rights, and privileges of individuals within the city.
(2) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal any
other law of this city relating to discrimination because of race, color, religion,
national origin, or sex. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-5
20-204. Unlawful housing practices. It is an unlawful practice for a
real estate owner or operator or for a real estate broker, real estate salesman,
or any individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these:
(1) To refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or
withhold real property from an individual because of his or her race, color,
religion, national origin or sex;
(2) To discriminate against an individual because of his or her race,
color, religion, national origin or sex in the terms, conditions, or privileges of
this sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property or in the furnishings of
facilities or services in connection therewith;
(3) To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent
or lease real property from an individual because of his or her race, color,
religion, national origin or sex;
(4) To refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental, or lease of real property
to an individual because of his or her race, color, religion, national origin or sex;
(5) To represent to an individual that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to
permit an individual to inspect real property because of his or her race, color,
religion, national origin or sex;
(6) To print, circulate, post, or mail or cause to be printed, circulated,
posted or mailed an advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application for the
purchase, rental, or lease of real property, or to make a record of inquiry in
connection with the prospective purchase, rental, or lease of real property, which
indicates, directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification, or discrimination as
to race, color, religion, national origin or sex or an intent to make such a
limitation, specification or discrimination;
(7) To offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing or real property for
sale, rental, or lease with the understanding that an individual may be
discriminated against in the sale, rental, or lease of that real property or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith because of race, color,
religion, national origin or sex; or
(8) To otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an individual
because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-205. Blockbusting. It is an unlawful practice for a real estate owner
or operator, a real estate broker, a real estate salesman, a financial institution,
an employee of any of these, or any other person for the purpose of inducing a
real estate transaction from which he may benefit financially:
(1) To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition with respect to race, color, religion or national origin of the owners
or occupants in the block, neighborhood, or areas in which the real property is
located; or
(2) To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of
property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in
20-6
the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real
property is located. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-206. Exemptions from housing provisions. (1) Nothing in
§ 20-204 shall apply:
(a) To the rental of housing accommodations in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than four (4) families
living independently of each other, if the owner or member of his family
resides in one (1) of the housing accommodations;
(b) To the rental of one (1) room or one (1) rooming unit in a
housing accommodation by an individual if he or a member of his family
resides therein;
(c) To a landlord who refuses to rent to an unmarried malefemale
couple.
(2) A religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting
the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such a religion is restricted
on account of race, color, sex, or national origin.
(3) Single sex dormitory rental property shall be excluded from the
provision of this act which relate to discrimination based on sex. (Ord. # ,
Sept. 1978)
20-207. Provisions of enforcement. (1) The violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in the
amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to be recovered in civil action, provided
that in the case of a continuing violation, the total penalty shall not exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(2) The city may sue in a civil act through the general court of justice
for appropriate remedies to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including
temporary restraining orders and mandatory and prohibiting injunctions.
(3) In addition to appropriate civil and/or equitable remedies for
enforcement of this chapter, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-208. Agency no defense in proceeding against real estate
dealer. It shall be no defense to a violation of this chapter by a real estate
owner or operator, real estate broker, real estate salesman, a financial
institution, or other person subject to the provisions of this chapter, that the
violation was requested, sought, or otherwise procured by a person not subject
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-7
20-209. Establishment of procedures for conciliation. (1) The city
shall designate an agent(s) to investigate, make determinations of probable
cause, and seek to conciliate apparent violations of this chapter. Conciliation
efforts may be initiated by any person(s) said to be subject to discrimination as
defined in this chapter.
(2) The mayor and board of aldermen shall establish a hearing board
which in turn shall adopt formal rules and procedures to hear complaints and
make appropriate findings. Such procedures shall be made known to all parties
of a given charge of discrimination. Hearings by the board shall commence
whenever the agent(s) acting on behalf of the city decides a conciliation failure
has occurred and the respondent agrees to participate in the hearing board
proceedings. Hearing open to the public may be initiated by the responding
party at any time during the conciliation process. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-210. Findings of hearing board; nature of affirmative action.
(1) If the hearing board determines that the respondent has not
engaged in an unlawful practice, the board shall state its findings of fact and
conclusions of law and shall issue an order dismissing the complaint. A copy of
the order shall be delivered to the complainant, the respondent, the city
attorney, and such other public officers and persons as the board deems proper.
(2) If the hearing board determines that the respondent has engaged
in an unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of law
and shall negotiate such affirmative action as in its judgment will carry out the
purposes of this chapter. A copy of the findings shall be delivered to the
respondent, the complainant, the city attorney and such other public officials,
officers and persons as the board deems proper.
(3) Affirmative action negotiated under this section may include, but
not be limited to:
(a) Extension to all individuals of the full and equal enjoyment
of the advantages, facilities, privileges, and services of the respondent;
(b) Reporting as to the manner of compliance;
(c) Posting notices in conspicuous places in the respondent's
place of business in a form prescribed by the hearing board;
(d) Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment, or sublease of real
property to an individual;
(e) Payment to the complainant of damages for injury caused by
unlawful practice including compensation for humiliation and
embarrassment, and expenses incurred by the complainant in obtaining
alternative housing by the complainant as a direct result of such unlawful
practice.
(4) The provisions for conciliation and affirmative action shall not
preclude or in any way impair the enforcement provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-8
20-211. Investigations, powers, records. (1) In connection with an
investigation of a complaint filed under this chapter, the enforcing agent(s) at
any reasonable time may request voluntary access to premises, records and
documents relevant to the complaint and may request the right to examine,
photograph, and copy evidence.
(2) Every person subject to this chapter shall make, keep and preserve
records relevant to the determination of whether unlawful practices have been
or are being committed, such records being maintained and prescribed in a
manner and to the extent required under the Civil Rights Act of 1968 and any
regulations promulgated thereunder.
(3) A person who believes that the application to it of a regulation or
order issued under this section would result in undue hardship may apply to the
hearing board for an exemption from the applications of the regulational order.
If the board finds that the application of the regulation or order to the person in
question would impose an undue hardship, it may grant appropriate relief.
(Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-212. Conspiracy to violate this chapter unlawful. It shall be
unlawful practice for a person, or for two (2) or more persons to conspire:
(1) To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person
because he or she has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this chapter, or
because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing under
this chapter; or
(2) To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of
the acts or practices declared unlawful by this chapter; or
(3) To obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions
of this chapter or any order issued thereunder; or
(4) To resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with the enforcing agent(s),
hearing board, or any of its members or representatives in the lawful
performance of duty under this chapter. (Ord. # , Sept. 1978)
20-9
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY ALARM DEVICES
SECTION
20-301. Definitions.
20-302. Automatic telephone dialing alarm systems.
20-303. Application requirements for an alarm permit.
20-304. Items required for an alarm system to qualify for an alarm permit.
20-305. False alarms.
20-306. Fine assessment for false alarms.
20-301. Definitions. Unless it is apparent from the context that
another meaning is intended, the following words when used in this chapter
shall have the meanings indicated herein:
(1) "Alarm business" means the business of any individual,
partnership, corporation, or other entity engaged in selling, leasing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any
alarm system or in causing any alarm system to be sold, leased, maintained,
serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed in or on any building,
structure, or facility.
(2) "Alarm system" means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or
electrical, arranged to signal the police and/or fire department that an
emergency exists or that the services of either or both of those departments are
needed. "Alarm system" shall also mean any alarm device which automatically
emits an audible, visual, or other response upon the occurrence of any hazard
or emergency and is intended to alert persons outside the building to the
existence of said hazard or emergency.
(3) "Alarm user" means the person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure, or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained.
(4) "Answering service" refers to a telephone answering service
providing among its services the receiving on a continuous basis emergency
signals from alarm systems and thereafter relaying the message to the central
dispatch facility.
(5) "Automatic telephone dialing alarm system" means any alarm
system which is a device which automatically or electronically transmits by
telephone or telephone line connected to the central dispatch facility a recorded
message or code signal indicating a need for emergency response; or a system
which, upon activation, connects to an answering service whose function it is to
transmit to the police and/or the fire department a need for emergency response.
20-10
(6) "Central dispatch facility" means the central communications
facility of the Newport Police 911 Center which receives, routes, or otherwise
handles emergency service communications traffic.
(7) "False alarm" means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the
police and/or fire department when a situation requiring a response by the police
and/or fire department does not in fact exist; but, this definition does not include
an alarm signal caused by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it
include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by
the alarm user. (Ord. #1994-7-B, )
20-302. Automatic telephone dialing alarm systems. (1) It shall be
unlawful for a person, natural or corporate, to sell, offer for sale, install,
maintain, lease, operate, or assist in the operation of an automatic telephone
dialing alarm system over any telephone lines exclusively used by the public to
directly request emergency service from the fire and/or police department.
(2) The 911 director, when he has knowledge of the unlawful
maintenance of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system installed or
operating in violation of this code; shall, in writing, order the owner, operator,
or lease to disconnect and cease operation of the system within seventy-two (72)
hours of receipt of the order.
(3) Any automatic telephone dialing system installed prior to the
effective date of the ordinance comprising this chapter; automatically dialing
911 shall be disconnected and cease operation.
(4) Any installation required in the 911 police center of any alarm
shall be handled by the 911 board representative (Murrell Alarm Co.
Morristown). (Ord. #1994-7-B, )
20-303. Applicat ion requirements for an alarm permit. Application
for an alarm permit shall be made to the 911 director. This includes all burglar
or fire alarms. The application shall include the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's
property to be serviced by the alarm, and the name, address, and telephone
number of the applicant's residence if different from that of the property to be
served.
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company
which will service the alarm, if any (in applicant's location).
(3) An emergency telephone number of the alarm user or his
representative to allow prompt notification of alarm calls and to assist fire
and/or police personnel in the inspection of the property.
(4) Such other information as the 911 director shall deem necessary.
It is the applicant's responsibility to notify the 911 directors, in writing, of any
and all changes in the information on file with the city regarding such permit
within ten (10) days of such changes being made. (Ord. #1994-7-B, )
20-11
20-304. Items required for an alarm system to qualify for an
alarm permit. (1) All alarm systems serving any locations within Cocke
County of Newport shall terminate at the central dispatch facility of the
Newport Police Department and 911 directors.
(2) All alarm systems shall have a back-up power supply that will
automatically become effective in the event of power failure or outage in the
primary source of electricity.
(3) All alarm systems will have a reset which silences the annunciator
and which will not sound again as a result of the same event that resulted in the
original activation.
(4) All alarm systems monitored by the 911 dispatcher at Newport
shall pay an alarm maintenance fee to Murrell Alarm Company which is the 911
alarm maintenance company.
(5) All alarm systems installed on or after the effective date of the
ordinance comprising this chapter must comply with the requirements set out
in this section. (Ord. #1994-7-B, )
20-305. False alarms. (1) Whenever an alarm is activated thereby
requiring an emergency response to the location by police and/or fire personnel,
a police and/or fire officer on the scene of the activated alarm shall determine
whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated by the alarm
system or whether in some way the alarm system malfunctioned and thereby
activated a false alarm.
(2) If the police or fire officer at the scene of the activated alarm
system determines the alarm to be false and no emergency was necessary, then
said officer shall submit a report of the false alarm to the 911 director. A
written notification of emergency response and determination of the response
shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user at the address noted on the permit
or location where alarm was activated.
(3) The 911 director shall have the right to inspect any alarm system
on the premises to which response has been made and he may cause inspection
of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter to determine
whether it is in conformity with this code.
(4) It shall be a violation of this code to intentionally cause a false
alarm, and any person who intentionally causes a false alarm shall be subject
to the penalty provisions contained herein.
(5) There shall be a fourteen (14) day grace period provided to the
alarm user during the initial installation of the alarm system. For fourteen (14)
days after the permit has been issued by the 911 director the fines provided for
in § 20-306 will not apply.
(6) Any alarm business, testing or servicing any alarm system, shall
notify the 911 center of the location and time of said testing and servicing. The
fines provided for in § 20-306 will not apply to the alarm user in prior notice of
20-12
testing or servicing has been made to the 911 center as outlined in this section.
(Ord. #1994-7-B, )
20-306. Fine assessment for false alarms. It is hereby found and
determined that more than three (3) false alarms, within any six (6) month
period, are excessive and constitute a public nuisance. The activation of four (4)
or more false alarms within any six (6) month period will result in the
assessment of the following fines:
(1) A service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be
automatically levied against the alarm upon the occurrence of the fourth (4 ) th
false alarm;
(2) A service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be automatically
levied against the alarm user upon the occurrence of the fifth (5 ) false alarm; th
(3) A service charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be
automatically levied against the alarm user upon the occurrence of the sixth
(6 ) false alarm; th
(4) A service charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
automatically levied against the alarm user for each false alarm in excess of six
(6). All service charges levied shall be paid to Cocke County 911 by the alarm
user within thirty (30) days of the date of the date of the written notice of said
charges. Failure to make payment within thirty (30) days from the date of the
notice shall result in disconnection of the alarm system and a discontinuance of
police and fire response to alarms that may occur at the premises described in
the alarm user's permit. Reconnection of the alarm system and reinstatement
of police and fire emergency response service may be made upon payment of all
service charges due, accompanied by a payment of a twenty-five dollar ($25.00)
reinstatement fee. (Ord. #1994-7-B, )
20-13
CHAPTER 4
PARK AND RECREATION PROGRAM OPERATION
SECTION
20-401. Purpose.
20-402. Staffing.
20-403. Parks and recreation advisory board.
20-404. Plan of service.
20-405. Definitions.
20-406. Hours of operation.
20-407. Prohibited beverages and substances.
20-408. Prohibited unlawful activities generally.
20-409. Prohibited unlawful activities--sanitation.
20-410. Prohibited unlawful activities--traffic.
20-411. Prohibited unlawful activities--parking.
20-412. Prohibited unlawful activities--picnic areas.
20-413. Prohibited unlawful activities--games.
20-414. Certain behavior declared unlawful.
20-415. Prohibited unlawful activities--merchandising, advertising and signs.
20-416. Park operating policy; closed areas.
20-417. Lost and found articles.
20-418. Enforcement.
20-419. Additional rules and regulations.
20-420. Penalty.
20-421. Code of conduct for community center.
20-422. Skateboard park special provisions.
20-401. Purpose. The Parks and Recreation Department of the City of
Newport shall provide a range of recreational services for city residents of all
ages. Said programs shall be designed to provide services that address both
leisure enjoyment and exercise needs of city residents. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec.
2006)
20-402. Staffing. The city administrator shall employ a parks and
recreation department director who is well qualified in education, professional
training, and experience to provide for the city's needs in parks and recreation
services.
(1) The parks and recreation director's staffing responsibilities include:
(a) Recommends to the city administrator the proper
organization and staff levels required for the department to provide plan
of services;
20-14
(b) Screening employment applications and recommending
those potential employees who will best fit in the program's overall plan
for services to the city administrator for employment;
(c) Training department employees;
(d) Daily supervision and overall performance of the department
staff in meeting the goals of the city parks and recreation plan of service;
(e) Evaluating performance of employees;
(f) Recommending promotions, disciplinary action and
termination of department employees.
(2) The city administrator considers the parks and recreation director's
recommendations and determines the appropriate staffing level to recommend
for funding to the board of mayor and aldermen in the budget. The city
administrator also makes the final decision on employment, promotion,
demotion, and any disciplinary action required of the department personnel.
(Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-403. Parks and recreation advisory board. The parks and
recreation advisory board shall consist of seven (7) members who serve
staggered five (5) year terms so that no more than two (2) members are
scheduled to vacate the board in any one (1) year. Members are appointed by
the mayor with the approval of the board of mayor and aldermen. If a member
resigns, moves out of the designated service area, or otherwise vacates a position
on the board, the replacement is designated to fill the unexpired term of the
vacated position. All members serve in an advisory capacity to the parks and
recreation director and city administrator. Their purpose is to:
(1) Assist in developing a park and recreation plan of services;
(2) Serve as an advisory appeal board for patrons who have been
disciplined by the parks and recreation director in accordance with the
ordinance and parks and recreation rules and regulations, if they disagree with
the severity of the action taken.
(3) Assist the parks and recreation director in evaluating the need for
new programs as well as evaluating the continued need for existing programs
offered in the parks and recreation plan of services;
(4) Assist the parks and recreation director in developing rules and
regulations necessary in carrying out the plan of services;
(5) Assist in planning new park and recreation facilities;
(6) Hold hearings if there is conflict at a parks and recreation
sponsored event which questions the conduct of a sponsored event coach,
officials, or participants and recommend remedial action if appropriate.
(7) Certify coaches of all program sponsored events meet minimum
requirements and backgrounds as specified in the program standards for
coaches. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-15
20-404. Plan of service. The parks and recreation department director,
with the input from staff members and the parks and recreation advisory board,
shall draft a plan of services of the department. The plan will be as simple as
possible to include all programs and services to be provided that staffing and
funding will support along with the approximate dates programs will begin and
end along with a brief description of the program; age groups served by the
program; and estimated number of participants. The plan of services will be
amended as new programs are added so that the plan of services remains up to
date at all times. The plan will be reviewed, revised as necessary to fit funding
availability and approved by the city administrator, pending funding by the
board of mayor and aldermen in the annual budget process. (Ord. #2006-15,
Dec. 2006)
20-405. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following
terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
(1) "City" is the City of Newport, Tennessee.
(2) "Director" is the Director of the Newport Parks and Recreation
Department, the person immediately in charge of all parks, facilities, and all
their areas and activities, and to whom all park attendants in such areas are
responsible.
(3) "Park" is all city owned and operated recreation facilities.
(4) "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
(5) "Vehicle" is any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered,
animal drawn, or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any
size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in
the service of the parks. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-406. Hours of operation. Newport parks will be open to use by the
public invited thereto between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M. or as
posted at the park facilities. All persons are invited to use Newport parks and
their facilities who will comply with the terms of this chapter and such rules and
regulations as may be promulgated hereunder governing the use of such parks.
(Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-407. Prohibited beverages and substances. (1) It shall be
unlawful for any person to bring controlled substances, as defined in the
statutes of the State of Tennessee, and/or alcoholic beverages into any park or
recreational area, owned or operated by the City of Newport, or to drink
alcoholic beverages or imbibe controlled substances at any time while therein.
20-16
It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to enter any area described above
while under the influence of controlled substances and/or alcoholic beverages,
or be under the influence of controlled substances and/or alcoholic beverages
while within the areas described above.
(2) Violation of this section is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any
person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty
of a misdemeanor and fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-408. Prohibited unlawful activities generally. It shall be
unlawful for any person within Newport parks to:
(1) Building and other property. (a) Disfiguration and removal.
Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or
remove any buildings, tables, benches, railings, paving or paving
materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances
thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures
or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever,
either real or personal.
(b) Restrooms and washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining
restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person
over the age of six (6) years shall use the restrooms and washrooms
designated for the opposite sex.
(c) Removal of natural resources. Dig or remove any soil, rock,
stone, trees, shrubs or plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or
make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or
agency.
(d) Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or
structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across
such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
(e) Trees, shrubbery, lawns. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or
remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds,
of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach a rope, wire or other
contrivance to any plant or tree. A person shall not dig in or otherwise
disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area.
(f) Climbing trees, etc. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit
upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(2) Pedestrian walking track. Stand, loiter or ride bicycles or any
wheeled vehicle on walking track. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-17
20-409. Prohibited unlawful activities--sanitation. It shall be
unlawful for any person with Newport parks to:
(1) Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause
to be placed in the waters of any fountain, swimming pool, sink or any other
tributary any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid which may result in
pollution of waters.
(2) Refuse and trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave
any garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in
any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided;
where receptacles are not so provided, all such trash and refuse shall be carried
away from the park by the persons responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-410. Prohibited unlawful activities--traffic. It shall be unlawful
for any person within Newport to:
(1) State motor vehicle laws and city traffic ordinance apply. Fail to
comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws and
the traffic ordinance of the City of Newport in regard to equipment and
operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in this and
other ordinances.
(2) Obey personnel; enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all
traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and
instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on
the highways, street or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with
the provisions of the regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be
issued subsequently by the director.
(3) Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs
indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted
for proper control and to safeguard life and property.
(4) Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed as
posted. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-411. Prohibited unlawful activities--parking. (1) Designated
areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area,
and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions.
(2) Vehicles left on park property. All vehicles left on park properties
after hours will be towed away at the owner's expense. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec.
2006)
20-412. Prohibited unlawful activities--picnic areas. (1) Generally.
Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose.
Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas
when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the
20-18
comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any direction given
to achieve this.
(2) Availability. Violate the regulation/reservation use of the picnic
shelters.
(3) Reservations. Reservations may be made to ensure the use of said
picnic shelter/pavilion. A reservation fee is required in advance to ensure use
of said shelter/pavilion.
(4) Duty of picniker. Leave a picnic area before a fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash, liter and garbage is placed in proper disposal
receptacles. If no such trash receptacle is available, then garbage and trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picniker to be properly disposed
of elsewhere. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-413. Prohibited unlawful activities--games. Take part in or abet
the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such
as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for
such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous
games such as football and baseball is prohibited except on the fields and courts
or areas provided therefore. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-414. Certain behavior declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for
any person within Newport parks to:
(1) Intoxicating beverages. (a) Prohibition. Bring controlled
substances and/or alcoholic beverages, into the park or drink alcoholic
beverages at any time in the park.
(b) Drunkenness. Have entered the park while under the
influence of controlled substances and/or intoxicating beverages, or be
under the influence of controlled substances and/or intoxicating liquor
while within the park.
(2) Firearms and explosives. Bring or have in his possession, or set off
or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any type of fireworks or
explosives in any such area or property adjacent thereto.
(3) Fight/argue. It shall be unlawful for any person to argue or fight
within any park or recreational facility owned or operated by the City of
Newport. Any person, firm, or corporation found in violation of fighting or
arguing, shall be punished by a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more
than fifty dollars ($50.00) or by a sentence of not more than ninety (90) days in
jail, or both.
(4) Domestic animals. Have been responsible for the entry of a dog or
other domestic animals into areas other than automobile parking concourses
and walks immediately adjacent thereto, and in such areas as may be clearly
marked by signs. Nothing herein shall be constructed as permitting the running
of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are permitted shall
20-19
be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than five (5) feet in
length.
(5) Dress. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
(6) Alms. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether
private or public.
(7) Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and
under such regulations as may be designated by the director. No person shall
drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on the
highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
(8) Closed areas. Enter an area posted as "closed to the public" nor
shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
(9) Games of chance. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of
chance.
(10) Loitering and boisterousness. Sleep or protracted lounge on seats
or benches, or other areas or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive,
insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to a breach of the public peace. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-415. Prohibited unlawful activities--merchandising,
advertising and signs. No person within Newport parks shall:
(1) Vending and peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing,
nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is herein made as to any
regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the director.
(2) Advertising. Announce, advertise or call to the public attention in
any way to any article or service for sale or hire.
(3) Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, advertisement
or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any
sign whatever on Newport parks. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-416. Park operating policy; closed areas. Any section or part of
the Newport Parks and Recreation Department may be declared closed to the
public by the director at any time, either temporarily or at regular and stated
intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as
the director shall find reasonably necessary. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-417. Lost and found articles. The finding of lost articles by park
attendants shall be reported to the director who shall make every reasonable
effort to locate the owners. The director shall also make every reasonable effort
to find articles reported as lost. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-20
20-418. Enforcement. (1) Officials. The director and park attendants
shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Ejectment. The director and any park attendant shall have the
authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter or
rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-419. Additional rules and regulations. The director shall have the
authority to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry
out the provisions of this chapter and to ensure an impartial, fair and safe use
and enjoyment of Newport parks by those persons lawfully using the parks. The
director shall have the authority to schedule the use of all park facilities and
ball fields under this section. Regulations pertaining to specific activities shall
be displayed in a prominent and public location at the point of activity
controlled. Rules and regulations pertaining to the parks as a whole shall be
publicly and prominently displayed at the entrance to Newport parks. Rules
and regulations adopted in accordance with this section shall have the same
force and effect as if copied herein verbatim. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
20-420. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter, by omission or commission of any act or deed, or
refuses to comply with the instructions of any park attendant, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00), or by a
sentence of not more than ninety (90) days in jail, or both. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec.
2006)
20-421. Code of conduct for community center. The following code
of conduct shall apply to the Newport Community Center and surrounding
grounds under the operation and control of the City of Newport.
(1) The stealing of any personal or city-owned property will result in
immediate and permanent suspension from the Newport Community Center and
anyone caught or suspected of stealing shall be turned over to the Newport
Police Department for conviction by the proper courts.
(2) There will be no alcoholic beverages, drugs, or gambling in the
building or on surrounding grounds. No one under the influence of alcohol or
drugs shall enter the building or be allowed on the surrounding grounds and/or
parking lots. The violation of the above rules and regulations (1) and (2) will
result in immediate and permanent suspension.
(3) No writing, marking or defacing any wall, floor, doors, or ceilings
in any manner, is permitted.
(4) No arguing or fighting is allowed in the Newport Community
Center or surrounding grounds and/or parking lots.
20-21
(5) No misuse of equipment or building. The party responsible for any
damage will be required to make restitution to the City of Newport for the
amount of the damage.
(6) Loud, profane, or vulgar language by anyone in or around the
Newport Community Center, parking lots or grounds will not be permitted or
tolerated.
(7) The violation of the above subsections (1) through (5) will result in:
(a) 1 violation--thirty (30) days suspension; st
(b) 2 violation--sixty (60) days suspension; and nd
(c) 3 violation--ninety (90) days suspensions. rd
(d) Any violations over three (3) will result in permanent
suspension.
(8) Any expression of physical or verbal abuse to any staff member or
user of facility will result in suspension.
(9) The playing of radios, tape players, etc. will be permitted only with
staff approval.
(10) No smoking, food or drinks allowed in gym, weight room, pool, or
racquetball area, unless authorized by the staff member in charge. Smokeless
tobacco is not allowed in any area of the community center.
(11) No roaming the hallways. You must have a definite destination
and/or activity.
(12) No spitting within the facilities--floors, walls, sinks, etc.
(13) Shoes and shirts are required to enter the building.
(14) Shirts are required at all times.
(15) When leaving the pool area you must be dry with no wet feet, legs,
or other body parts. Shirts and shoes must be worn when leaving the pool area.
(16) No running in any areas of the building, with the exception of the
gymnasium.
(17) No smoking allowed inside the community center building.
(18) No riding or parking of any type of bicycle, skateboards or skates
on any sidewalk, ramp, or steps that lead to any entrance to the building.
(19) Violation of the above subsections (8) through (18) will result in:
(a) 1 violation--five (5) days suspension; st
(b) 2 violation--fifteen (15) days suspension; nd
(c) 3 violation--thirty (30) days suspension. rd
(d) Any violations over three (3) will result in permanent
suspension.
(20) No public display of affection and/or sexual conduct will be
permitted or tolerated. Violation of this subsection will be punishable
depending on the severity of the conduct. The staff member in charge will
determine the amount of suspension time no less than five (5) days and/or if
permanent suspension is necessary.
(21) All rules that are posted inside the community center and/or on all
surrounding city owned property apply and must be followed.
20-22
(22) The Newport Community Center staff will maintain a written
record of all reported violations of these rules and regulations. The staff will
also maintain a written record of all disciplinary action taken against
individuals.
(23) Any violation of a city ordinance or state or federal law will be
reported to the proper authorities and will be dealt with by the court having
proper jurisdiction. A conviction by a court or a finding of delinquency by the
juvenile court will automatically result in a permanent suspension of privileges
of using the Newport Community Center or the surrounding grounds and
parking lots.
(24) Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Newport
Community Center Director on any violation shall have the right to appeal and
request a hearing before the Newport Recreation Board. Such request must be
made in writing, setting forth the reasons for the request, and filed within five
(5) days from the date of the decision complained about. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec.
2006)
20-422. Skateboard park special provisions. (1) Skateboard park
operation--general. The City of Newport has established a skateboard park for
the use and enjoyment of Newport residents. However, skateboarding can be
dangerous with the possibility of serious injury. Therefore, the following rules
and precautions are required for use of the Newport skateboard park facilities.
(2) Waiver required. All skateboard park participants must read and
sign a waiver annually, each January, prior to using the skate park at which
time they will receive a sticker for their helmets as proof they have complied
with city regulations for use of the skate park. Parents or guardians of
participants under the age of eighteen (18) must also read and sign the waiver.
(3) Skating wisely. All skaters are urged to skate wisely at all times.
Skateboarding and skating can be hazardous recreational activities. Use of the
skateboard park facility may result in death or serious injury. Parents or
guardians of participants under the age of eighteen (18) are urged to help
emphasize wise skating to their skaters. Use of the skateboard park facility is
strictly at an individual's own risk. The City of Newport does not assume any
responsibility for loss or injuries.
(4) Skating within skill level. Skaters should skate within their
individual skill level at all times. Parents or guardians of participants under
the age of eighteen (18) are urged to help explain to their skaters the meaning
of skating within skill level and help emphasize skill level to their skaters.
(5) Skating with in-line skates and skateboards only. The Newport
skateboard park is designed for in-line skateboard use only. No other type skate
will be allowed.
(6) Hours of operation. The skate park opens at dawn and closes at
dusk.
20-23
(7) Park is self policing. The skate park is self policing. Skaters are
expected to be respectful of all skaters and pick up after themselves. Skate
parks should be free from trash and litter. If the skateboard park has litter or
trash on it when a skater arrives, the park should not be used until the litter or
trash has been cleared. Participants should police the area of trash and place
in trash receptacles.
(8) Helmet use. The use of helmets designed for skateboarding is
required, they must fit properly and have straps fastened. Other safety
equipment, elbow pads, knee pads and wrist pads, is strongly recommended. All
helmets must display the parks and recreation numbered sticker to assure the
participant is properly registered.
(9) Loaning helmets to others for use is prohibited. Loaning helmets
to unregistered skaters is strictly prohibited and will result in an individual
being permanently banned from the skateboard park. In addition, it may place
the offending registered user in serious liability situation if the user of a loaned
helmet is injured on the skateboard park. Parents or guardians of participants
under the age of eighteen (18) are urged to help explain to their skaters the
potential consequences and possible liability to their skaters.
(10) Prohibited items and activities on the skateboard park property.
The following are not permitted in the skate park area:
(a) Alcoholic beverages;
(b) Smoking and/or tobacco products;
(c) Fighting;
(d) Profanity;
(e) Graffiti/tagging;
(f) Pets;
(g) Loud music;
(h) Glass containers;
(i) Bicycles;
(j) Motorized vehicles;
(k) Scooters;
(l) Food and beverages;
(m) Weapons.
(11) Other prohibited items on the skateboard park. Personal obstacles,
ramps, other equipment or materials are not permitted to be used or added to
the facility. Facility structures are not to be altered or waxed.
(12) Weather conditions. Certain weather conditions may create unsafe
surfaces for skating. Skaters as well as parents and guardians of minors are
urged to consider the weather conditions before using the skateboard park
facilities.
(13) Stolen or lost items. The City of Newport is not responsible for lost
or stolen items. Participants are urged to keep up with their property.
(14) Safety and courtesy. Participants are urged to skate safely and be
courteous to other skaters.
20-24
(15) Spectators. All spectators are required to remain outside of the
skating area.
(16) Organized events. All organized events require advanced, written
approval from the City of Newport Parks and Recreation Department Director.
(17) Reporting damage or hazardous conditions. All citizens are urged
to report any damage, hazardous conditions, concerns, comments or suggestions
to the Newport Parks and Recreation, 433 Prospect Avenue, Newport, TN
37821. For emergencies they should call 911.
(18) City reserved rights. The City of Newport reserves the right to
close the skateboard park facility for any reason. The City of Newport
authorities, at their discretion, reserve the right to restrict entry to the facility
and ask persons to leave the facility as the result of disorderly conduct,
disturbance of the peace, rule violations or unsafe behavior. Any person not
complying with such request will not be permitted to use the facility and may
then be charged with trespassing. (Ord. #2006-15, Dec. 2006)
A-1
APPENDIX A
ZONING ORDINANCE
FOR
NEWPORT
TENNESSEE
DATE OF ORIGINAL ADOPTION
January 13, 1994
DATE OF LAST READOPTION
August 14, 2007
A-2
MUNICIPAL ZONING ORDINANCE
OF
NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
Prepared For
The Newport Board of Mayor and Aldermen
Mayor Connie Ball
Vice-Mayor James B. (Jimmy) Clark Alderman John M. Bugg
Alderman Luke Goddard Alderman Fred L. Gregg
Alderman Dennis Thornton
The Newport Regional/Municipal Planning Commission
Leon Bryant, Chairman
Paul Teague, Vice-Chairman Jim McSween, Secretary
Connie Ball, Mayor Dennis Thornton, Alderman
Jan Carpenter Cecil Giland
Pat Proffitt Charlie Rathbone
Walter Cole, Director of Planning
Prepared By The
Local Planning Assistance Office
The Department of Economic and Community Development
Johnson City, Tennessee
TABLE OF CONTENTS A-3
1. MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
101. Creation and Membership. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-6
102. Organization, Powers, Duties, etc.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-6
103. Additional Powers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-6
2. THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF NEWPORT
Section
201. Authority. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-7
202. Short Title. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-7
203. Purpose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-7
204. Definitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-8
3. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
301. Continuance of Nonconforming Uses and Structures. . . . . . . A-13
302. Off-Street Automobile Parking.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-14
303. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-16
304. Off-Street Parking Lot Design Requirements. . . . . . . . . . . . . A-16
305. Ingress and Egress. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-17
306. Access Control. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-17
307. Vision Clearance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-19
308. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Regulations. . . . . . . . . . . A-19
309. Signs.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-23
310. Site Plan Regulations for Commercial, Public, and
Semi-Public Uses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-33
311. Site Plan Regulations for Industrial Uses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-35
312. Temporary, Mobile, Factory-Built, or
Factory Assembled Structures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-38
313. Customary Home Occupations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-40
314. Gasoline Service Stations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-41
4. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
Section
401. Use. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-42
402. Street Frontage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-42
403. Corner Lots. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-42
404. One Principal Building on a Lot. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-42
405. Reduction of Lot Size.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-42
406. Yard and Other Spaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-42
TABLE OF CONTENTS A-4
407. Conformity to Subdivision Regulations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-43
408. Accessory Building and Use Regulations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-43
409. Height and Density. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-44
5. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Section
501. Classification of Districts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-45
502. Zoning District Boundaries.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-45
6. PROVISIONS GOVERNING USE DISTRICTS
Section
601. R-1 Low Density Residential District.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-46
602. R-2 Medium Density Residential District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-47
603. M-R Medical/Residential District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-48
604. P-1 Residential/Professional District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-48
605. C-1 Central Business District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-49
606. C-2 General Business District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-50
607. C-3 Interstate Highway Business District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-51
608. M-1 Light Industrial District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-52
609. M-2 Heavy Industrial District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-53
610. A-1 Agriculture District. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-53
7. AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
Section
701. Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-55
8. EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Section
801. Lot of Record. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-56
802. Adjoining and Substandard Lots of Records. . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-56
803. Exceptions for Carport or Garage Construction. . . . . . . . . . . A-56
804. Front Yards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-57
805. Exceptions on Height Limits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-57
9. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
901. Building Permit Required.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-58
902. Enforcing Officer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-58
903. Application For/Issuance of Building Permits. . . . . . . . . . . . . A-58
TABLE OF CONTENTS A-5
904. Expiration/Extension of Building Permit Approvals.. . . . . . . A-59
905. Final Site Inspection/Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. . A-59
906. Violations.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-59
907. Penalties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-60
908. Remedies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-60
10. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
1001. Creation and Appointment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-61
1002. Procedure.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-61
1003. Appeals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-61
1004. Powers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-61
1005. Action of the Board of Zoning Appeals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-62
11. AMENDMENTS
Section
1101. Procedure.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-63
1102. Approval by Planning Commission. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-63
1103. Introduction of Amendment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-63
12. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Section
1201. Conflict With Other Ordinances.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-64
1202. Validity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-64
1203. Effective Date. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-64
APPENDICES
Appendix A Illustration A - Setbacks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-66
Appendix A Illustration B - Farthest Extension of Setback.. . . . . A-67
Appendix B Street Classifications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-68
Appendix C Certificate of Planned Unit Development Approval.. A-69
Appendix D Certificate of Site Plan Approval. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-70
Appendix E Application for Board of Zoning Appeals. . . . . . . . . . A-71
Appendix F Application for Zoning Reclassification.. . . . . . . . . . . A-74
A-6
Zoning Ordinance
Newport, Tennessee
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION
101. Creation and Membership
102. Organization, Powers, Duties, etc.
103. Additional Powers
101. Creation and Membership. Pursuant to the provisions of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-101 there is hereby created a municipal
planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission. The
planning commission shall consist of nine (9) members; two (2) of these shall be
the mayor and another member of the governing body, selected by the governing
body; the other seven (7) members shall be appointed by the mayor. All
members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation.
Except for the initial appointments, the terms of the seven (7) members
appointed by the mayor shall be for four (4) years each. The seven (7) members
first appointed shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, and five
years respectively so that the term of one member expires each year. The term
of the mayor and the member selected by the governing body shall run
concurrently with their terms of office. Any vacancy in an appointive
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor.
102. Organization, Powers, Duties, etc. The planning commission
shall be organized and shall carry out its powers, functions and duties in
accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, title 13.
103. Additional Powers. Having been designated as a regional
planning commission, the municipal planning commission shall have the
additional powers granted by, and shall otherwise be governed by the provisions
of the state law relating to regional planning commissions.
A-7
CHAPTER 2
THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
SECTION
201. Authority
202. Short Title
203. Purpose
204. Definitions
201. Authority. An ordinance, in pursuance of the authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 13-7-201 through 13-7-210 and § 13-7-401, for the
purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order,
prosperity, and general welfare; to provide for the establishment of districts
within the corporate limits; to regulate within such districts, the location,
height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and structures, the
percentage of lot occupancy, the required open spaces, the density of population
and the uses of land, buildings and structures; to provide methods of
administration of this ordinance and to prescribe penalties for the violation
thereof.
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Newport.
202. Short Title. Chapters 2 through 13 in this title shall be known as
the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Newport, Tennessee." The map herein
referred to as the "Zoning Map of Newport, Tennessee," and all explanatory
matter thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this code. A copy of the
zoning map is on file in the planning office at the Newport Municipal Building.
203. Purpose. These zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth
have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the community.
They have been designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety
from fire, panic and other danger, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent
the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable
consideration among other things, as to the character of each district, and its
particular suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value
of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
city.
A-8
204. Definitions. Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for
the purpose of this ordinance, have the meaning herein indicated. Words used
in the present tense include the future. The singular number includes the plural
and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory. The
words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed
to include the words intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.
(1) Access. The right to cross between public and private property,
thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property.
(2) Accessory Structure. A structure that is customarily designed and
used as an accessory use. The following are excluded: single-wide mobile homes,
tractor trailers, car trailers, recreational vehicles, storage containers designed
to transport goods, etc. that are not customarily designed accessory structures.
(3) Advertising. Includes any writing, printing, graphics, painting,
display, emblem, drawing, sign, or other device designed, used or intended for
advertising, whether placed on the ground, rocks, trees, or other natural
features or on buildings, structures, milestones, sign boards, billboards, wall
board, roof board, frames, supports, fences or other man-made structure.
(4) Alley. A vehicular travel way which affords a secondary means of
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street.
(5) Antenna. A metallic/graphic/fiberglass apparatus (aerial) for
sending and receiving electromagnetic waves.
(6) Boarding or Rooming House, Tourist Home, or Bed and Breakfast
Inn. A building containing a single dwelling unit and not more that five (5)
guest rooms where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.
(7) Buffer Strip. A strip of land not less than ten (10) feet in width and
on which plant material is planted that has such growth characteristics as will
provide an obscuring screen not less than six (6) feet in height within two (2)
years of planting.
(8) Buildable Area of a Lot. That portion of a lot bounded by the
required rear yard, side yards and the building setback line (See Appendix A,
Illustration A).
(9) Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or
chattel.
(a) Building or Use, Accessory. A building or use customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use and located on
the same lot with such building or use.
(b) Building, Modular. A unit of construction which is totally or
in part constructed off-site and transported for on-site erection,
placement, assembly or similar terms.
(c) Building, Prefabricated. A building constructed on-site from
components which have been prefabricated, panelized, or constructed in
sections off-site.
A-9
(d) Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the
main or principal use of the lot on which said building is located.
(10) Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the finished
grade at any building line to the highest point of the roof; provided that where
land is subject to required minimum flood elevations, the building height shall
be measured from such required elevation.
(11) Building Setback Line. A line delineating the minimum allowable
distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no
building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. These
setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the nearest point of
exposed foundation, building/porch support, or farthest extending protrusion of
the building/structure (See Appendix A, Illustration B).
(12) Business Services. Establishments engaged primarily in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment service;
management and consulting services; protective services; and, office equipment
rental.
(13) Carport. A structure used for the storage of vehicles and having no
enclosure other than its roof and such necessary support as will present the
minimum obstruction to light, air and view.
(14) Club. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by an association
or persons for a social or recreational purpose, but not operated primarily for
profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as business.
(15) Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which units are
owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned
by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
(16) Day Care Center. An establishment which receives for care and
supervision six (6) or more children or adults for less than twenty-four (24)
hours per day unattended by parent or legal guardian, and shall include day
nurseries, child or senior adult day care services, nursery and play schools, and
non-public kindergartens.
(17) Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
(18) Dwelling Unit. One (1) or more rooms designed as a unit for
occupancy as living quarters for sleeping and cooking purposes.
(a) Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building designed, constructed or
reconstructed and used for more than two (2) dwelling units, with each
dwelling unit having a common structural wall with any other dwelling
on the same floor.
(b) Dwelling, Single Family. A building designed, constructed
and used for one (1) dwelling unit.
A-10
(c) Dwelling, Two Family or Duplex. A building designed,
constructed, or reconstructed and used for two (2) dwelling units that are
connected by a common structural wall.
(19) Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a premise and living
together as a single housekeeping unit.
(20) Flood. A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
dry land areas from the overflow of water from streams or rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface water from any source.
(21) Floor Area. The total area of all floors of a building including a
finished attic and finished basement.
(22) Home Occupation. Any activity carried out for gain by a resident
as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit and/or other structure located
on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
(23) Junkyard. A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily
for collecting, storage, and/or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded
materials or for collecting, dismantling, storing, and salvaging of machinery or
vehicles not in running condition or for the sale of parts thereof.
(24) Landscaping. The planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs,
lawns, and other ground cover or materials, provided that terraces, fountains,
retaining walls, street furniture, sculptures, or other art objects, and similar
accessory features may be considered as landscaping if integrally designed.
(25) Lot. A parcel of land which fronts on and has access to a public
(governmentally owned and maintained) street and which is occupied or
intended to be occupied by a building or buildings with customary accessories
and open spaces.
(26) Lot Line. The boundary dividing a given lot from a street, alley, or
adjacent lots.
(a) Lot Line, Front. That property line running with the street
right-of-way which gives access to the lot.
(27) Lot of record. A lot existing prior to this ordinance, the boundaries
of which are filed as legal record.
(28) Medical Facilities. (a) Convalescent, Rest or Nursing Home: A
health care facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals
and continuing nursing care for compensation.
(b) Dental Clinic or Medical Clinic: A facility for the
examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human out-patients
provided, however, that patients are not kept overnight except under
emergency conditions.
(c) Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily
for human inpatient medical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient facilities, emergency
medical services, and staff offices which are an integral part of the
facility.
A-11
(d) Public Health Center: A facility utilized by a health unit for
the provision of public health services.
(29) Mobile Home. A detached residential dwelling unit built on a single
chassis and designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways
on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where
it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or
other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like,
and which meets all standards of the Southern Standard Building Code.
(30) Mobile Home Park. A parcel or tract of land under single ownership
which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
dwelling purposes under the planned unit development regulations.
(31) Modular Building. See Building, Modular.
(32) Nonconforming Use. Any structure or land lawfully occupied by a
use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is
situated.
(33) Noxious Matter. Material (in gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or
any other form) which is capable of causing injury to living organisms, chemical
reactions, or detrimental effects upon the social, economic, or physiological
well-being of individuals.
(34) Personal Services. Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, such as beauty and
barber shops, shoe repair, tailor and seamstress, and weight control and exercise
salons.
(35) Planned Unit Development. An integrated design for development
of residential, commercial, or industrial uses or combination of uses which is
professionally designed to allow flexibility and initiative in site and building
design and location, in accordance with a plan approved by the planning
commission.
(36) Principal Use. The specific primary purpose for which land or a
building is used.
(37) Professional Office. The office of a physician, dentist, attorney,
architect, engineer, urban planner, accountant, or related professions.
(38) Retail Trade and Services. Establishments engaged in selling goods
and/or offering services to the general public for personal, small business, or
household use or consumption.
(39) Satellite Dish Antenna. An earth station antenna, parabolic or
spherical design, for the reception or transmission for the satellite or terrestrial
communication services.
(40) Shopping Center. For the purpose of this ordinance, a shopping
center shall be considered as an enterprise located on a single parcel of property
which is internally separated or segregated into individual shops or separate,
distinct businesses or functions. Individual ownership is not a factor. These
centers shall be considered as planned unit developments.
A-12
(41) Street, Public. Any vehicular way, except alleys, which is owned
and maintained by the city, state, or federal governments.
(42) Structure. Any combination of materials, including buildings,
constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground,
including signs and fences.
(43) Townhouse. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3)
such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside,
no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one (1) or more common fire resistant walls.
(44) Travel Trailer. Any vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit its
being used as conveyance upon the public streets or highways duly licensable
as such, and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as
a dwelling or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons, and designed, for
short-term occupancy, for frequent and/or extensive travel, and for recreational
and vacation use, including camper trucks and self-propelled campers, etc.
(45) Travel Trailer Parks. Any plot of land approved as a planned unit
development upon which two (2) or more travel trailers are located and used as
temporary living or sleeping quarters for periods of thirty days (30), or less.
(46) Wholesale Trade. Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial,
institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting
as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to,
such individuals or companies.
(47) Yard. An open space on the same lot with a principal building,
open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky
except as otherwise provided in this ordinance (See Appendix A, Illustration A).
(a) Yard, front. The yard extending across the entire width of
the lot between the front lot line and the nearest part of the principal
building including covered porches.
(b) Yard, rear. The yard extending across the entire width of the
lot between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal
building, including covered porches.
(c) Yard, side. A yard extending along the side lot line from the
front yard to the rear yard, and lying between the side lot line and the
nearest part of the principal building, including covered porches.
A-13
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION
301. Continuance of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
302. Off-Street Automobile Parking
303. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space
304. Off-Street Parking Lot Design Requirements
305. Ingress and Egress
306. Access Control
307. Vision Clearance
308. Planned Unit Development Regulations
309. Signs
310. Site Plan Regulations for Multi-Family Residential, Commercial, Public,
and Semi-Public Uses
311. Site Plan Regulations for Industrial Uses
312. Temporary, Mobile, Factory-Built, or Factory-Assembled Structures
313. Customary Home Occupations
314. Gasoline Service Stations
301. Continuance of Nonconforming Uses and Structures. Lawful
nonconforming uses, buildings, and structures existing at the time of the
passage of this zoning ordinance, or any amendment thereto, shall be allowed
to remain subject to the following provisions:
(1) No building or land containing a nonconforming use shall hereafter
be extended unless such extensions shall conform with the provisions of this
ordinance for the district in which it is located; provided, however, that a
nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a building which
were manifestly arranged or designed for such use prior to the time of
enactment of this ordinance.
(2) When the following conditions have existed for a period of six (6)
months, it shall be evidence of an intent to abandon a nonconforming use; and
no use of land or structures shall be undertaken thereafter unless it be in
conformity with the provisions of the district within which such property is
located.
(a) Nonresidential Uses. No employees, customers, or clients are
present on site who are there to actively conduct business, give or receive
professional services, participate in activities, or use equipment that is
considered to be essential to the character and operation of the
nonconforming use, and, no serious attempts are being made to market
the property for sale for its former use.
A-14
(b) Residential Uses. No residents, whether they be owners or
tenants, are present, and no serious attempts are being made to market
the property for sale for its former use.
(3) Any nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire or
other causes, may be reconstructed and used as before unless the building
official determines that the building is damaged to the extent of more than fifty
(50) percent of its appraised value for tax purposes in which case any repair or
reconstruction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
When a structure has been burned, damaged or destroyed, it shall be
deemed as a “nonconforming structure” and as such shall be repaired or
demolished (abated). After 90 days, a burned damaged or destroyed structure
shall be considered a public nuisance.
When any structure has been damaged or destroyed, repair or demolition
shall be commenced at the earliest opportunity and at a maximum allotted time
not exceeding 90 days. Extenuating circumstances will be considered, such as:
(a) Not yet released by the State Fire Marshall’s Office,
pertaining to arson investigations.
(b) Specific investigations by the property owner’s insurance
company being not complete.
(c) Local fire inspector, building inspector or police investigator
requiring further investigations, or
(d) Approval by the NRPC or BZA for extensions of time.
(4) Nonconforming mobile homes located on single lots may be
replaced with newer and/or more structurally sound mobile homes for protection
of the health, welfare, and safety of the mobile home resident and surrounding
property owners.
302. Off-Street Automobile Parking. (1) With the exception of uses
within the C-1, Central Business District, the number of parking spaces
provided shall meet the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth
below. For uses not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Each space
shall conform to off-street parking lot design requirements as established in
Section 304.
(a) Automobile repair shop and/or truck repair: One (1) space for
each employee plus one (1) space for each two hundred and fifty (250)
square feet of floor space used for repair work.
(b) Bed & Breakfast/Tourist Homes: One (1) space for each room
to be rented in addition to the two (2) spaces for the home.
(c) Boarding houses and rooming houses: Not less than one (1)
space for each room to be rented.
(d) Bowling Alley: Not less than five (5) spaces for each bowling
lane.
(e) Churches: One (1) space for each four (4) seats.
A-15
(f) Clubs and lodges: One (1) space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of floor space.
(g) Dwelling, single-family: Not less than two (2) spaces per
dwelling unit.
(h) Dwelling, multiple-family: Not less than two (2) spaces per
dwelling unit.
(i) Funeral parlors: One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the
chapel.
(j) Gasoline service stations and similar establishments: Four
(4) spaces for each bay or similar facility plus one (1) space for each
employee.
(k) Hospitals and convalescent/nursing homes: One (1) space for
each four (4) patient beds, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees
including staff doctors and nurses.
(l) Hotels, motels, and other tourist accommodations: Not less
than one (1) space for each room to be rented plus one (1) additional space
per three (3) employees.
(m) Manufacturing or other industrial use: Not less than one (1)
space for each three (3) persons employed or intended to be employed,
with a minimum of five (5) spaces for any establishment.
(n) Mini-Warehouse/Self Storage: One (1) space per storage
room rented out.
(o) Mobile home parks: Two (2) spaces for each mobile home.
(p) Movie Cinema: Not less than one (1) space for each four (4)
seats.
(q) Offices: (i) Medical - one (1) space for each three hundred
(300) square feet of floor space.
(ii) Other professional - one (1) space for each four
hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
(iii) General - one (1) space for each four hundred (400)
square feet of floor space.
(r) Places of public assembly: one (1) space for each five (5) seats
in the principal assembly room or area.
(s) Restaurants: One (1) space per two (2) customers computed
on a maximum seating capacity. Restaurants that also serve take-out
orders shall provide six (6) additional spaces. Drive-thru restaurants with
no indoor seating shall provide fourteen (14) spaces per 1,000 gross
square feet of restaurant area.
(t) Retail business, shopping centers and similar uses: Four (4)
spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area.
(u) Schools: One (1) space for each faculty member and five (5)
additional spaces for visitor parking, plus one (1) space for each four (4)
pupils except in elementary and junior high schools.
A-16
(v) Wholesale business: One (1) space for each three (3)
employees based on maximum employment.
(2) Combination of Required Parking Space. The required parking
space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one (1) lot, but the
required space assigned to one (1) use may not be assigned to another use;
except that, the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls
whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use
which will be closed at night or on Sunday.
(3) Remote Parking Space. If the off-street parking space required
herein cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use
is located, the Board of Zoning Appeals may permit such space to be provided on
other off-street property provided such space lies within four hundred (400) feet
of the main entrance to such principal use, provided that such land is in the
same ownership as the principal use, provided it is not on the opposite side of
a major street or stream, provided a sidewalk is constructed connecting the two
parcels if none exists; and provided that such remote parking spaces are located
within a zoning district which permits the same or similar uses to that of the
use for which the parking is intended. Such land shall be used for no other
purpose so long as no other adequate provision for parking space, meeting the
requirements herein specified, has been made for the principal use.
303. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space. With the exception
of uses within the C-1, Central Business District, every building or structure
hereafter constructed and used for industry, wholesale, business, or trade shall
provide space for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or
alley. Each space shall measure at a minimum of 12 x 30 feet and shall not be
considered as part of the space requirements for off-street automobile storage.
304. Off-Street Parking Lot Design Requirements. To protect and
enhance community appearance and to provide orderly, safe, and systematic
circulation within parking areas, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) All areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be
of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street or alley to
obtain egress.
(2) All parking lots shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from
all public right-of ways.
(3) Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet by nineteen
(19) feet with minimum parking aisle and width dimensions shown as follows:
Parking Stall Stall Aisle
Angel Length Width Width
30 deg. 19.0 9.0 12.0
45 deg. 19.0 9.0 13.0
60 deg. 19.0 9.0 18.0
70 deg. 19.0 9.0 24.0
90 deg. 19.0 9.0 24.0
A-17
(4) Handicapped parking shall be provided as regulated in the
Southern Standard Building Code. Each establishment shall have a minimum
of one (1) handicapped parking space and be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and
six (6) inches by nineteen (19) feet.
(5) All parking aisles shall be arranged so as to channel traffic and
minimize vehicular/pedestrian conflicts.
(6) Entrances and exits for all off-street parking lots shall comply with
the requirements of Section 306 of this ordinance.
(7) The parking lot shall be adequately drained to eliminate surface
water without contributing to drainage problems on adjoining property or
rights-of-way.
(8) With the exception of single-family dwellings, all required off-street
parking shall be paved with a minimum of asphaltic concrete and have an
adequate base to prevent premature break-up.
(9) All fixed objects within parking lots (utility poles, signs, fire
hydrants, etc.) shall be located within islands to which access by vehicles is
physically limited. These islands shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees,
or other appropriate plant material which shall not obstruct visibility from
vehicles.
(10) Traffic safety signs, signals, and markings shall be in conformance
with the Tennessee Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where needed,
size reduction of devices shall be approved, however, shape and color shall meet
requirements of the manual.
(11) Parking rows and interior dividers shall be terminated with
terminal islands not less than five (5) feet in width, constructed with raised
curbs, and landscaped with appropriate cover.
(12) Landscaping shall be required as established in Section 310.2.d or
311.2.d.
(13) Maintenance of all islands, parking spaces and ways, landscaping,
and traffic control devices within the parking facility is the responsibility of the
property owner. All elements shown on the site plan are to be maintained on a
regular schedule. All structures or plant materials that are damaged must be
replaced to original standards within ninety (90) days. The planning director or
his designated representative shall regularly inspect parking lots required to
meet these regulations. The planning director or his representative shall notify
the property owner and/or manager upon finding deficiencies in structural or
landscaped areas.
305. Ingress and egress. A plan for adequate and safe ingress and
egress for all land uses shall be required.
306. Access control. It is the purpose of this section to establish
reasonable and impartial regulations for the location of driveway entrances, and
A-18
to promote the safety of users of the streets and lands of Newport through the
control of design, location, and construction of driveway entrances.
(1) General Provisions. In no case shall any curbs on city streets or
rights-of-way be cut or altered without first obtaining a driveway permit from
the planning department. Minimum paving requirements for such driveways
shall be determined by the planning director at the time of application. In all
cases, the driveway extension over the right-of-way shall be paved to protect
public streets.
(2) Driveway Alignment. Single driveways shall be positioned at right
angles to the roadway. Where two (2) driveways are used on one (1) frontage,
and they are to be used for access to and from both directions of travel on the
highway, each roadway shall be at right angles with the center line of the
roadway. The driveway angle may be between forty-five (45 ) degrees (min.) and
sixty (60 ) degrees (max.) when the driveway is to be used by vehicles in only one
direction of highway travel (right turns only) on a divided highway.
(3) Driveway Entrance Regulations. All driveway entrances shall be
located subject to the following controls:
(a) On all streets classified as Level A on the official zoning map
(See Appendix B), no driveway entrances shall be constructed within one
hundred (100) feet of an intersecting street right-of-way line.
(b) On all streets classified as Level B and C on the official
zoning map (See Appendix B), no driveway entrances shall be constructed
within sixty (60) feet of an intersecting street right-of-way line.
(c) On all streets classified as Level D on the official zoning map
(See Appendix B), no driveway entrances shall be constructed within
twenty-five (25) feet of an intersecting street right-of-way line.
(d) On all streets classified as Level A on the official zoning
map, no driveway entrances shall be constructed within forty (40) feet of
the side property line.
(e) On all streets classified as Level B and C on the official
zoning map, no driveway entrances shall be constructed within twenty
(20) feet of the side property line.
(f) If neighboring property owners wish to share a driveway, the
shared side property line setback requirements shall be waived. If a
driveway is shared, this one (1) driveway will count as two (2), or as one
(1) driveway per lot and all other access control requirements shall be
met.
(g) If a lot of record cannot meet the above access control
requirements, a driveway cut will not be denied; but the spirit and intent
of this section shall be adhered to as closely as possible.
(4) Number of Driveway Entrances Allowed. In order to promote the
safety of the motorist and to minimize traffic congestion and property damage
by reducing the points of conflict, the following regulations shall apply:
A-19
(a) Lots with less than one hundred fifty (150) feet frontage may
have one (1) driveway entrance.
(b) Lots with one hundred fifty (150) feet to eight hundred (800)
feet of frontage may have two (2) driveway entrances.
(c) Lots with over eight hundred (800) feet frontage may have
one (1) additional driveway entrance for each additional four hundred
(400) feet.
(5) Driveway Entrance Widths. The width of all curb cuts shall be
within the following limits.
(a) Residential uses shall be limited to driveway widths
between ten (10) and twenty-five (25) feet.
(b) Uses serving twenty-five (25) or more large trucks per week
shall have driveway widths between twenty (20) and forty (40) feet.
(c) All other uses shall be limited to driveway widths between
fifteen (15) and thirty (30) feet.
307. Vision Clearance. In all districts there shall be no plants or
structures placed in or on any yard partition of a lot that would obstruct the
vision of auto or pedestrian traffic using the intersecting public streets.
308. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Regulations. The purpose
of the Planned Unit Development regulations is to provide for diversification in
the relationship of uses and structures to their sites and also provide flexibility
which will create a more desirable living environment. A PUD shall mean an
integrated, professionally prepared design for development of residential,
commercial, or industrial uses, or as permitted, combinations of such uses, to
allow application of new techniques and technology of site and building design
and location; this for the purpose of achieving economies in land usage,
maintenance, and street and utility systems while providing for attractive open
areas, safe circulation, and general well-being of the inhabitants.
(1) Applicability of PUD Regulations. A PUD may be developed in any
district provided that the uses permitted and density requirements of the
district allow the development and the PUD plan elements are approved by the
planning commission. Residential, commercial, public, semi-public, or industrial
uses, or combinations of these uses where district or special regulations permit,
may be developed under the PUD concept. Cluster type subdivisions and
condominiums, townhouses, multi-dwelling units, rental developments,
multi-use parks, travel trailer parks, and multi-use or ownership developments
shall be considered as PUD's for the purpose of this ordinance.
(2) Relationships of PUD Regulations to District and Site Plan
Regulations. Unless specifically altered by any provision of this section, the use
and development regulations of Sections 601 through 609, Sections 310 and 311,
or any other applicable provision of this ordinance shall apply to the
development of a PUD.
A-20
(3) General Requirements. All PUD developments shall comply with
the following requirements.
(a) Minimum Site. No PUD shall have an area less than that
required by the planning commission as adequate for the proposed
project; however, the minimum site shall not be less than the minimum
lot size required in the district in which the proposed project is to be
located.
(b) Structures and Open Space. The planning commission shall
require structures and open space to be arranged on the site in such a
way that adjacent uses will not be adversely affected.
(i) Where feasible, the highest height and intensity of
uses shall be toward the interior of the projects.
(ii) No freestanding building shall be located closer than
twenty (20) feet to any other freestanding building.
(iii) Minimum setback requirements for lots as
established in Chapters 6 and 7 may be altered upon approval of
the planning commission; except that, in no case shall the setbacks
from any exterior project site side or rear property line be less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
(iv) Landscaping/buffering requirements, as contained in
Sections 310 and 311 and Chapter 6, shall be applied to PUD
developments; except that, the planning commission may require
additional landscape materials or structures where it is deemed to
be in the public interest to do so.
(4) Open Space Requirements. Preservation, maintenance, and
ownership of open space areas and facilities shall be accomplished by one or
more of the following methods, and shall be established in an appropriate legal
manner.
(a) Dedication to and acceptance by the public as part of a
governmentally administered park and open space system.
(b) A property owners association.
(c) The developer or management authority of the PUD.
(5) Parking and Access Control Requirements. The provisions of this
ordinance relating to vehicular access and parking (Sections 302 through 307)
shall be adhered to; except that, the planning commission may alter these
requirements in instances in which a superior design alternative is presented
which will not be detrimental to the public interest or in conflict with the intent
of this ordinance.
(6) Density Requirements for Residential PUD. The density (units per
gross acre) of dwelling units in a PUD shall be no greater than that allowed in
the zoning district within which a PUD is located. The open spaces around
public structures, such as schools and churches may be included in the gross
acreage of the site for the purpose of calculating the number of residential units
that are allowed within a PUD.
A-21
(7) Signs. The number, size, type, and placement of signs within PUDs
shall be governed by the applicable provisions of Section 309 of this ordinance.
(8) Street and Utility Construction Standards. Public and common
ways for pedestrian and vehicular circulation shall be developed in relationship
to other existing or planned streets and ways and with the Newport Major Road
Plan. Whether or not the subdivision of property is proposed within a PUD, all
project street and way improvements shall comply with the construction
standards set out in the subdivision regulations. Due to the uniqueness of each
PUD, the owner/developer of a PUD may request slight adjustments from
widths of streets, ways, utility easements, curbing, and similar standards set
out in the subdivision regulations; and, upon a determination of good cause
being shown for such adjustments, the planning commission may permit
changes or alterations in standards, provided the spirit and intent of this section
can be preserved.
(9) Plan Preparation and Review Process. (a) PUDs Requiring The
Subdivision of Property. In PUDs in which property is divided for the
purpose of sale or rental, such as a subdivision or mobile home park, the
following requirements for PUD plan preparation shall apply:
(i) Preliminary PUD Plan. Prior to submitting a
preliminary subdivision plat for review, a preliminary PUD plan
shall be submitted to the planning commission which shall include
the following: the general location of buildings and uses, general
circulation patterns, open space and recreation areas, parking
areas, ingress/egress points, sketch elevations and drainage, the
boundary dimensions, overall density of development, public uses,
landscaping concepts, zoning classification, and other information
deemed pertinent by the planning commission. The approved
preliminary PUD plan shall serve as the plan upon which the final
PUD plan and preliminary subdivision plat are based. Approval of
a preliminary PUD plan shall lapse twelve (12) months from the
date it was approved.
(ii) Final PUD Plan/Preliminary Subdivision Plat. In
addition to meeting the applicable provisions of the subdivision
regulations regarding preparation of a preliminary plat, the final
PUD plan shall include detailed architectural/engineering plans
for: utilities, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, location
of all structures, topographic intervals at no less than five (5) feet,
minimum elevations, and grading, the physical relationship of
uses, parking areas, open space and recreation areas, landscaped
areas, buffer or screening materials and locations, areas proposed
for dedication as parks, ways, or places, final drafts or legal
documents, and other information deemed pertinent by the
planning commission. Upon approval of the final PUD plan and
the preliminary subdivision plat by the planning commission,
A-22
development may commence with the installation of public
improvements. No lots, however, shall be sold until final
subdivision plat approval has been granted by the planning
commission with all required improvements having either been
installed or appropriate security posted for the installation of such
improvements.
(b) PUDs Not Requiring The Subdivision of Property. In PUDs
in which no individual parcel of property is owned or rented, such as
condominium, apartment, commercial, or industrial PUDs, and similar
uses, the following requirements for PUD plan preparation apply:
(i) Preliminary PUD Plan. A concept plan containing the
following information shall be submitted to the planning
commission for review: the general location of buildings and uses,
general circulation patterns, open space and recreation areas,
parking areas, ingress/egress points, sketch elevations and
drainage, the boundary dimensions, overall density of
development, public uses, landscaping concepts, zoning
classification, and other information deemed pertinent by the
planning commission. The approved preliminary PUD plan shall
serve as the plan upon which the final PUD plan is based.
Approval of a preliminary PUD plan shall lapse twelve (12)
months from the date it was approved.
(ii) Final PUD Plan. Following approval of a preliminary
PUD plan, the developer may proceed to prepare a final PUD plan
which shall include detailed architectural/engineering plans for:
utilities, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, location of
all structures, topographic intervals at no less than five (5) feet,
minimum elevations, and grading, the physical relationship of
uses, parking areas, open space and recreation areas, landscaped
areas, buffer or screening materials and locations, areas proposed
for dedication as parks, ways, or places, final drafts of legal
documents, and other information deemed pertinent by the
planning commission. Upon approval of the final PUD plan, a
special conditions permit may be issued.
(10) Staging of Development. The PUD applicant may elect to develop
the site in successive stages. The stages and expected development periods shall
be shown on the preliminary PUD development plan. However, each stage given
final PUD approval must be substantially complete within itself. The planning
commission may also require the development of a PUD project in stages if
public facilities are not adequate to handle the entire development initially.
(11) Permits. The developer of a PUD shall be entitled to receive
appropriate development permits following approval of the final PUD plan and
the preliminary subdivision plat, where applicable. However, none of these
permits shall be issued until the planning director receives a PUD plan which
A-23
bears the signed certificates of approval and of application and agreement (See
Appendix C for examples).
(12) Changes and Modifications. A PUD project may be changed or
modified under conditions established for minor changes and major changes.
(a) Minor changes. The planning commission may approve
changes in minor shifts of building locations proposed streets and ways,
utilities and easements, recreation and open space areas or other features
on the approved plan. However, these changes shall not increase
densities, change exterior boundary lines, change uses, materially change
location or amount of land devoted to specific uses, or significantly change
the exterior features or appearance of buildings and uses shown on the
approved plans.
(b) Major changes. All changes other than those established as
minor shall be considered as major changes to the PUD plan and shall
require a new plan submission in accordance with the procedures and
requirements for approval of a PUD plan.
309. Signs. The purpose of this article is to regulate all exterior signs,
so as to protect property values, the visual character, and the public health,
safety and welfare of Newport. Signs are deemed to be an accessory and
incidental use to the land or building in which they identify or advertise for a
use thereon, and is intended that such signs will be appropriate and adequate,
but not excessive, in performing their identification or advertising function. All
new signs erected, constructed, or placed upon any property or building within
the city shall conform to the provisions of this section. In addition, this article
enables the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations under the
zoning authority of the City of Newport.
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of the chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
(a) Abandoned Sign. Means a permitted sign that was erected
on the property in conjunction with a particular use, that use having been
subsequently discontinued for a period of 30 (thirty) days or more, or a
permitted temporary sign for which the permit has expired.
(b) Animated Sign. Means any sign or permanent structure that
uses movement, projection, or change of lighting or other electrical
impulses to depict action or create a special effect. Variable display signs,
beacons, and moving message boards are considered to be animated signs
under this chapter.
(c) Banners, Pennants, Festoons and Balloons. Means any sign
of fabric or other flexible material that is permanently mounted to a pole,
enclosed in a frame, or otherwise mounted to allow movement caused by
wind. Flags shall not be considered as banners under this chapter.
(d) Canopy Sign. (see Wall Sign)
A-24
(e) Commercial Message. Means any sign wording, logo, or
other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
(f) Construction Sign. Means any sign, whose message is
limited to the name and use of the building being constructed, which may
include the names of the architects, engineers, contractors, and other
persons involved with the construction project.
(g) Dilapidated Sign. Means any sign that is structurally
unsound, has defective parts, or is in need of painting or other
maintenance.
(h) Directional Sign. Means a permanent sign erected for or by
a public entity for purposes of identification, direction, or public safety.
(i) Existing Sign. Means any sign that was erected, mounted,
or displayed prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(j) Franchise Sign. Means a company, corporation, or franchise
that has specific or standard sign age for national logos or signs.
Franchise signs must also comply with sign regulations.
(k) Freestanding Sign. Means any sign supported by structures
or supports that are anchored in the ground and that are independent of
any building or other structure.
(l) Height Clearance. Means the perpendicular distance from
the graded ground surface to the bottom edge of any freestanding sign
that is not classified as a ground or monument sign.
(m) Height of Sign. Means the vertical distance from normal
grade to the highest point of the sign. Any berming, filling, or excavating
solely for the purpose of locating the sign shall be included as part of the
sign height.
(n) Illegal Sign. Means any sign that does not have a valid
permit from the city, is not a lawful non-conforming sign, and is not
exempt from the permit requirement established within this chapter.
(o) Incidental Sign. Means any sign, generally informational,
that has a purpose secondary to the use on the lot on which it is located,
such as “ no parking”, “entrance”, “loading only”, etc. No sign with a
commercial message, symbol, or service shall be considered incidental.
(p) Ingress/Egress Sign. Means a sign displaying the direction
of ingress or egress on a given site, such as “in”, “out”, “one way” etc.
(q) Marquee. Means any permanent roof-like structure
projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the
wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide
protection from the weather. A marquee is characteristically used to
mark the entrance to a theater or cinema.
(r) Master Identification Sign. Means a wall sign identifying all
of the businesses within a single building or structure.
A-25
(s) Menu Board. Means a structure primarily designed for the
display of a menu items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for
such items in conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through
service.
(t) Monument Sign. Means a freestanding sign attached to the
ground, which incorporates a design and materials complimentary to the
architectural theme of the building on the same property.
(u) Mural Sign. Is a scene or form of artwork without wording
that is painted or affixed onto a structure. The Newport Regional
Planning Commission must approve this type of sign.
(v) Nonconforming (Sign or Sign Structure). Means any existing
permanent sign or sign structure which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter, but was erected pursuant to a valid permit
from the city and complied with the sign regulations in effect at the time
it was erected.
(w) Off-Premise Sign. Means a sign that directs attention to a
business, commodity, or service offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is erected. Any sign that is not an on-premise
sign as defined herein shall be considered an off-premise sign.
(x) On-Premise Sign. Means a sign that directs attention to a
business, commodity, or service offered located on the premises on which
the sign is erected. For the purpose of this chapter, common access
easements, common reserved areas, or common open space shall be
considered as any of the served lots.
(y) Painted Wall Sign. Means any sign or display without
wording painted directly on any exterior surface, exclusive of window or
door glass areas.
(z) Pole (or Pylon) Sign. Shall mean any freestanding sign more
than (4) four feet in height that does not meet the definition of a
monument, ground, or portable sign. These signs are composed of the sign
cabinet or base and the sign pole or pylon by which it connects to the
ground.
(aa) Political Preference Sign. Means any temporary sign
supporting a political candidate, stating a position regarding a political
issue or similar purpose. Any political preference sign shall have a name
(person, business, or organization) and address on to the sign.
(bb) Portable Sign. Means any sign designed or intended to be
readily relocated, and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a
structure. Portable signs include such signs as sidewalk signs, A-frame
sign or any sign attached to or painted on a vehicle or trailer parked and
visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the
normal day-to-day operations of the business. For the purpose of this
chapter, portable signs shall not be considered permanent signs. Real
estate signs and other temporary signs that are otherwise provided for in
A-26
this chapter shall not be considered portable signs for the purpose of this
chapter.
(cc) Product Sales Sign. Means a sign that advertises a product
or item that is being sold on the premises. Product sales sign shall only
display the product name and sale price.
(dd) Projecting Sign. Means any sign, other than a wall sign,
whose leading edge extends beyond the building or wall to which it is
affixed, forming an angle with said building or wall.
(ee) Public Right-of-Way/Public Way. Means a strip of ground
dedicated for public use, usually for Public Street, public infrastructure,
and/or waterway. For the purpose of this chapter, such right-of-way shall
be considered to extend a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of
pavement, or to the dedicated right-of-way boundary, whichever is
further.
(ff) Real Estate Sign. Means a temporary sign erected by the
owner, or agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is
located for rent, lease, or sale.
(gg) Roof Line. Means the highest horizontal point of the wall
visible to the public, excluding any architectural feature that extends
above such apparent horizontal roofline if such feature is fully enclosed
and considered an integral part of the occupied space, such as an atrium
or high ceiling.
(hh) Roof Sign. An attached or wall sign extending above the
plate line or on the parapet of a building or structure is allowed; any sign
or part of sign beyond the highest point or edge of the roof is prohibited.
See example A. below.
Example A. - ROOF SIGN
A-27
ROOF SIGN (Cont.)
(ii) Shopping Center. Is defined as two (2) or more tenants
occupying one (1) or more structures on a single parcel of land or a group
of adjoining parcels, that is designated to integrate the building fronts,
and parking areas, signs and ingress/egress to operate as one (1) unit.
Shopping Centers not designed to be operated as an integrated single
unit will be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(jj) Sign. Means any display of any letter, numeral, figure,
emblem, picture, outline, character, spectacle, announcement, or
anything in part or in combination by any means whereby the same are
made visible to the eye and for the purpose of attracting attention
outdoors to make anything known, whether such display be made on,
attached to, or as part of a structure erected for the purpose, or on,
attached to, or as a part of any other structure, surface, or thing,
including but not limited to the ground or any rock, tree or other natural
object, which display is visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel
of property on or over which the same is made.
(kk) Sign Area. Means the square foot enclosed by the perimeter
of the sign face. With the respect to signs that are composed of individual
symbols, letters, numbers, figures, illustrations, messages, forms, or
panels, sign area shall be considered to include all such components
together with their background, surrounding frame, and any “cutouts” or
extensions. The sign area shall not include any support structure bracing.
(ll) Sign Content. Means the sign shall be limited to identifying
or advertising the property, and individual enterprises, the products or
services, the entertainment available on the same property where the
sign is located, or public service information.
(mm) Sign Face. Means the entire area of a sign upon, against, or
through which copy is placed.
A-28
(nn) Sign Structure. Means any structure that supports, has
supported, or is capable of supporting a sign, including any decorative
cover for the sign structure. This definition shall not include a building,
fence, wall, or earthen berm.
(oo) Snipe Sign. Means any sign that is affixed by any means to
trees, utility poles, fences, or other objects, where the message appearing
thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which
the sign is located.
(pp) Special Event Sign. Means any sign, including a banner,
which carries a message regarding a special community event or function
associated with a recognized charitable or civic organization.
(qq) Subdivision Sign. Means any sign located at the entrance to
subdivision, whether it is residential, commercial, or industrial, as
defined in this chapter.
(rr) Temporary Sign. Means any sign that is intended for
temporary and a limited time period, as permitted by this chapter.
(ss) Two-Sided Sign, Two Sign Faces. Means any sign
constructed on a single set of supports, with messages visible on either
side, or a “V” type sign with a common support in the center of the “V”.
(tt) Wall Sign. Means any sign, other than a projecting sign,
that is attached to or painted on any wall of any building, awning, or
canopy.
(uu) Window Sign. Means any sign, graphic or interior design
element placed inside the window pane, used to advertise, announce, or
identify a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind, or
to draw visual attention to the business or use, and which is visible from
the public right-of-way. For purposes of this chapter, window signs may
be permanent or temporary and subject to the applicable provisions
herein.
(2) Applicability; Effect. A sign may be established or maintained in
the city only in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. The effect
of this article, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
(a) Establish a permit system to allow a variety of sign types in
commercial zones, and a limited variety of signs in other zones, subject
to the standards and permit procedures of this article.
(b) Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the
principle use of a site without a permit when in compliance with the
requirements of this article.
(c) Provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances.
(d) Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this article.
(e) Provide for enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(3) General Provisions. (a) Plans Required. The planning director
shall be provided with plans and specifications identifying the location,
A-29
type, and design of any sign, which requires a permit under the
provisions of this section.
(b) Permit Required (i) Unless specifically exempted by this
section, it shall be unlawful to erect, substantially modify or
relocate any sign without first obtaining a sign permit. When a
sign permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to substantially
modify the sign without prior approval from the Building
Inspections Department. A written record of such approval shall
be entered upon the original permit application and maintained in
the permit record.
(ii) A sign permit will not be required for the placement
of one (1) temporary commercial freestanding sign, if a temporary
building permit has been issued. The temporary sign shall be
placed upon the premise’s address by the building permit and
removed when the temporary building permit expires. No more
than one (1) temporary sign will be allowed.
(c) Prohibited Signs. (i) Signs which include action, motion,
moving materials, or which have any moving parts; or contain
flashing or rotating lights or bulbs; or are intermittently lighted;
or interfere with the view of traffic or that could be confused with
any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device, with the
exception of signs that display time and temperature and public
service announcements without advertising matter.
(ii) Portable signs.
(iii) Signs that are not securely affixed to the ground, or
otherwise affixed in a permanent manner to an approved
supporting structure.
(iv) Any sign which by reason of its location, position, size,
shape, or color may obstruct, impair, or otherwise interfere with
the view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign or signal
erected by a public authority. To these ends, no sign shall use the
words “slow”, “stop”, “caution”, “yield”, “danger”, “warning”, or “go”
in a manner that misleads, confuses, or distracts a vehicle driver.
(v) Signs on public property including utility poles,
except those erected by an authorized public entity.
(vi) Signs and landscaping around signs that create a
sight visibility problem for public safety and health.
(vii) No more than one (1) freestanding sign per property
where the business is being conducted, unless the property fronts
more than one (1) primary or secondary parallel or intersecting
roads, which would allow an additional freestanding sign per
primary or secondary road frontage. No more than one (1)
freestanding sign per road frontage. Enter and exit signs shall not
be included in the total number of signs allowed.
A-30
(viii) Product Sales signs that are not affixed onto the
building where the product is being sold. Product Sales signs shall
be temporarily fixed to the building in a proper and neat fashion
as determined by the codes official. Product advertisement signs
shall be temporary, and shall not be displayed for more than two
(2) weeks.
(ix) All signs which are not expressly permitted by this
ordinance or any other ordinance of the city.
(d) Non-conforming Signs. (i) The utilization of a nonconforming
sign and/or sign structure, as defined herein, may continue subject
to the conditions and requirements noted below. When the use of
a property changes (including but not limited to the redevelopment
of the site or a change in the use or name of the business(es), the
sign on that property must be brought into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(ii) No alterations to a nonconforming sign/sign structure
shall be permitted except minor repairs and maintenance. Any
structural or other substantial maintenance or improvement to a
nonconforming sign (except for painting or refinishing the surface
of the existing sign face or sign structure so as to maintain the
appearance) shall be deemed an abandonment of the
nonconforming status, shall render any prior permit void and
result in there classification of such sign as an illegal sign.
(iii) In the event that a non-conforming sign is
reconstructed as the result of damage from any cause, or to correct
deterioration and dilapidation to the extent of (50%) fifty percent
of its fair market value, said signs shall be permitted to exist in
nonconforming locations only to the extent that the surface area
for message display be reconstructed in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(e) Signs Permitted in all Zoning Districts. The following types
of signs are permitted in all districts, subject to the conditions set
out below and other applicable provisions of this ordinance. Such
signs do not require a permit.
(i) Political Campaign Signs. One (1) sign per candidate
per premise, each sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in
residential districts or sixteen (16) square feet in all other districts,
may be erected on private property no more than thirty (30) days
prior to the election. The property owner shall remove all
campaign signs within seven (7) days after the results of an
election are certified.
(ii) Temporary Special Event Signs. Signs not exceeding
thirty-two (32) square feet that announce a special event sponsored
by a civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organization
A-31
may be erected on private property no more than thirty (30) days
prior to the event. The property owner shall remove all special
event signs within seven (7) days of the conclusion of an event. A
downtown streaming banner identifying a special event being held
in Cocke County must be approved by the Newport Regional
Planning Commission with the continuance of approval from the
property owners that are being affected. The streaming banner
location is located at 145 E. Broadway.
(iii) Real Estate Sale/Lease Signs. Maximum signage up
to nine (9) square feet in residential zones or thirty-two (32) square
feet in commercial and industrial zones, advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which
the signs are displayed are permitted. Such signs shall be removed
within fourteen (14) days of the sale, rental, or lease.
(iv) Residential Name/Address Signs. For each single
family dwelling unit, one (1) nameplate indicating name, address,
house number, home occupation, or an announcement of space for
boarders or roomers if applicable, limited to two (2) square feet in
area, is permitted.
(f) Signs Requiring a Permit. (i) Residential Districts.
(A) For subdivisions, and PUD’s (including
multi-family developments and mobile home parks) and all
non-residential uses, total sign age shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in area and twelve (12) feet in
height, is permitted. Individual buildings within a PUD
total signage shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
(B) While under development, a subdivision or
PUD may have one (1) temporary sign that shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet in area and twelve (12) feet in height.
Such sign is permitted in addition to any permanent
identification sign, but shall be removed after two (2) years
or when ninety (90%) percent of the project is sold,
whichever occurs first.
(ii) Commercial Districts. (A) Wall signage for a Single
Commercial Occupant not located in a Shopping Center,
Mall, or commercial PUD’s shall not exceed one hundred
(100) square feet in area, except for occupants building that
is larger than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet,
which would be allowed two hundred-fifty (250) square feet
of wall signage. Freestanding sign shall not exceed one
hundred-fifty (150) square feet in area. Sign height shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet. Enter and exit signs not exceeding
three (3) square feet, height not exceeding three (3) feet, and
A-32
does not obstruct clear visibility to vehicles exiting the
premises.
(B) Shopping Centers, malls, and commercial
PUD’s wall signage for each occupant or business shall not
exceed or cover over twenty-five (25%) percent of the wall
facing. Wall facing calculations are estimated by
multiplying a standard ceiling height of eight (8) feet by
sidewall-to-sidewall width. See example B. below. Maximum
wall signage shall not exceed three hundred (300) square
feet. Total square feet allowed for a freestanding sign shall
not exceed three hundred-fifty (350) square feet and the sign
height shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. Enter and
exit signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet and shall
not obstruct clear visibility for vehicles exiting the premises,
and exceed in three (3) feet in height. Shopping Centers not
designed to be operated as an integrated single unit will be
allowed additional freestanding signs. The Board of Zoning
Appeals will determine if the commercial center is designed
to operate as a single unit, and will determine the location
and number of freestanding signs.
Example B
A-33
(C) In the C-3 Interstate Highway Business
District each business shall be allowed in addition to the
normal business signs, one (1) highrise freestanding
interstate sign not to exceed one hundred (100) feet in
height nor three hundred-fifty (350) square feet in sign area.
(iii) Industrial Districts. (A) Maximum identification
sign area permitted for separate establishments on
individual lots located outside a PUD, shall be one hundred
and seventy-five (175) square feet per separate industrial
use; except that no ground sign or wall sign shall be greater
than one hundred-fifty (150) square feet in area.
(B) In industrial PUD’s or buildings housing more
than one (1) establishment, each establishment may have
one (1) ground sign per establishment not to exceed one
hundred (100) square feet and a wall or other type signs so
long as the total sign area for each establishment does not
exceed one hundred-fifty (150) square feet. Enter and exit
signs not exceeding three (3) square feet and height not
exceeding three (3) feet and does not obstruct clear visibility
to vehicles exiting the premises.
(C) Industrial park entrance signs shall be limited
to one (1) major directory sign not to exceed two hundred
(200) square feet.
(iv) Administration. The following shall apply in the
administration of these sign provisions:
(A) Fees and inspections: Fees may be charged for
sign permits and for annual inspection. Permits for signs
shall become null and void if the sign is not installed within
(6) six months.
(B) Removal or repair of signs: Any sign which is
erected not in conformance with this chapter, or any sign
which by reason of improper maintenance, abandoned, or
disrepair becomes nonconforming or unsafe, shall be
removed or repaired pursuant to the provisions of all
building codes as enforced by the building inspections
department, and all amendments thereto, as incorporated
by reference in the code of ordinances of the City of
Newport, Tennessee.
310. Site Plan Regulations for Commercial, Multi-Family, Public,
and Semi-Public Uses. It is the general purpose and intent of this section to
require site plans for all new developments or redevelopments of commercial,
multi-family, public, or semi-public uses to provide for a lessening of traffic
congestion and for securing adequate light, air, and aesthetic conditions for
A-34
residents of the city. These plans shall be approved by the planning commission
as consistent with this ordinance and with the comprehensive planning program
of the town prior to the issuance of grading or building permits.
Site plans for small additions to existing buildings shall be exempt from
review when, in the opinion of the planning director, the addition will not
adversely affect the general purpose and intent of these regulations.
Shopping centers, mobile home parks, travel trailer parks, apartments,
condominiums, and other similar types of projects shall be developed under the
provisions of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Regulations as set out in
Section 308; except that, unless specifically altered by the provisions of Section
308 or the use and development regulations contained in Sections 601 - 609 or
any other applicable provision of this ordinance, all provisions relating to plan
preparation and site development contained in this section shall also apply to
the plan preparation and site development of all PUDs.
In accordance with the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-4-104, site plans for any public use including, but not limited to, schools,
parks, streets and highways, public buildings, and utilities, shall be submitted
to the planning commission for review, and shall be prepared in accordance with
the provisions of Sections 308, 601 - 609, and this section, as may be applicable.
A site plan shall set forth the proposed development of the total land tract
and shall meet the following regulations:
(1) General Provisions. (a) All site plans shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed engineer, landscape architect, architect, and/or surveyor,
as may be appropriate, and in accordance with state law regarding the practice
of these professions. Drawings shall be at a scale of not less than 1" = 20' for
small tracts and 1" = 50' for large tracts.
(b) All site plans shall show: (i) Topography of existing and
finished grades.
(ii) Location of all land subject to flooding.
(iii) Dimensions and calls of all property lines.
(iv) North point, scale, acreage of site, and location map.
(v) Location of all existing and proposed structures
(including signs), street rights-of-way, sidewalks, and easements.
(vi) Dimensions of all existing and proposed structures.
(vii) Plans for vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
utilities, solid waste disposal, landscaping and open space, signs,
off-street parking, and storm water drainage.
(2) Open Space and Landscaping Plan. To obtain sufficient space
between uses and buildings for adequate light, air, privacy, and amenities, the
following requirements for open space and landscaping are established:
(a) Landscaping shall mean planting of grass, trees, shrubs, or
other comparable surface cover or decorative plazas and/or pools. Where
existing landscape features exist on site which can meet the purpose of
this section, all or part of such features may be used to meet the
A-35
requirements of this section upon the approval of the planning
commission.
(b) All developments shall meet the minimum yard (open space)
requirements established in Chapters 6 and 7.
(c) The setback space between a public street and parking areas
shall be landscaped with berms and/or appropriate landscape plants
which shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition through a
permanent maintenance program.
(3) Signs. Sign size and placement shall be governed by the provisions
of Section 309.
(4) Off-Street Parking. The off-street parking and loading/unloading
areas, points of ingress/egress, and driveways shall be developed in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 302 through 306.
(5) Waste Disposal. All waste disposal facilities shall be screened by
fencing, walls, or evergreen plant materials in such a way that they are not
visible from any public street or adjoining properties.
(6) Stormwater Drainage. A certified plan for stormwater drainage
shall be included with the site plan which identifies all easements, drainage
structures including sizes/capacities, and other pertinent information concerning
the assumptions upon which the plan is based. The estimated stormwater runoff
based on a ten (10) year storm shall be calculated for pre-development and
post-development. The amount of runoff shall not be increased, and shall be
accommodated on site.
(7) Site Improvements Bond. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, the planning director shall make a determination regarding whether
or not all site improvements, as set out in this ordinance and the approved site
plan, have been properly made or installed. If not, prior to issuing a certificate
of occupancy, the planning director and city manager shall determine the
amount, form, and term of surety that must be established and must secure
such guarantee for the purpose of ensuring the timely completion of the required
site improvements.
(8) Issuance of Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued
until the planning director receives a site plan which bears the signed
certificates of site plan approval and of application and agreement (See
Appendix D).
(9) Expiration of Approved Site Plans. Approval of a site plan shall
expire six (6) months after the date of its approval unless a building permit has
been issued and substantial progress has been made toward completion of the
project.
311. Site Plan Regulations for Industrial Uses. It is the intent of this
section to require site plans for all new industrial uses as well as any
non-industrial uses which are permitted in the industrial districts of the town
and shall apply to the expansion or redevelopment of any existing uses within
A-36
the town's industrial districts. The purpose of these regulations is to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Newport through a lessening
of traffic congestion, the securing of adequate light and air, the preservation of
aesthetic qualities, and the protection of property. These site plans shall be
reviewed and approved by the planning commission as being consistent with the
intent of this ordinance and the comprehensive planning program of the city
prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit.
Industrial and/or commercial PUDs located in any industrial zoning
district shall be developed under the provisions of the Planned Unit
Development (PUD) Regulations as set out in Section 308; except that unless
specifically altered by the provisions of Sections 308 or the use and development
regulations contained in Sections 601 through 609 or any other applicable
provision of this ordinance, all provisions relating to plan preparation and site
development contained in this section shall also apply to the plan preparation
and site development of all PUDs.
In accordance with the provisions of Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-4-104, site plans for any public use including but not limited to schools,
parks, streets and highways, public buildings, and utilities, shall be submitted
to the planning commission for review and shall be prepared in accordance with
the provisions of Sections 308, 601 - 609, and this section, as may be applicable.
(1) General Provisions. (a) All site plans shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed engineer, landscape architect, architect, and/or
surveyor, as may be appropriate, and in accordance with state law
regarding the practice of these professions. Drawings shall be at a scale
of not less than 1" = 20' for small tracts and 1" = 50' for large tracts.
(b) All site plans shall show: (i) Topography of existing and
finished grades.
(ii) Location of all land subject to flooding.
(iii) Dimensions and calls of all property lines.
(iv) North point, scale, acreage of site, and location map.
(v) Location of all existing and proposed structures
(including signs), street rights-of-way, sidewalks, easements, and
covenants.
(vi) Dimensions of all existing and proposed structures.
(vii) Plans for vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
utilities, solid waste disposal, landscaping and open space, signage,
off-street parking, and storm water drainage.
(2) Open Space and Landscaping Plan. To obtain sufficient space
between uses and buildings for adequate light, air, privacy, and amenities, the
following requirements for open space and landscaping are established:
(a) Landscaping shall mean planting of grass, trees, shrubs, or
other comparable surface cover or decorative plazas and/or pools. Where
existing landscape features exist on site which can meet the purpose of
this section, all or part of such features may be used to meet the
A-37
requirements of this section upon the approval of the planning
commission.
(b) To minimize adverse visual and environmental impacts, no
accessory buildings shall be permitted in areas established for open
space.
(c) All site plans shall meet the minimum yard requirements
(open space) established in Chapter 6 and 7; except that, on sites
adjoining residential districts, the following additional development
standards shall apply:
(i) The requirements for the yard (open space) area shall
be one hundred (100) feet. Whenever highly combustible,
flammable, or explosive materials or any other materials that have
inherent characteristics that constitute a hazard to life or property
are to be used on such sites, the planning commission may require
additional yard area. Development within required yard areas
adjacent to residential districts shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(A) Off-street parking areas shall be setback no
less than fifty (50) feet from the district boundary.
(B) At least the first fifty (50) feet of required yard
area shall be appropriately landscaped by use of berms and
grass, trees, shrubs, or other appropriate plants.
(C) No solid or liquid waste disposal areas shall be
allowed in the required yard area, with the exception of
solid waste dumpster facilities for non-industrial solid waste
products.
(d) The setback space between the public street and parking
areas shall be landscaped.
(i) Where possible berming shall be installed to screen
parked cars and where berms are not used screening shall be
achieved through use of trees and shrubs.
(ii) All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy
growing condition through a permanent maintenance program.
(3) Signs. Sign size and placement shall be governed by the provision
of Section 309.
(4) Off-Street Parking. The off-street parking and loading/unloading
areas, points of ingress/egress, and driveways shall be developed in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 302 through 306.
(5) Emissions. To provide for the protection of the environment and the
citizens of Newport, a plan for emission control shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) No use shall create noise, vibrations, dust odor, or fumes
which are in any way harmful to endanger the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public.
A-38
(b) Uses creating undue glare shall provide shielding so that
glare cannot be seen off the site.
(c) In the event that emission controls are questionable, the
planning commission may require certification of the proposed controls
by an environmental engineer or other appropriate expert.
(d) If the town determines a violation of these emission
standards is occurring, it shall be authorized to take whatever action it
deems appropriate to safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare
of the public. The burden of proof that no such violation is occurring or
has been abated shall rest solely with the industrial use involved.
(6) Waste Disposal. (a) No waste disposal facilities, whether they be
for the disposal of industrial or non-industrial solid waste, shall be
allowed within any front yard.
(b) All waste disposal facilities shall be screened by fencing,
walls, or evergreen plant materials in such a way that they are not visible
from any public street or adjoining properties.
(7) Stormwater Drainage. A certified plan for stormwater drainage
shall be included with the site plan which identifies all easements, drainage
structures including sizes/capacities, and other pertinent information concerning
the assumptions upon which the plan is based. The estimated stormwater runoff
based on a ten (10) year storm shall be calculated for pre-development and
post-development. The amount of runoff shall not be increased, and shall be
accommodated on site.
(8) Site Improvements Bond. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, the planning director shall make a determination regarding whether
or not all site improvements, as set out in this ordinance and the approved site
plan, have been properly made or installed. If not, prior to issuing a certificate
of occupancy, the planning director and city administrator shall determine the
amount, form, and term of surety that must be established and must secure
such guarantee for the purpose of ensuring the timely completion of the required
site improvements.
(9) Issuance of Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued
until the planning director receives a site plan which bears the signed
certificates of site plan approval and of application and agreement (See
Appendix D).
(10) Expiration of Approved Site Plans. Approval of a site plan shall
expire six (6) months after the date of its approval unless a building permit has
been issued and substantial progress has been made toward completion of the
project.
312. Temporary, Mobile, Factory-Built, or Factory Assembled
Structures. It shall be unlawful to place any temporary structure, trailer,
mobile structure (including, but not limited to: cars, vans, trucks, or buses),
tents and tent-type structures, factory-built or factory assembled structures
A-39
designed for conveyance after fabrication, either on their own wheels, flatbed
truck, or other trailers on any residential, commercial, or industrial lot within
the town for the purpose of assembly, or for business, educational, hazardous,
institutional, mercantile, residential, or storage occupancies, except as noted
herein.
(1) Permitted Temporary, Mobile, Factory-Built, or Factory Assembled
Structures. The following structures shall be allowed subject to the provisions
of this and other applicable sections of this ordinance and upon obtaining the
proper permits from the planning director.
(a) Mobile homes located in approved mobile home parks.
(b) Modular buildings for residential or nonresidential use
installed on permanent concrete or masonry foundation as a finished
building with permanent sewer or water connections. Such units shall be
inspected at the point of manufacture and shall bear the insignia of
approval of the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance or
other approved inspection agency, as provided for in Tennessee Code
Annotated. title 58, chapter 36, part 3, Double-wide mobile homes, that
have the same general appearance as site-built homes, may not be used
for commercial purposes in the C-1, Central Business District.
(c) Temporary office and storage buildings located on approved
construction sites provided they are removed upon completion of
construction.
(d) Customary accessory storage buildings in approved
residential locations. Temporary storage pods may be placed for ninety
(90) days in a location approved by the Director of Planning.
(e) Tents used by a person, firm, corporation, or group as an
assembly occupancy for the purpose of a religious meeting, festival, fair,
circus, or carnival for a limited time not to exceed thirty (30) days with
proper permit procedure followed; additional permits may be granted for
up to ninety (90) days in one (1) calendar year.
(f) Tents or temporary buildings used to sell fresh produce
locally grown in Cocke County during the growing season or Christmas
trees during the holiday season.
(g) A temporary permit not exceeding six (6) months may be
issued for occupancy of a mobile home on a lot with another dwelling or
building for living purposes where the applicant can show that such
occupancy is necessary to provide for the care of a sick or infirm person
that cannot safely care for himself. Proof shall include a written
statement from the infirm’s doctor attesting to inability to care for
oneself. A temporary permit can be renewed for periods not exceeding a
total of one (1) year. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be authorized to
extend this one (1) year limit due to extenuating circumstances presented
before the Board.
A-40
(2) Replacement of Nonconforming Mobile Home Dwellings. See
Section 301.4 of this ordinance.
(3) Establishment of New or Expansion of Existing Mobile Home and
Travel Trailer Parks. Mobile home and travel trailer parks shall be considered
PUDs and the establishment or expansion of these uses shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 308 and other applicable sections of this ordinance.
313. Customary Home Occupations. The following uses shall be
permitted as home occupations within all residential zoning districts, subject to
the applicable provisions of the zoning districts and the limitations and
requirements set out in Subsection 2 below. The home must be the primary
residence of the property owner to qualify as a customary home occupation.
(1) Permitted Home Occupations. (a) Arts and crafts made by the
owners of the premises.
(b) Professional offices for architects, real estate brokers,
engineers and other contract workers whose businesses rarely require
clients to visit the home.
(c) Tutorial instruction allowing two (2) pupils per session,
except for music instruction which shall be one (1) student per session.
(d) Beauty/barber shops.
(e) Antique sales.
(f) Any other use which the Board of Zoning Appeals finds to be
of similar character.
(2) Requirements/Limitations Regarding the Operation of Home
Occupations.
(a) Location on Premises. A home occupation shall be conducted
within a dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal
practitioner or in any building accessory thereto which is normally
associated with a residential use.
(b) Exterior Alterations. No alterations to the exterior
appearance of the principal residential building or premises shall be
made which changes the character thereof as a residence.
(c) Outdoor Display or Storage. No outside display of goods or
outside storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation
shall be permitted.
(d) Employees. No persons other than a member of the
immediate family occupying such dwelling, and one (1) person not a
member of such family, may participate in or be employed by such
occupation.
(e) Level of Activity. The use of the dwelling unit for the home
occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for
residential purposes by its occupants, and shall under no circumstances
change the residential character thereof.
A-41
(f) Traffic, Parking. No traffic shall be generated by such home
occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the
conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street.
(g) Equipment and Production Processes. No mechanical or
electrical equipment shall be employed other than machinery or
equipment customarily found in the home associated with a hobby or
vocation not conducted for gain or profit, or machinery or equipment
which is essential in the conduct of the home occupation; and, no
equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual
or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises.
(h) Signs. No signs accessory to such home occupation shall be
displayed except as permitted or authorized by Section 309.3.e.4.
314. Gasoline Service Stations. The following development standards
shall apply to all gasoline service stations:
(1) Front yard setbacks for all structures except the principal building,
shall be reduced to fifteen (15) feet.
(2) On all streets classified as major arterials on the official zoning
map, no driveways shall be constructed within sixty (60) feet of an intersecting
street right-of-way line.
A-42
CHAPTER 4
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
SECTION
401. Use
402. Street Frontage
403. Corner Lots
404. One Principal Building On a Lot
405. Reduction of Lot Size
406. Yard and Other Spaces
407. Conformity to Subdivision Regulations
408. Accessory Building and Use Regulations
409. Height and Density
401. Use. Except as herein provided, no building or land shall hereafter
be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless
for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located.
402. Street Frontage. No building shall be erected on a lot which does
not abut on at least one (1) public street for at least forty (40) feet. Residential
planned unit developments may be excluded from this provision through the
plan approval process for planned unit developments. If an approved public
street is inadequate to serve a proposed development, the developer may be
required to improve the existing street to approved city standards.
403. Corner Lots. The minimum width of a side yard along an
intersecting street shall be fifty (50%) percent greater than the minimum side
yard requirements of the district in which the lot is located.
404. One Principal Building on a Lot. Only one (1) principal building
and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot;
except that planned unit developments may be excluded from this provision on
the approval of the planning commission.
405. Reduction of Lot Size. No lot shall be reduced in area so that
yards, lot width, building area, or other provisions of this ordinance shall not be
maintained.
406. Yard and Other Spaces. No part of a yard or other open space
required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space required
under this ordinance for another building.
A-43
407. Conformity to Subdivision Regulations. No building permit
shall be issued for or no building shall be erected on any lot within the
municipality, unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building
is proposed to be placed shall have been accepted or opened as a public street
prior to that time or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with
a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Newport Regional
Planning Commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the
secretary of the commission.
408. Acc essory Building and Use Regulations. Buildings and/or uses
which are customarily incidental and subordinate in size and function to the
principal use of a site are considered to be accessory buildings and/or uses and
are permitted on the same lot with a principal use. The establishment of
accessory buildings and/or uses shall be subject to the following provisions and
other applicable provisions of this ordinance:
(1) General Provisions. (a) No accessory structure shall be occupied
or used unless the principal structure to which it is accessory is occupied
or being used.
(b) If an accessory building shares a structural wall with a
principal building, it shall be deemed to be a part of the principal
building and shall comply with the requirements of the ordinance
applicable to a principal building, such as setback, height, etc.
(2) Location. (a) Residential districts. Accessory buildings not
exceeding one (1) story or fourteen (14) feet in height, and occupying less
than twenty (20%) percent of the required rear yard, may be located as
close as ten (10) feet to the rear property line, except as may be provided
for in Chapter 6. No accessory buildings or uses shall be permitted within
any required front or side yard, except for such items as mail boxes, yard
ornaments, and light fixtures located so as not to create a nuisance or
safety hazard to neighboring property or the public.
(b) Unenclosed Structures in Residential Districts. Unenclosed
accessory buildings and unenclosed additions to principal buildings may
occupy a portion of the front, side or rear yards, but may not be closer
than five (5) feet to a front lot line or closer than four (4) feet to a side or
rear lot line, except as may be provided for in Chapter 6.
(c) General Farming Uses in Residential Districts. Accessory
general farming structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height
and shall meet all yard setback requirements of a principal structure.
(d) Business and Industrial Districts. The location of accessory
uses and structures shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections
310 and 311 of this ordinance.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities. These facilities shall be
located in accordance with the provisions of Sections 302 through 304.
A-44
(4) Signs. The size, type, and location of signs shall be governed by
Section 309 and other applicable sections of the ordinance.
409. Height and Density. No building or structure shall hereafter be
erected or altered so as to exceed the height limit, to accommodate or house a
greater number of families, to have narrower or smaller front yards or side
yards than are required or specified in the regulations herein for the district in
which it is located.
A-45
CHAPTER 5
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
SECTION
501. Classification of Districts
502. Zoning District Boundaries
501. Classification of Districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the
City of Newport, Tennessee, is hereby divided into eleven (11) classes of districts
as follows:
Residential R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Me d i u m Den s i t y
Residential
Medical/Residential M-R Medical/Residential
Professional/Residential P-1 Professional/Residential
Commercial C-1 Central Business
C-2 General Business
C-3 Interstate Highway
Business
Industrial M-1 Light Industrial
M-2 Heavy Industrial
Agriculture A-1 Agriculture
502. Zoning District Boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are
hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of The City of
Newport, Tennessee," dated April 30, 2007, and all amendments thereof, which
is a part of this ordinance and which is on file in the office of the Director of
Planning. Unless otherwise specifically indicated on the map, the boundaries of
districts are lot lines or the center lines of streets or alleys or such lines
extended, the corporate limit lines, or a line midway between the main track of
a railroad or the center lines of streams or other water bodies. Questions
concerning the exact locations of district boundaries shall be determined by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
A-46
CHAPTER 6
PROVISIONS GOVERNING USE DISTRICTS
SECTION
601. R-1 Low Density Residential District
602. R-2 Medium Density Residential District
603. M-R Medical/Residential District
604. P-1 Residential/Professional District
605. C-1 Central Business District
606. C-2 General Business District
607. C-3 Interstate Highway Business District
608. M-1 Light Industrial District
609. M-2 Heavy Industrial District
610. A-1 Agriculture District
601. R-1 Low Density Residential District. It is the purpose and
intent of this district to establish low density residential areas along with open
areas which appear likely to develop in a similar manner. The requirements of
the district are designed to protect the total characteristics of the district, to
promote and encourage an environment for family life, and to restrict all
business oriented activities.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the R-1 Low Density
Residential District, as shown on the zoning map of the City of Newport,
Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
(1) Single-family residences, except mobile homes.
(2) Single-family and two-family (duplex) PUD's except mobile homes.
(3) Customary home occupations as regulated in Section 313.
(4) Publicly owned buildings and uses, following approval by the
planning commission as required in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-104;
schools offering general education; churches; and tennis clubs, country clubs,
and other similar uses which are characteristically associated with ample open
space areas and recreation or leisure activities, and are used for social purposes
which restrict participation to members and guests only, provided that:
(a) A site plan prepared as regulated in Section 310 is reviewed
and approved by the planning commission;
(b) The buildings are placed not less than forty (40) feet from
side and rear property lines;
(c) There are planted buffer strips with a minimum of ten (10)
feet in height along rear and side property lines;
(d) That access be restricted to streets classified as Level A, B,
or C (See Appendix B) on the official zoning map; and
A-47
(e) Any outside lighting of courts, parking lots, or other facilities
shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to not cause
inconvenience to other uses in the immediate area.
(5) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(6) Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Sections 408 and
803.
(7) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 302 through 307.
(8) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
602. R-2 Medium Density Residential District. It is the purpose and
intent of this district to provide areas for higher density residential development
plus open areas where similar development is likely to occur. When proposed
uses are not allowed in the R-1 Low Density Residential District, but are
adjacent to the R-1 Low Density Residential District, a buffer strip shall be
planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the R-2 Medium Density
Residential District, as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Newport,
Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
(1) Any use and regulations in the R-1 Residential District.
(2) Residential planned unit developments, including mobile home
parks as regulated in Sections 308 and 312.
(3) Bed and breakfast inns.
(4) Funeral homes; fraternal organizations; clubs not operated for
profit; day care centers providing care and supervision for children, handicapped
persons, or elderly for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours; and similar
uses as determined by the Newport Board of Zoning Appeals, provided:
(a) A site plan prepared as regulated in Section 310 is reviewed
and approved by the planning commission;
(b) The buildings are placed not less than forty (40) feet from
side and rear property lines;
(c) There are planted buffer strips with a minimum of ten (10)
feet in height along rear and side property lines;
(d) Any outside lighting of parking lots or other facilities shall
be designed and constructed in such a manner as to not cause
inconvenience to other uses in the immediate area.
(e) That access be restricted to streets classified as Level A, B,
or C (See Appendix B) on the official zoning map; and
(f) Existing buildings may be utilized provided that the
provisions of this ordinance are met as closely as possible.
(5) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(6) Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Sections 408 and
803.
(7) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 302 through 307.
(8) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
A-48
603. M-R Medical/Residential District. It is the purpose and intent
of this district to provide areas medical services and residential development
plus open areas where similar development is likely to occur. Professional
services are permitted in this district provided that they meet applicable
standards and are limited so as not to encourage general commercial activity.
When proposed uses are not allowed in the R-1 Low Density Residential or R-2
Medium Density Residential District, but are adjacent to the R-1 Low Density
Residential or R-2 Medium Density Residential District, a buffer strip shall be
planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the M-R Medical/Residential
District, as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Newport, Tennessee, the
following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
(1) Any use allowed in the R-1 Residential District.
(2) Residential planned unit developments except mobile home parks.
(3) Bed and breakfast inns.
(4) Medical uses including hospitals for human care, professional
offices for doctors, professional offices for nursing services; day care centers
providing care and supervision for children, handicapped persons, or elderly for
periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours; professional offices for dentists; and
similar uses, provided:
(a) A site plan prepared as regulated in Section 310 is reviewed
and approved by the planning commission;
(b) The buildings are placed not less than forty (40) feet from
side and rear property lines;
(c) There are planted buffer strips with a minimum of ten (10)
feet in height along rear and side property lines;
(d) Any outside lighting of parking lots or other facilities shall
be designed and constructed in such a manner as to not cause
inconvenience to other uses in the immediate area.
(e) That access be restricted to streets classified as Level A, B,
or C (See Appendix B) on the official zoning map; and
(f) Existing buildings may be utilized provided that the
provisions of this ordinance are met as closely as possible.
(5) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(6) Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Sections 408 and
803.
(7) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 302 through 307.
(8) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
604. P-1 Residential/Professional District. It is the purpose and
intent of this district to provide areas for medium density residential and
professional uses where the character of the existing neighborhood has taken a
direction toward professional service activities. Professional services are
permitted in the district provided they meet applicable standards, are limited
A-49
so as not to encourage general business activity, and are located on major
arterial or collector streets as noted on the zoning map. In addition, this district
should promote the historic and aesthetic value of older homes where possible
to maintain the unique nature of the established residential neighborhoods.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the P-1
Professional/Residential District, as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of
Newport, Tennessee, the following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
(1) Any use and regulations in the R-2 Residential District except
mobile home parks.
(2) Professional offices for doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, real
estate agencies, insurance agencies, and similar uses as determined by the
Newport Board of Zoning Appeals, provided:
(a) A site plan prepared as regulated in Section 310 is reviewed
and approved by the planning commission;
(b) New buildings are placed not less than forty (40) feet from
side and rear property lines;
(c) Existing buildings shall have no parking in front yards and
shall meet the requirements of this section as closely as possible;
(d) There are planted buffer strips with a minimum of ten (10)
feet in height along rear and side property lines;
(e) Any outside lighting of parking lots or other facilities shall
be designed and constructed in such a manner as to not cause
inconvenience to other uses in the immediate area.
(f) That access be restricted to streets classified as Level A (See
Appendix B) on the official zoning map; and
(3) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(4) Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Sections 408 and
803.
(5) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 302 through 307.
(6) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
605. C-1 Central Business District. It is the purpose and intent of this
district to secure the commercial core of the City and to encourage concentrated
development of office and shopping facilities. The requirements of the district
are designed to protect and improve this area as the principal shopping and
office district of Newport. Prior to the issuance of building permits for all new
construction, site plans as required by Section 310, shall be reviewed and
approved by the planning commission to determine if the projects meet all
requirements and are in keeping with the comprehensive planning program of
the City of Newport, Tennessee. When proposed uses are adjacent to a
residential district, a buffer strip shall be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the C-1 Central Business
District, as shown on the zoning map of the City of Newport, Tennessee, the
following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
A-50
(1) Retail trade and services, excluding all types requiring outdoor
display or storage.
(2) Business, professional, and personal services excluding repair
garages, junk yards, and storage yards.
(3) Cultural activities.
(4) Churches, clubs, and lodges.
(5) Dwelling units for the purpose of permanent occupancy located
above street level.
(6) Townhouses, condominiums, and similar types of housing may be
established as separate uses as a PUD under the applicable provisions of Section
308 of this ordinance when the following development criteria are met:
(a) There shall be no minimum lot size required for this type of
development.
(b) The density of such developments shall not exceed fifteen
(15) units per gross acre.
(7) Public buildings and lands, except schools, provided a site plan is
submitted as required in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-104.
(8) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(9) Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section
408.
(10) No off-street parking is required, however, any off-street parking
provided shall meet the applicable provisions in Sections 302 - 307.
(11) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
606. C-2 General Business District. It is the purpose and intent of this
district to provide for general commercial areas at convenient locations within
the city. The regulations are designed to encourage concentrations of commercial
activities and to preserve the traffic carrying capacity of the major collectors and
arterials upon which such uses are located. The regulations are also designed
to encourage groupings of compatible commercial activities in which parking
and traffic congestion can be reduced to a minimum. Therefore, prior to issuance
of building permits for all new construction, site plans, as required by Section
310, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission to determine
if the projects meet all requirements and are in keeping with the comprehensive
planning program of the City of Newport, Tennessee. When proposed uses are
adjacent to a residential district, a buffer strip shall be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the C-2 General Business
District, as shown on the zoning map of the City of Newport, Tennessee, the
following regulations apply and uses are permitted.
(1) Any use and regulations in the R-2 (Residential District) except
mobile home parks.
(2) Personal, business, and professional services and offices, excluding
junkyards and other similar uses.
(3) Storage yards provided a buffer strip is planted.
A-51
(4) Retail businesses, including automobile and mobile home sales.
(5) Lodges, clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, and other similar
services.
(6) Funeral homes.
(7) Churches and places of worship.
(8) Gasoline service stations as regulated in Section 314.
(9) Wholesale business and warehousing.
(10) Places of amusements, recreation, entertainment, or assembly.
(11) Shopping centers developed as planned unit developments as
regulated in Section 308.
(12) Commercial and travel trailer parks developed as planned unit
developments as regulated in Section 308.
(13) Publicly owned buildings and uses, following approval by the
planning commission as required in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-104; and
schools and colleges offering general education.
(14) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(15) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 302 through 307.
(16) Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section
408.
(17) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
607. C-3 Interstate Highway Business District. It is the purpose and
intent of this district to provide for interstate highway oriented commercial
areas adjacent to interstate highway interchanges. The regulations are designed
to encourage concentrations of commercial activities associated with interstate
highway traffic while also encouraging groupings of compatible commercial
activities in which parking and traffic congestion can be reduced to a minimum.
Therefore, prior to issuance of building permits for all new construction, site
plans, as required by Section 11-310, shall be reviewed and approved by the
planning commission to determine if the projects meet all requirements and are
in keeping with the comprehensive planning program of the City of Newport,
Tennessee. When proposed uses are adjacent to residential districts, a buffer
strip shall be planted and maintained.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the C-3 Interstate Highway
Business District, as shown on the zoning map of the Newport, Tennessee, the
following regulations apply and uses are permitted.
(1) Retail businesses, including automobile and mobile home sales.
(2) Lodges, clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, and other similar
services.
(3) Gasoline service stations as regulated in Section 11-314.
(4) Planned Commercial developments as regulated in Section 11-308.
(5) Personal, business, and professional services and offices, excluding
junkyards and other similar uses.
A-52
(6) Publicly owned buildings and uses, following approval by the
planning commission as required in Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-4-104; and
schools and colleges offering general education.
(7) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(8) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 11-302 through 11-307.
(9) Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section
11-408.
(10) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
608. M-1 Light Industrial District. It is the purpose and intent of this
district to establish areas for certain industrial and commercial establishments
along with open areas which will likely develop in a similar manner. The
regulations are designed to protect the essential community characteristics and
to promote and encourage industrial, wholesaling, and commercial uses and to
discourage residential development. Therefore, prior to the issuance of building
permits for all new construction, site plans, as required by Section 311, shall be
reviewed and approved by the planning commission to determine if the projects
are in keeping with this ordinance and the comprehensive planning program of
the City of Newport, Tennessee.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the M-1 Light Industrial
District, as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Newport, Tennessee, the
following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
(1) Personal, business, and professional services and offices.
(2) Wholesale trade.
(3) Warehouses.
(4) Trucking terminals of moderate vehicle size and/or activities.
(5) Contractor offices and equipment storage.
(6) Building supplies.
(7) Enclosed manufacturing uses as established below:
(a) printing and publishing, limited to newspapers, books,
periodicals, miscellaneous printing and publishing, and similar allied
industries;
(b) optical;
(c) food and dairy products, meat packing except odorous
cooking and preserving and slaughterhouse operations;
(d) small article products including jewelry, musical
instruments, toys, pens, pencils, and similar uses;
(e) weaving and moderate textiles, apparel and other finished
products made from fabrics and similar materials;
(f) professional, scientific, and controlling products; and
(g) lumber and wood products, furniture, and other products,
except sawmills and paper mills.
(8) Other uses of the same general character as the above uses,
excluding jails.
A-53
(9) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(10) Access and parking as regulated in Section 302 through 307.
(11) Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section
408.
(12) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
609. M-2 Heavy Industrial District. It is the purpose and intent of this
district to establish areas for heavy industrial activities. The regulations are
designed to protect essential community characteristics and promote the
economy by encouraging industrial development in an orderly planned manner.
Therefore, prior to the issuance of building permits for all new construction, site
plans, as required by Section 311, shall be reviewed and approved by the
planning commission for compliance with this ordinance and the comprehensive
planning program of the City of Newport, Tennessee.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of the M-2 Heavy Industrial
District, as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Newport, Tennessee, the
following regulations apply and uses are permitted:
(1) Any use permitted in the M-1 Light Industrial District.
(2) Service terminals for waterways, trucks, railroads, and related
facilities.
(3) Any industry which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise,
odors, fire hazards, or other objectionable conditions as determined by the
planning director. Slaughterhouses, sawmill uses, and jails shall automatically
be considered as nonallowed uses.
(4) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 302 through 307.
(5) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(6) Customary accessory uses and structures as regulated in Section
408.
610. Agriculture District. It is the purpose and intent of this district
to establish areas for agriculture and forestry activities while minimizing their
conflicts with non-farm activities. The regulations are designed to protect
essential community characteristics and promote the economy by encouraging
continued agricultural and forestry where those activities are still viable.
Therefore, prior to the issuance of building permits for all new construction, site
plans, as required by Section 311, shall be reviewed and approved by the
planning commission for compliance with this ordinance and the comprehensive
planning program of the City of Newport, Tennessee.
(1) Agriculture uses, agricultural processing excluding manufactured
products, animal husbandry including veterinarian services and animal hospital
services, and other similar uses as determined by the Newport Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(2) Forestry activities and related services.
(3) Single family and two (2) family (duplex) residences.
A-54
(4) Churches and places of worship.
(5) Signs as regulated in Section 309.
(6) Customary accessory buildings as regulated in Sections 408 and
803.
(7) Access and parking as regulated in Sections 302 through 307.
(8) Setback and height requirements as regulated in Chapter 7.
A-55
CHAPTER 7
SECTION 701 - AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
For the purpose of this ordinance, area, yard, and height requirements for the district classifications of the
City of Newport, Tennessee, Zoning Ordinance are hereby established as follows:
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Requirements From Property Lines (feet)
District Area in
Square Feet
Square Feet Per
Additional Family
Lot Width at Bldg.
Setback (feet)
Front Yard* Side Yard* Rear Yard* Maximum Height of
Structures (feet)
R-1 7,500 7,500 75 30 12** 30 35
R-2 7,500 3,000 75 30 10** 25 35
M-R 7,500 3,000 75 30 12** 25 35
P-1 7,500 3,000 75 30 12** 25 35
C-1 0 0 0 35***
C-2 30 15 25 35***
C-3 30 15 25 35***
M-1 30 20 25 55
M-1 40 25 25 55
A-1 5 acres 50 50 20 35
* Different setback requirements stated in Sections 308, 310, 311, and 601 through 609 shall take precedence over the above stated
requirements.
** Structures greater than twenty (20) feet in height shall meet a fifteen (15) foot setback.
*** Height limits may be increased to fifty-five (55) feet if an internal fire protection system and fire hydrants are installed.
A-56
CHAPTER 8
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION
801. Lot of Record
802. Adjoining and Vacant Lots of Record
803. Exceptions for Carport or Garage Construction
804. Front Yards
805. Exceptions on Height Limits
801. Lot of Record. Where the owner of a lot consisting of one (1) or
more adjacent lots of official record at the time of the adoption of applicable
zoning regulations does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the
yard or other requirements of the zoning regulations, an application may be
submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance from the terms of the
zoning ordinance. Such lot may be used as a building site; provided, however,
that the yard and other requirements of the district are complied with as closely,
in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals, as is possible.
802. Adjoining and Substandard Lots of Records. Where two (2) or
more lots of record with a continuous frontage are under the same ownership,
or where a substandard lot of record has continuous frontage with a larger tract
under the same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one (1) or more
building sites meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they
are located.
803. Exceptions for Carport or Garage Construction. For existing
housing constructed on lots of record of less than seven thousand - five hundred
(7,500) square feet in area and on which no garage or carport currently exists,
carports or garages may be constructed in rear and side yards upon the planning
director making the following findings:
(1) The size or shape of the lot or the location of the principal structure
on the lot will not permit the construction of a carport or garage in a manner
that will meet the current setback requirements of this ordinance.
(2) That the construction of a carport or garage will not have a
detrimental affect on the safety of adjoining properties or damage the aesthetic
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(3) That the current setback requirements of the ordinance be followed
as closely as possible, except that, no carport or garage shall be constructed less
than five (5) feet
from any property line unless a letter of consent first be obtained from the
adjacent
property owner.
A-57
804. Front Yards. The front yard setback requirements of this
ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average depth of
existing front yards on developed lots located within two hundred (200) feet on
each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting
on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required front yard
depth. In such case, the minimum front yard shall be the average of the existing
front yard depths on the developed lots.
805. Exceptions on Height Limits. The height limitations of this
ordinance shall not apply to any structure not intended for human occupancy,
including but not limited to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, and
chimneys attached to residential structures. Such structures including, but not
limited to monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers,
windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers,
masts, and aerials shall be reviewed by the planning commission prior to
construction.
A-58
CHAPTER 9
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
901. Building Permit Required
902. Enforcing Officer
903. Application for Issuance of Building Permits
904. Expiration/Extension of Building Permit Approvals
905. Final Site Inspection/Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy
906. Violations
907. Penalties
908. Remedies
901. Building Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to commence the
excavation for or the construction of any building including accessory buildings,
or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, including accessory
buildings until the planning director has issued for such work a building permit
including a statement that the plans, specifications, and intended use of such
building in all respects conform with the provisions of this ordinance.
Application for a building permit shall be made to the planning director.
902. Enforcing Officer. The provisions of this ordinance shall be
administered and enforced by the Planning Director. The planning director shall
have the authority to enter upon any land during reasonable hours and make
examinations and surveys that do not occasion damage or injury to private
property.
903. Application For/Issuance of Building Permits. For all
multi-family residential, commercial, public, semi-public, or industrial uses, a
site plan or PUD plan, whichever may be applicable, prepared in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 310, 311, or 308, shall be submitted with an
application for a building permit. Building permit applications for all other uses
not requiring a site plan or PUD plan shall be accompanied by a dimensioned
sketch or scale plan indicating the size and shape of the lot and the location and
use of any existing or proposed buildings or structures on the site. No building
permit for earth moving or construction shall be issued unless all the applicable
provisions of this ordinance have been met. If the request for issuance of a
building permit is refused, the planning director shall state the reason for his
refusal in writing.
A-59
904. Expiration/Extension of Building Permit Approvals.
(1) Expiration of Building Permits. Unless provided for otherwise in
this ordinance, building permits, along with any sketch or site plans upon which
such permit was issued, shall be null and void six (6) months from the date of
issuance and/or approval if substantial progress has not been made toward
completion of the development activity as it was approved. Planned Unit
Developments (PUD's) shall be null and void twelve (12) months from the date
of approval if substantial progress has not been made toward completion of the
development activity as it was approved.
The planning director may grant any number of ninety (90) day
extensions to a building permit holder for a building permit, if just cause can be
given to justify the extension and if progress toward completion of the project
can be shown.
(2) Abandonment of Permitted Projects. Any project for which a
building permit has been issued and where an accessory or principal building
has only been partially constructed at the end of one (1) year and for which an
application for extension has not been submitted, may be subject to being
considered as an unsafe and illegal building and may be subject to the
provisions of Section 102.4 of the Southern Standard Building Code and any
other applicable provisions of this or any other ordinance of the city.
905. Final Site Inspection/Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.
In order to ensure that a building, structure, or addition has been constructed
in accordance with the approved sketch, site, or PUD plan and will be occupied
by a use lawful within the zoning district in which it is located, the Planning
Director shall make a final inspection upon notification by the owner or
occupant that a premises is ready to be occupied. Within three (3) working days
of such application, the planning director shall make a final inspection of the
property in question, and shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the building or
structure is found to conform to the provisions of this ordinance and the
statements made in the application for the building permit. If such a certificate
is refused, the planning director shall state such refusal in writing with the
cause. No land or building hereafter erected or altered in its use shall be used
until such a certificate of occupancy has been granted.
906. Violations. Any person whether owner, lessee, principal, agent,
employee, or otherwise who violates any provision of this ordinance, permits any
such violation, fails to comply with any of the provisions or requirements hereof,
including any conditions, stipulations, or safeguards attached to any permit,
variance, special exception, or other such final authorization or approval
hereunder, or who erects, constructs or reconstructs any building or structure,
or uses any land in violation of any written statement or plan submitted and
approved pursuant to this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
A-60
907. Penalties. Any persons violating any provision of the ordinance
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not less
than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
908. Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this ordinance, the planning director or any other
appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would
be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may
institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such violation; or to
prevent occupancy of such building, structure, or land.
A-61
CHAPTER 10
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
SECTION
1001. Creation and Appointment
1002. Procedure
1003. Appeals
1004. Powers
1005. Action of the Board of Zoning Appeals
1001. Creation and Appointment. A board of zoning appeals is hereby
established in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-7-205. The
Newport Municipal/Regional Planning Commission is hereby designated as the
board of zoning appeals and the terms of the members of the board of zoning
appeals shall be concurrent with the terms of the members of the Newport
Municipal/Regional Planning Commission.
1002. Procedure. Meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be held
at the call of the chairman or by a majority of the membership and at such other
times as the board may determine. Such chairman, or in his/her absence, the
acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; shall take all
evidence necessary to justify or explain its action, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official action, all of which shall be immediately filed in
the office of the board and shall be a public record.
1003. Appeals. An appeal to the board of zoning appeals may be taken
by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved, or by any governmental officer,
department, board, or bureau affected by any decision of the planning director
based in whole or part on provisions of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be
taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing
with the planning director and with the board of zoning appeals a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The planning director shall transmit
forthwith to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appeal was taken. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or attorney.
1004. Powers. The board of zoning appeals shall have the following
powers:
A-62
(1) Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, or requirement, permit
decision, determination or refusal made by the planning director or other
administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of this
ordinance.
(2) Special Exceptions. To hear and decide special exceptions to this
ordinance as noted in Chapter 8.
(3) Variance. To hear and decide applications for variance from the
terms of this ordinance, but only where, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of adoption of
this ordinance was a lot of record; or where by reason of exceptional
topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situations or
conditions of a piece of property, the strict application of the provisions of this
ordinance would result in exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the owner of such property, provided that such relief may
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this ordinance. In granting a
variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location,
character, and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may
deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of this ordinance. Before any
variance is granted it shall be shown that special circumstances are attached to
the property which do not generally apply to other property in the neighborhood.
1005. Action of the Board of Zoning Appeals. In exercising the
aforementioned powers, the board of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that
end shall have all powers of the planning director. The concurring vote of a
majority of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
ordinance, or to authorize any variance from the terms of this ordinance.
A-63
CHAPTER 11
AMENDMENTS
SECTION
1101. Procedure
1102. Approval by Planning Commission
1103. Introduction of Amendment
1101. Procedure. The city council may amend the regulations,
boundaries, or any provision of this ordinance. Any member of the city council
may introduce such amendment, or any official, board, or any other person may
present a petition to the city council requesting an amendment or amendments
to this ordinance.
1102. Approval by Planning Commission. No such amendment shall
become effective unless the same be first submitted for approval, disapproval,
or suggestions to the planning commission. If the planning commission
disapproves after such submission, it shall require the favorable vote of a
majority of the entire membership of the city council to become effective.
1103. Introduction of Amendment. Upon the introduction of an
amendment of this ordinance or upon the receipt of a petition to amend this
ordinance, the city council shall publish a notice of such request for an
amendment, together with the notice of time set for hearing by the city council
of the request change. Said notice shall be published in some newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Newport, Tennessee. Said hearing by the city
council shall take place not sooner than fifteen (15) days after the date of
publication of such notice.
A-64
CHAPTER 12
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
SECTION
1201. Conflict with Other Ordinances
1202. Validity
1203. Effective Date
1201. Conflict with Other Ordinances. In the case of conflict between
this ordinance or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or
future ordinance of the City of Newport, the most restrictive shall in all cases
apply.
1202. Validity. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause,
provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not of itself invalid or
unconstitutional.
1203. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force
from and after its passage, the public welfare demanding it.
Certified by Planning Commission ______________________________
Passed on First Reading ______________________________
Passed on Second Reading ______________________________
Approved and Signed in Open Meeting ______________________________
Attest: ______________________________
/S/ ___________________________ ______________________________
City Recorder Mayor
A-65
APPENDICES
These appendices shall not be considered as a part of the adopted zoning
ordinance. Their purpose is to assist city staff, appointed and elected officials,
and other users of the zoning ordinance in understanding important
administrative procedures essential to efficient enforcement of the city's land
use regulation program.
A-66
APPENDIX A
ILLUSTRATION A
Muskowitz, Harvey S., and Carl G. Lindbloom. The illustrated Book of
Development Definitions. Piscataway: Rutgers University, 1981.
A-67
APPENDIX A
ILLUSTRATION B
A-68
APPENDIX B
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
The streets and roads in the City of Newport, Tennessee, are classified by
the Newport Major Street Plan and are used as street access classifications for
the purpose of this ordinance:
Street Classification Level A Arterial
Broadway
Cosby Highway
North Street
Street Classification Level B Major Collector
Headrick Avenue
Heritage Blvd.
Lincoln Avenue
Morrel Springs Road
Rankin Road
Smith Street
Street Classification Level C Minor Collector
2nd Street
3rd Street
Bailey Street
College Street
Street Classification Level D Local Streets
All other streets in the City of Newport will be classified for access
purposes as local streets.
A-69
APPENDIX C
CERTIFICATE OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
We hereby certify that this Planned Unit Development (PUD) has been
found to comply with the zoning and PUD regulations of the Newport
Municipal/Regional Planning Commission, with the exception of such
alterations or variances, if any, as noted in the minutes of the Newport
Municipal/Regional Planning Commission and the Newport Board of Zoning
Appeals.
_______________ _____________________________________________
Date Chairman Newport Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
_______________ _____________________________________________
Date Secretary Newport Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
CERTIFICATE OF PUD APPLICATION AND AGREEMENT
I (we) hereby certify that I (we) understand that the approval of a
Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall expire twelve (12) months after the date
of approval.
_______________ _____________________________________________
Date Applicant
_____________________________________________
Applicant
A-70
APPENDIX D
CERTIFICATE OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL
We hereby certify that this site plan has been found to comply with the
zoning and site plan regulations of the Newport Municipal/Regional Planning
Commission, with the exception of such variances, if any, as noted in the
minutes of the Newport Board of Zoning Appeals.
_______________ _____________________________________________
Date Chairman Newport Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
_______________ _____________________________________________
Date Secretary Newport Municipal/Regional
Planning Commission
CERTIFICATE OF SITE PLAN APPLICATION AND AGREEMENT
I (we) hereby certify that I (we) understand that the approval of a site
plan shall expire six (6) months after the date of approval unless a building
permit has been issued and substantial progress has been made toward
completion of the project.
_______________ _____________________________________________
Date Applicant
_____________________________________________
Applicant
A-71
APPENDIX E
APPLICATION FOR BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS HEARING
CITY OF NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
300 E. Main Street, P. O. Box 370
Newport, Tennessee
(423) 623-2811
Applicant Name: ____________________________________
Applicant Address: ____________________________________
____________________________________
____________________________________
Property Owner Name: ____________________________________
Property Owner Address: ____________________________________
____________________________________
____________________________________
Address of Property in Question:
________________________________________________________________________
Tax map, group and parcel number(s) for property:_________________________
________________________________________________________________________
(Attach a tax map and mark the affected property)
Existing zone and use of property:_________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Action requested:
Administrative Review/Zoning Text Interpretation: G
Setback Variance: G
Height Variance: G
Extension of a Non-conforming Use: G
Special Exception: G
Reason for making the request and why you feel the request is justified:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
A-72
Signature of the Applicant: __________________________________________
Date: __________________________________________
Approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals: ______________________________
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE APPLICANT:
(1) You must obtain the names and addresses of the adjoining property
owners, prepare a letter notifying them of your request (a sample letter is
attached to this application), place the letters in stamped addressed envelopes
and take the letters to the City of Newport Planning Department AT LEAST 10
days prior to the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting. The Planning Department
will mail the letters.
(2) You or a representative MUST be present at the Board of Zoning
Appeals meeting to respond to any questions or concerns the Board may have.
(3) A $50.00 fee to help defray administrative costs is required at the
time of application. Please make checks payable to the City of Newport,
Tennessee.
FOR STAFF USE ONLY
Date received: __________________________
Scheduled for the ________________________ Board of Zoning Appeals meeting.
Letters to adjoining property owners mailed: _______________________________
Board of Zoning Appeals Action: Approved ______________ Denied ____________
SAMPLE LETTER FOR ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS ACTION REQUESTED
Date: ___________________________
Adjoiner Name: ___________________________
Address: ___________________________
___________________________
___________________________
Dear ________________________________________,
This letter is to notify you of my request to the Newport, Tennessee Board of
Zoning Appeals for a _________________________________________________. The
property that will be discussed is located at __________________________. I am
requesting the Newport Board of Zoning Appeals approve my request so that I
may ____________________________________________________________________
A-73
________________________. My request is on the____________________________
Newport, Tennessee Board of Zoning Appeals agenda. The Board meets at 3:00
p.m. at the Newport City Hall. All interested persons are invited to attend.
Sincerely,
_________________________________________
Applicant Name
Approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals:_________________________________
A-74
APPENDIX F
APPLICATION FOR ZONE RECLASSIFICATION
CITY OF NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
300 E. Main Street, P. O. Box 370
Newport, Tennessee
(423) 623-2811
Applicant Name: ____________________________________
Applicant Address: ____________________________________
____________________________________
____________________________________
Property Owner Name: ____________________________________
Property Owner Address: ____________________________________
____________________________________
____________________________________
Address of Property requested for zone reclassification:
________________________________________________________________________
Tax map, group and parcel number(s) for property:
________________________________________________________________________
(Attach a tax map and mark the affected property)
Existing zone and use of property: _________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
Requested zone and use of property :________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
Signature of the Applicant: ______________________________________________
Date: _________________________________
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE APPLICANT:
(1) You must obtain a “rezoning sign” from the City of Newport
Planning Department and place the sign on the proposed rezoning site AT
LEAST 10 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
(2) The sign must remain on the site until the Planning Commission
has voted on your request.
(3) The person requesting the rezoning must submit to the City of
Newport Planning Department letters addressed to each property owner and
resident that is adjacent to the property in question containing information
adequate to notify such owners and residents of the intention to rezone the area
for which the application is submitted and when and where the Planning
A-75
Commission meeting will be held. Such letters should be placed in unsealed,
stamped and addressed envelopes ready for mailing by the Planning
Department. The return address of the Planning Department must appear on
the envelope, and a list of all persons to whom letters are sent must accompany
the application.
Approved by the Planning Commission: ____________________________________
(4) You or a representative must be present at the Planning
Commission meeting to respond to any questions or concerns the Commission
may have.
(5) A $70.00 fee is required at the time of application. Please make
checks payable to the City of Newport, Tennessee.
FOR STAFF USE ONLY
Date received:_________________________________
Scheduled for the ___________________________ Planning Commission meeting.
Letters to adjoining property owners mailed:_______________________________
Sign posted: Yes _______ No _______
Planning Commission Action: Approved _______ Denied _______
Notice of Public Hearing Printed: _________________________________________
1st Reading Date: _______________________________ Action: _________________
2nd Reading Date: ______________________________ Action: _________________
Effective Date of Rezoning: ________________________________________________
LETTER FOR ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS
ZONE RECLASSIFICATION (REZONING) REQUEST
Date: ___________________________
Adjoiner Name: __________________________________
Address: __________________________________
__________________________________
__________________________________
Dear __________________________________________,
This letter is to notify you of my request to the Newport Regional Planning
Commission for a zone reclassification (rezoning). The property I am requesting
to be rezoned is located at_________________________________________________
_______________________ and is zoned ____________________________. A sign has
been placed on the property as required by the Newport Regional Planning
Commission. I am requesting the Newport Regional Planning Commission
recommend the property be rezoned to _____________________________________
A-76
________________. I request this property be rezoned so that I may ____________.
My request is on the _________________________ Newport Regional Planning
Commission agenda. The Planning Commission meets at 3:00 p.m. at the
Newport City Hall.
If the Newport Regional Planning Commission approves my request, the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen will conduct a Public Hearing and two readings before
the rezoning becomes effective. A Notice of Public Hearing will be placed in the
Newport Plain Talk at least 15 days prior to the Public Hearing.
Sincerely,
__________________________________
Applicant Name
Approved by the Planning Commission_________________
ORDINANCE #2018-10
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
NEWPORT CHAPTER 3 GENERAL PROVISIONS, SECTION 309 SIGNS, DELETING
AND REPLACING SUBSECTION 3.E.1. POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS
WHEREAS, Sections 13-7-201 –13-7-212 of the Tennessee Code Annotated provides
the City of Newport, Tennessee with the powers and authority to enact local municipal zoning
codes and;
WHEREAS, said sections provide a process for the amendment of local municipal
zoning text and zoning map, and;
WHEREAS, the Newport, Tennessee, City Council feels it to be in the best interest and
to the best general welfare of the citizen of Newport, Tennessee, to amend the Newport Zoning
text;
WHEREAS, the matter of this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance text has been
considered by the Newport Regional Planning Commission, and was approved and
recommended to the City Council on May 22, 2018.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF MAYOR AND
ALDERMEN of the City of Newport, Tennessee that municipal zoning ordinance be amended
as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 3 General Provisions, Section 309 Signs, Subsection 3.e.1. Political
Campaign Signs is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following new section:
1. Political Campaign Signs. Political signs may not be put up prior to ninety (90) days
before Election Day. Signs in residential areas shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
Signs in commercial areas shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Signs must be
placed a minimum of seven (7) feet from the street and shall not be located in such a
manner as to obstruct clear or free vision, or cause hazards for pedestrians or vehicular
traffic. No poles or stakes shall be driven into the ground at any intersection containing a
traffic light. Candidates shall be held liable for any damage to underground circuits. No
signs shall be placed upon or attached to any city owned property, except on Election
Day near polling locations. All signs must be removed within seven (7) days after the
election. Prohibited signs may be removed at any time by an authorized employee of the
City of Newport.
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT FURTHER ORAINED, BOARD OF MAYOR AND
ALDERMEN of the City of Newport, Tennessee that this ordinance shall be effective from and
after its passage, the public welfare requiring it.
PASSED BY PLANNING COMMISSION MAY 22, 2018
PASSED ON FIRST READING: JUNE 12, 2018
PUBLIC HEARING: JULY 10, 2018
PASSED ON SECOND READING: JULY 10, 2018
CITY OF NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
BY:___________________________
MAYOR CONNIE BALL
ATTEST: ____________________________________
CITY ADMINISTRATOR JAMES FINCHUM
This document has been examined by me, and is approved as to form.
_____________________________________________
CITY ATTORNEY TERRY HURST
RESOLUTION #2018-09
A RESOLUTION ADOPTING A PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY
FOR THE CITY OF NEWPORT
WHEREAS, pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-503(g), every governmental entity
subject to the Tennessee Public Records Act (“TPRA”) (Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-501 et seq.),
must establish a written public records policy properly adopted by the appropriate governing
authority by July 1, 2018; and; and
WHEREAS, the policy adopted shall not impose requirements on those requesting
records that are more burdensome than state law; and
WHEREAS, the governing body of the City of Newport, Tennessee desires to comply
with the recent change in state law as it pertains to records management; and
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of Newport that the following Public Records Policy for City of Newport is hereby adopted
by to provide economical and efficient access to public records as provided under the Tennessee
Public Records Act (“TPRA”) in Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-501, et seq.
SECTION 1. The following policy is hereby adopted as the Public Records Policy for
the City of Newport, Tennessee:
PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY FOR
THE CITY OF NEWPORT, TENNESSEE
Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-503(g), the following Public Records Policy for the
City of Newport is hereby adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to provide economical
and efficient access to public records as provided under the Tennessee Public Records Act
(“TPRA”) in Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-501, et seq.
The TPRA provides that all state, county and municipal records shall, at all times during
business hours be open for personal inspection by any citizen of this state, and those in charge of
the records shall not refuse such right of inspection to any citizen, unless otherwise provided by
state law. See Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-503(a)(2)(A). Accordingly, the public records of the City
of Newport are presumed to be open for inspection unless otherwise provided by law.
Personnel of the City of Newport shall timely and efficiently provide access and
assistance to persons requesting to view or receive copies of public records. No provisions of this
Policy shall be used to hinder access to public records. However, the integrity and organization
of public records, as well as the efficient and safe operation of the City of Newport, shall be
protected as provided by current law. Concerns about this Policy should be addressed to the
Public Records Request Coordinator for the City of Newport or to the Tennessee Office of Open
Records Counsel (“OORC”).
This Policy is available for inspection and duplication in the office of the City Recorder.
Additionally, this Policy is posted online at www.cityofnewport-tn.com. This Policy shall be
reviewed periodically as needed.
This Policy shall be applied consistently throughout the various offices, departments, and/or
divisions of the City of Newport.
I. Definitions:
A. Records Custodian: The office, official or employee lawfully responsible for the
direct custody and care of a public record. See Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-
503(a)(1)(C). The records custodian is not necessarily the original preparer or
receiver of the record.
B. Public Records: All documents, papers, letters, maps, books, photographs,
microfilms, electronic data processing files and output, films, sound recordings, or
other material, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received
pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official
business by any governmental agency. See Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-503(a)(1)(A).
C. Public Records Request Coordinator: The individual, or individuals, designated in
Section III, A.3 of this Policy who has, or have, the responsibility to ensure public
record requests are routed to the appropriate records custodian and are fulfilled in
accordance with the TPRA. See Tenn. Code Ann. § 10-7-503(a)(1)(B). The Public
Records Request Coordinator may also be a records custodian.
D. Requestor: A person seeking access to a public record, whether it is for inspection
or duplication.
II. Requesting Access to Public Records
A. Public record requests shall be made to the Public Records Request Coordinator
(”PRRC”) or his/her designee in order to ensure public record requests are routed
to the appropriate records custodian and fulfilled in a timely manner.
B. Requests for inspection only cannot be required to be made in writing. The PRRC
will request a mailing and/or email address from the requestor for providing any
written communication required under the TPRA.
C. Requests for inspection may be made in writing on Form A at City of Newport
City Hall, 300 East Main Street, Newport, Tennessee 37821.
D. Requests for copies, or requests for inspection and copies, shall be made in
writing on Form A in person or by mail at City of Newport City Hall, 300 East
Main Street, Newport, Tennessee 37821.
E. Proof of Tennessee citizenship by presentation of a valid Tennessee driver’s
license or alternative acceptable form of ID is required as a condition to inspect or
receive copies of public records.
III. Responding to Public Records Requests
A. Public Record Request Coordinator
1. The PRRC shall review public record requests and make an initial
determination of the following:
a. If the requestor provided evidence of Tennessee citizenship;
b. If the records requested are described with sufficient specificity to identify
them; and
c. If the city is the custodian of the records.
2. The PRRC shall acknowledge receipt of the request and take any of the
following appropriate action(s):
a. Advise the requestor of this Policy and the elections made regarding:
i. Proof of Tennessee citizenship;
ii. Form(s) required for copies;
iii. Fees (and labor threshold and waivers, if applicable); and
iv. Aggregation of multiple or frequent requests.
b. If appropriate, deny the request in writing, providing the appropriate
ground such as one of the following:
i. The requestor is not, or has not presented evidence of being, a
Tennessee citizen;
ii. The request lacks specificity;
iii. An exemption makes the record not subject to disclosure under the
TPRA;
iv. The city is not the custodian of the requested records; or
v. The records do not exist.
c. If appropriate, contact the requestor to see if the request can be narrowed.
d. Forward the records request to the appropriate records custodian in the
City of Newport.
3. The designated PRRC(s) is(are):
a. Name or title: City Administrator and/or designers
b. Contact information: City of Newport City Hall, 300 East Main Street,
Newport, Tennessee 37821, phone number 423-623-7323, fax number
423-623-7098, and email address newportadm@newporttn.org.
B. Records Custodian
1. Upon receiving a public records request, a records custodian shall promptly
make requested public records available in accordance with Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 10-7-503. If the records custodian is uncertain that an applicable exemption
applies, the custodian may consult with the PRRC, counsel, or the OORC.
2. If not practicable to promptly provide requested records because additional
time is necessary to determine whether the requested records exist; to search
for, retrieve, or otherwise gain access to records; to determine whether the
records are open; to redact records; or for other similar reasons, then a records
custodian shall, within seven (7) business days from the records custodian’s
receipt of the request, send the requestor a completed Public Records Request
Response Form which is attached as Form B, based on the form developed by
the OORC.
3. If a records custodian denies a public record request, he or she shall deny the
request in writing as provided in Section III.A.2.b and may use the Public
Records Request Response Form B.
4. If a records custodian reasonably determines production of records should be
segmented because the records request is for a large volume of records, or
additional time is necessary to prepare the records for access, the records
custodian shall use the Public Records Request Response Form B to notify the
requestor that production of the records will be in segments and that a records
production schedule will be provided as expeditiously as practicable. If
appropriate, the records custodian should contact the requestor to see if the
request can be narrowed.
5. If a records custodian discovers records responsive to a records request were
omitted, the records custodian should contact the requestor concerning the
omission and produce the records as quickly as practicable.
C. Redaction
1. If a record contains confidential information or information that is not open
for public inspection, the records custodian shall prepare a redacted copy prior
to providing access. If questions arise concerning redaction, the records
custodian should coordinate with counsel or other appropriate parties
regarding review and redaction of records. The records custodian and the
PRRC may also consult with the OORC.
2. Whenever a redacted record is provided, a records custodian should provide
the requestor with the basis for redaction. The basis given for redaction shall
be general in nature and not disclose confidential information.
IV. Inspection of Records
A. There shall be no charge for inspection of public records
B. The location for inspection of records within the offices of the City of Newport
shall be determined by either the PRRC or the records custodian.
C. When a reasonable basis exists, the PRRC or a records custodian may require an
appointment for inspection.
V. Copies of Records
A. A records custodian shall promptly respond to a public record request for copies
in the most economic and efficient manner practicable.
B. Copies will be available for pickup at City of Newport City Hall.
C. Upon payment for postage, copies will be delivered to the requestor’s home
address by the United States Postal Service.
D. A requestor can select electronic transfer of scanned documents.
E. A requestor will not be allowed to make copies of records with personal
equipment.
VI. Fees and Charges and Procedures for Billing and Payment
Fees and charges for copies of public records should not be used to hinder access to
public records.
A. Records custodians shall provide requestors with an itemized estimate of the
charges prior to producing copies of records and may require pre-payment of such
charges before producing requested records.
B. When fees for copies and labor do not exceed $10.00, the fees may be waived.
C. Fees and charges for copies are as follows:
1. $0.50 per page for letter- and legal-size color copies and/or scanned
documents.
2. The actual cost of any other medium upon which a record/information is being
produced.
3. Labor cost when incurred.
4. If an outside vendor is used, the actual costs assessed by the vendor.
D. Payment is to be made in cash, by personal check, or money order payable to the
City of Newport and presented to the city administrator, city recorder and city
clerk.
E. Payment in advance will be required when costs are estimated to exceed $ 30.00.
F. Aggregation of Frequent and Multiple Requests
1. The City of Newport will aggregate record requests in accordance with the
Frequent and Multiple Request Policy promulgated by the OORC when more
than (4) requests are received within a calendar month (either from a single
individual or a group of individuals deemed working in concert).
2. If more than four (4) requests are received within a calendar month:
a. Records requests will be aggregated at the city level.
b. The PRRC is responsible for making the determination that a group of
individuals are working in concert. The PRRC or the records custodian
will inform the individuals that they have been deemed to be working in
concert and that they have the right to appeal the decision to the OORC.
G. Exemptions to Open Records Policy
1. Requests for items that are routinely released and readily accessible are
exempt from this policy. These records include, but are not limited to:
agendas, approved minutes, police reports, court action reports and fire
incident reports.
SECTION 2. Repealer. Any resolutions, policies, or parts thereof in conflict with the
provisions of this resolution are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict only as pertaining
to the subject matter of this resolution.
SECTION 3. Severability. If a part of this resolution is invalid, all valid parts that are
severable from the invalid part remain in effect. If a part of this resolution is invalid in one or
more of its applications, the part remains in effect in all valid applications that are severable from
the invalid applications.
SECTION 4. Effective Date July 1, 2018. This resolution shall become effective upon
passage, the public welfare requiring it.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of Newport, Tennessee, meeting in a regular session on this 14th day of August 2018 with a
lawful quorum of said Council being present and with a majority of said Board voting in the
affirmative, that the City of Newport adopts a Public Records Policy.
RESOLVED THIS THE 14th DAY OF AUGUST IN THE YEAR OF 2018.
_______________________________________
Mayor Connie Ball
ATTEST:
_____________________________________
City Administrator James Finchum
______________________________________
City Attorney Terry Hurst