THE
SPRINGFIELD
MUNICIPAL
CODE
Prepared by the
MUNICIPAL TECHNICAL ADVISORY SERVICE
INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE
THE UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE
in cooperation with the
TENNESSEE MUNICIPAL LEAGUE
February 1993
Change 18, February 20, 2018
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, TENNESSEE
MAYOR
Ann Schneider
ALDERMEN
Jeff Gragg
Tim Harris
Bruce Head
James Hubbard
Clay Sneed
Bobby Trotter
CITY CLERK
Kimberly Brickles
CITY MANAGER
Gina Holt
CITY RECORDER
Lisa Crockett
ii
Preface
The Springfield Municipal Code contains the codification and revision of
the ordinances of the City of Springfield, Tennessee. By referring to the
historical citation appearing at the end of each section, the user can determine
the origin of each particular section. The absence of a historical citation means
that the section was added by the codifier. The word "modified" in the historical
citation indicates significant modification of the original ordinance.
The code is arranged into titles, chapters, and sections. Related matter
is kept together, so far as possible, within the same title. Each section number
is complete within itself, containing the title number, the chapter number, and
the section of the chapter of which it is a part. Specifically, the first digit,
followed by a hyphen, identifies the title number. The second digit identifies the
chapter number, and the last two digits identify the section number. For
example, title 2, chapter 1, section 6, is designated as section 2-106.
By utilizing the table of contents and the analysis preceding each title and
chapter of the code, together with the cross references and explanations included
as footnotes, the user should locate all the provisions in the code relating to any
question that might arise. However, the user should note that most of the
administrative ordinances (e.g. Annual Budget, Zoning Map Amendments, Tax
Assessments, etc...) do not appear in the code. Likewise, ordinances that have
been passed since the last update of the code do not appear here. Therefore, the
user should refer to the city's ordinance book or the city recorder for a
comprehensive and up to date review of the city's ordinances.
Following this preface is an outline of the ordinance adoption procedures,
if any, prescribed by the city's charter.
The code has been arranged and prepared in loose-leaf form to facilitate
keeping it up to date. MTAS will provide updating service under the following
conditions:
(1) That all ordinances relating to subjects treated in the code or which
should be added to the code are adopted as amending, adding, or deleting
specific chapters or sections of the code (see section 8 of the adopting ordinance).
(2) That one copy of every ordinance adopted by the city is kept in a
separate ordinance book and forwarded to MTAS annually.
iii
(3) That the city agrees to reimburse MTAS for the actual costs of
reproducing replacement pages for the code (no charge is made for the
consultant's work, and reproduction costs are usually nominal).
When the foregoing conditions are met MTAS will reproduce replacement
pages for the code to reflect the amendments and additions made by such
ordinances. This service will be performed at least annually and more often if
justified by the volume of amendments. Replacement pages will be supplied
with detailed instructions for utilizing them so as again to make the code
complete and up to date.
The able assistance of Bobbie J. Sams, the MTAS Word Processing
Specialist who did all the typing on this project, is gratefully acknowledged.
Andre Coure
Codification Consultant
iv
ORDINANCE ADOPTION PROCEDURES PRESCRIBED BY THE
CITY CHARTER
The ordinance adoption procedures for the City of Springfield are set as
follows precisely as they appear in the charter.
ORDINANCE
SECTION 12
BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the style or introductory clause of all
ordinances shall be as follows:
"Be it ordained by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Springfield."
Ordinance procedure. All ordinances shall begin with the clause, "Be it
ordained by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Springfield, Tennessee." An
ordinance may be introduced by any member of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. The body of ordinances may be omitted from the minutes on first and
second readings, but reference therein shall be made to the ordinance by title
and/or subject matter. Every ordinance shall be passed on three different days,
at regular, special or adjourned meetings. Except in the ordinance adopting the
budget, no material or substantial amendment may be made on final passage,
unless such amendment be passed in the same manner as an amendment to an
existing ordinance. Every ordinance shall be effective upon final passage unless
by its terms the effective date is deferred. Every ordinance upon final passage
shall be signed by the presiding officer of Board of Mayor and Aldermen, and
shall be immediately taken charge of by the Recorder, and by him numbered,
copied in an ordinance book and there authenticated by the signature of the
Recorder, and filed and preserved in the Recorder's office.
v
Change 18, February 20, 2018 1-1
TITLE 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER
1. BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN.
2. CODE OF ETHICS.
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN1
SECTION
1-101. Time and place of regular meetings.
1-102. Order of business.
1-103. General rules of order.
1-101. Time and place of regular meetings. The Board of Mayor and
Aldermen shall hold regular meetings at 6:00 P.M. on the third Tuesday of each
month as advertised. The meeting will normally be held in the board room
located in city hall. (Ord. # 90-21, Nov. 1990, modified, as amended by Ord.
#15-01, Feb. 2015)
1-102. Order of business. At each meeting of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, the following regular order of business shall be observed unless
dispensed with by a majority vote of the members present:
(1) Call to order by the mayor.
(2) Pledge of allegiance.
(3) Approval and/or correction of minutes of the previous meeting.
(4) Legislative items.
(5) Administrative items.
(6) Consent agenda.
(7) City managers report.
(8) Adjournment.
(1981 code, § 1-102, modified)
1-103. General rules of order. The rules of order and parliamentary
procedure contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the
transaction of business by and before the Board of Mayor and Aldermen at its
1Charter reference
See article IV, Board of Mayor and Alderman, for qualifications for
office, composition, proceedings, salaries, removal of Mayor and
Alderman from office, etc...
Change 13, July 15, 2008 1-2
meetings in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not
inconsistent with provisions of the charter or this code. (1981 code, § 1-103,
modified)
Change 13, July 15, 2008 1-3
CHAPTER 2
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION
1-201. Applicability.
1-202. Purpose.
1-203. Responsibilities of officials and employees.
1-204. Definition of personal interest.
1-205. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote.
1-206. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters.
1-207. Annual filing of disclosure questionnaire and conflicts of
interest statement.
1-208. Acceptance of gratuities.
1-209. Small gifts, giveaways and meals.
1-210. Use of information.
1-211. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc.
1-212. Use of position or authority.
1-213. Outside employment or rendering of services.
1-214. Ethics complaints.
1-215. Violations.
1-201. Applicability. 1. This chapter is the code of ethics for personnel
of the City of Springfield. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or
appointed officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those
of any separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or other
instrumentality appointed or created by the municipality. The words
"municipal" and "municipality" include these separate entities.
2. When an official or employee has doubt as to the applicability of a
provision of this chapter to a particular situation, he/she should apply to the
business conduct and ethics committee for an advisory opinion and be guided by
that opinion. The public official or employee shall have the opportunity to
present his/her interpretation of the facts at issue before such advisory decision
is made. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-202. Purpose. It is essential to the proper government and
administration of the City of Springfield that public officials and employees be,
and also give the appearance of being, independent, impartial and responsible
to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper
channels of the governmental structure and that no public office shall be used
for personal gain. The public, public officials and city employees should have
confidence in the integrity of their government. It is the policy of the City of
Springfield to meet its legal responsibilities and to conduct its business in
accordance with high ethical standards. In recognition of these goals, this code
Change 13, July 15, 2008 1-4
of ethics is hereby established for all officials and employees. (as added by
Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-203. Responsibilities of officials and employees. 1. Officials and
employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the
public. They are bound to uphold the laws of the nation, state and city and to
foster respect for all government. They are bound to observe in their official acts
the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their
office regardless of personal consideration, recognizing that the public interest
must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both official and private affairs
shall be above reproach.
2. All officials and employees of the City of Springfield shall be loyal to
the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain
those objectives. Officials and employees shall adhere to the rules of work and
performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate
authority.
3. Officials and employees shall not exceed their authority or breach the
law or ask others to do so, and they shall work in full cooperation with other
officials and employees, unless prohibited from doing so by law or by officially
recognized confidentiality of their work. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-204. Definition of personal interest. 1. For purposes of §§ 1-205 and
1-206 "personal interest" means:
a. Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in the subject of
a vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state statutes on
conflicts of interest; or
b. Any financial, ownership, or employment interest in a matter to be
regulated or supervised; or
c. Any such financial, ownership, or employment interest of the
official's or employee's spouse, parent(s), step parent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren), or stepchild(ren).
2. The words "employment interest" include a situation in which an
official or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible
employment with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that
is to be regulated or supervised.
3. In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of
interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over the
provisions of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-205. Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. An official
with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the meeting
at which the vote takes place, at the beginning of the agenda item discussion
and before the vote, so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that
affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official's
Change 13, July 15, 2008 1-5
vote on the measure. In addition, the official shall recuse himself from voting on
and discussing the measure. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-206. Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters. An official
or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other than
casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects or that
would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the
discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the
interest on a form provided by and filed with the city recorder. In addition, the
official or employee shall, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance, or
policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter. (as added
by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-207. Annual filing of disclosure questionnaire and conflict of interest
statement. Members of the board of mayor and aldermen, city manager, city
attorney, city judge, planning commission members, municipal board of appeals
members, beer board members, department heads, and certain key employees
specified by the board of mayor and aldermen shall be required to annually
complete and file with the business conduct and ethics committee a City of
Springfield "disclosure questionnaire and conflict of interest statement" in
accordance with the deadline established by the business conduct and ethics
committee. The date for filing disclosure questionnaire is prior to the regular
July meeting or before the person takes his/her position. (as added by
Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-208. Acceptance of gratuities, etc. An official or employee shall not
accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity, or other consideration or
favor of any kind from anyone other than the City of Springfield:
1. For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of an
act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the
regular course of his duties; or
2. That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence his
action, or reward him for past action, in executing municipal business. (as
added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-209. Small gifts, giveaways and meals. The board of mayor and
aldermen shall establish a policy with regard to the acceptance of small gifts,
giveaways, and meals by officials and employees. (as added by Ord. #07-03,
April 2007)
1-210. Use of information. 1. An official or employee shall not disclose
any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that
is made confidential under state or federal law except as authorized by law.
Change 13, July 15, 2008 1-6
2. An official or employee shall not use or disclose information obtained
in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to result in
financial gain for himself or any other person or entity. (as added by Ord. #07-
03, April 2007)
1-211. Use of municipal time, facilities, etc. 1. An official or employee
shall not use or authorize the use of municipal time, facilities, equipment, or
supplies for private gain or advantage to himself.
2. An official or employee shall not use or authorize the use of municipal
time, facilities, equipment, or supplies for private gain or advantage to any
private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or lease
that is determined by the governing body to be in the best interests of the City
of Springfield. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-212. Use of position or authority. 1. An official or employee shall not
make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name
of the City of Springfield.
2. An official or employee shall not use or attempt to use his position to
secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized by
the charter, general law, or ordinance or policy of the City of Springfield.
3. An official or employee shall not appear on behalf of private interests
before any agency of the city. However, a member of the board of mayor and
aldermen may appear before city agencies in the course of his duties as a
representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic
obligations. Nothing in this section shall preclude officials and employees from
appearing in behalf of their own personal routine interests within established
policies and procedures of the City of Springfield. By way of example,
applications for building permits, utility services, site plan approvals, and
reservation of city facilities are considered routine.
4. An official or employee shall not accept a retainer or compensation that
is contingent upon a specific action by a city agency.
5. An official or employee shall not have any interest in any contract
made by him in his official capacity or by any public committee, board,
commission or department of which he is a member, agent, or employee. (as
added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-213. Outside employment or rendering of services. No public official or
employee shall engage in or accept outside or private employment or render
services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible
with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his
independence of judgment or action in the performance his official duties or
conflicts with any provision of the City of Springfield's charter or any ordinance
or policy. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
Change 13, July 15, 2008 1-7
1-214. Ethics complaints. 1. The business conduct and ethics committee
consisting of the vice mayor, city attorney, and one department head appointed
by the board of mayor and aldermen at the beginning of each fiscal year, or as
often as necessary, shall investigate all ethics complaints against officials and
employees. Upon the written request of an official or employee potentially
affected by a provision of this chapter, the business conduct and ethics
committee shall render a written advisory ethics opinion based upon this
chapter and other applicable law.
2. a. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the business
conduct and ethics committee shall investigate any credible complaint
against an appointed official or employee charging any violation of this
chapter, or shall undertake an investigation on its own initiative when it
acquires information indicating a possible violation, and make
recommendations for action to end or seek retribution for any activity
that, in its judgment, constitutes a violation of this code of ethics.
b. The business conduct and ethics committee shall request the board
of mayor and aldermen to temporarily appoint or hire another attorney
or individual to take the place of any member of the committee having a
conflict of interest in a particular matter. The board of mayor and
aldermen may also, upon the request of the business conduct and ethics
committee, retain the professional services of individuals or firms in order
to assist the committee in the investigation of an ethics complaint.
c. When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this chapter is
lodged against a member of the board of mayor and aldermen, the
governing body shall either determine that the complaint has merit,
determine that the complaint does not have merit, or determine that the
complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the
governing body determines that a complaint warrants further
investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the business conduct
and ethics committee.
3. The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances
would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics.
4. When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation of a
personnel policy, rule, or regulation the violation shall be dealt with as a
violation of the personnel provisions rather than as a violation of this code of
ethics. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
1-215. Violations. An elected official, employee, or appointed member of
a separate municipal board, commission, committee, authority, corporation, or
other instrumentality who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action and
punishment as provided by the City of Springfield charter or other applicable
law, and in addition is subject to censure by the board of mayor and aldermen.
Violation of any provisions of this chapter should raise conscientious questions
Change 13, July 15, 2008 1-8
for the board of mayor and aldermen or other official or employee concerned as
to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best
interest of the city. (as added by Ord. #07-03, April 2007)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 2-1
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.
2. REPEALED.
3. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES.
4. HEALTH AND EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES BOARD.
5. THE SPRINGFIELD-ROBERTSON COUNTY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
6. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
7. MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE BOARD.
8. CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS.
CHAPTER 1
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD2
SECTION
2-101. Appointment, terms, and vacancies.
2-102. Powers and duties.
2-101. Appointment, terms, and vacancies. The parks and recreation
board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall serve without compensation.
Said board shall be as follows: one (1) member per ward appointed by the
alderman of said ward; one (1) member at large appointed by the mayor to serve
as chairperson. Board members representing wards 1, 2, and 3 shall be
appointed in July 1993, and board members representing wards 4, 5, and 6 and
the chairperson shall be appointed in July 1995 and every four (4) years
thereafter. (Ord. # 091-2, June 1991)
2-102. Powers and duties. The board shall have the following duties and
powers:
(1) The board shall, in conjunction with the parks and recreation
department, formulate policy regulations and rules for the operation of the
parks and recreation system of the City of Springfield.
(a) Unless otherwise denoted, the term "Park" shall apply to all
parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, tennis courts, swimming pools,
1Municipal code reference
The adult entertainment appeals board: §§ 9-717 through 9-723.
2Municipal code reference
Parks rules and regulations: title 20.
2-2
community centers, and other recreational areas now owned or hereafter
acquired or developed by the City of Springfield.
(b) All individual citizens, civic clubs, committees, businesses,
special interest groups, charitable organizations, or other entities
desiring to use park properties or facilities exclusively, and any
agreements regarding concessions, shall seek approval through the parks
department prior to beginning the activity or event.
(2) Formulate and recommend a three (3) to five (5) year parks and
recreation capital plan, said plan to be forwarded to the city manager and mayor
and board of aldermen, for consideration as part of the annual budget process
prior to March 1st of each year.
(3) Formulate with the parks and recreation department, all parks and
recreation rules and regulations and recommend same to the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen for adoption.
(4) To communicate to the public the importance of parks/recreation
services and to inform the public of the status and progress of said services. To
communicate and work closely with other related public agencies to insure a
complete community effort to provide the most effective and economical
park/recreation services available.
(5) Formulate fees and charges to be recommended to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen for adoption. The parks and recreation board is hereby
authorized to work with groups sponsoring events that require fees or charges
which are not covered by the normal fee schedule. The city manager shall work
with the recreation board and ultimately approve said special fees and charges.
(6) Duties of the officers:
(a) Chairperson: The chairperson shall preside at all meetings
of the board, and shall call special meetings of the board at the request
of any two (2) or more board members.
(b) Vice-chairperson: The vice-chairperson shall preside at any
meeting of the board when the chairperson is not present. This person
shall assume any other duties as set forth by the chairperson.
(c) Secretary: The recording secretary will be the
parks/recreation director. The secretary will have:
(1) The responsibility of preparing the agenda and
minutes of all meetings, and will cause a copy of same to be mailed
or delivered to each member of the board one week before meeting;
(2) Responsibility to conduct the official correspondence
of the board;
(3) The responsibility to keep all official records of the
board;
(4) No vote on the board.
(7) Election of officers: The vice-chairperson shall be elected annually
at the regular meeting each July. The term of office shall be for one (1) year.
(8) Board meetings:
2-3
(a) The board will meet on a regular monthly basis, the date
and time to be set by the board.
(b) Special meetings may be called at the request of two (2)
board members.
(c) All regular and special meetings of the board will be open to
the public.
(d) Individuals, or groups desiring to petition the board for some
specific action should present their request in writing to the board
secretary no later than one (1) week prior to the meeting. Petitioning
party may also appear in person at the meetings to make an oral
presentation.
(e) The parks director and/or appropriate staff will be present
at all meetings of the board.
(9) Minutes: All proceedings of the board shall be in typed form and
filed in permanent book of record open to public inspection at all normal office
hours, and during the meeting times. Minutes of previous meeting to be
approved at next meeting.
(10) Quorum: A majority of the duly appointed board members shall
constitute a quorum.
(11) Voting: The ayes and nays will be taken upon the passage of all
board matters. All votes shall be entered upon the minutes of the meeting. The
act of a majority of members present at the meetings, at which a quorum is
present, will be the official act of the board.
(12) Committees: Chairperson shall establish committees to investigate
and review certain matters under consideration by the board. (Ord. # 091-11,
June 1991)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 2-4
CHAPTER 2
[this chapter was repealed by Ord. #15-10, Sept. 2015]
2-5
CHAPTER 3
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND AUTHORITIES
SECTION
2-301. Boards, commissioners, and authorities.
2-301. Boards, commissioners, and authorities. Except as otherwise
controlled by law, all existing boards, commissions, and authorities shall have
a member to represent each existing Ward of the City of Springfield, Tennessee.
Each ward representative will be appointed to that membership by the
alderman for that ward. And the mayor shall appoint a member at large to each
existing board, commission, and authority who shall be deemed the chairperson.
Each term of office shall run concurrent with the elected officials term of office
or four (4) years.
In respect to boards, commissions and authorities not in existence as of
date of adoption of this codification, the board of mayor and aldermen has the
authority to create, provide and establish the membership of each board,
commission and authority as it deems necessary. (Ord. # 089-06, Aug. 1989,
modified)
2-6
CHAPTER 4
HEALTH AND EDUCATION FACILITIES BOARD
SECTION
2-401. Directors appointed.
2-401. Directors appointed. The following individuals:
Jerry E. West, Chair (reaffirmed to a 6 year term commencing as of
1991) at large
Ward 1 - David Baker (appointed to a 6 year term as of 1993)
Ward 2 - Anthony Cone (appointed to a 6 year term as of 1992)
Ward 3 - George Cheran (appointed to a 6 year term as of
1992)
Ward 4 - Don Hicks (reaffirmed to a 6 year term commencing
as of 1991)
Ward 5 - Robert E. James (appointed to a 6 year term as of
1993)
Ward 6 - James E. Willhite (appointed to a 6 year term as of
1992)
are duly ratified, appointed, or reaffirmed as directors of the Springfield Health
and Educational Facilities Board with said appointment relating back to their
ratification and/or appointment as the directors of the Industrial Development
Board for the City of Springfield, Tennessee.
Change 11, December 20, 2005 2-7
CHAPTER 5
THE SPRINGFIELD-ROBERTSON COUNTY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
SECTION
2-501. Creation of a joint board.
2-502. Name.
2-503. Members to serve without compensation.
2-504. Members appointed; terms.
2-505. Qualifications of members of the board.
2-506. Selection of original members of the board.
2-507. Purchase and disposal of personal property and equipment.
2-508. Annual budget.
2-501. Creation of a joint board. It is hereby determined and declared
that the public convenience and necessity can best be served by the creation of
a joint board to be created by Robertson County and the City of Springfield, for
the operation of the local airport. (as replaced by Ord. #05-12, Aug. 2005)
2-502. Name. Such board shall be known as the "Springfield-Robertson
County Joint Airport Board" and shall have jurisdiction over the
Springfield-Robertson County Airport only. (as replaced by Ord. #05-12,
Aug. 2005)
2-503. Members to serve without compensation. Members appointed
to the Springfield-Robertson County Joint Airport Board shall serve without
pay, except for mileage and other lawfully approved expenses incurred in
carrying out their lawful duties. (as replaced by Ord. #05-12, Aug. 2005)
2-504. Members appointed; terms. Seven (7) members of said board shall
be appointed. Members first appointed to new positions on the board may be
appointed for a term of less than five (5) years, but thereafter, each member
shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, except that the vacancies
occurring otherwise than by the expiration of terms shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the governing body first making the appointment. In
addition, three (3) persons shall be non-voting ex-officio board members by
virtue of their positions, being the Robertson County Executive, the Springfield
City Manager and the Executive Director of the Springfield-Robertson County
Chamber of Commerce. (as replaced by Ord. #05-12, Aug. 2005)
2-505. Qualifications of members of the board. Members of the
Springfield-Robertson County Joint Airport Board shall be appointed with due
regard for their fitness to serve by having successful business, professional or
public service experience, and knowledge of and practical experience in
Change 11, December 20, 2005 2-8
aeronautics for the efficient dispatch of the powers and duties duly vested in and
imposed upon them. Members shall be residents of Robertson County,
Tennessee and shall be appointed by the respective governing body as set forth
in § 2-506 hereof. However, should a member's primary place of residence
change to outside Robertson County, his or her term as a member of the joint
board shall terminate and a replacement shall be appointed to fill the unexpired
term of said member by the local governing body first appointing the member.
(as replaced by Ord. #05-12, Aug. 2005)
2-506. Selection of original members of the board. The Commissioners
of Robertson County shall in concert with the City of Springfield Board of Mayor
and Aldermen select the original members of said board as follows:
Position 1 A 1-year term- A county resident appointed by the County
Commission
Position 2 A 2-year term- A city resident appointed by the City Board
Position 3 A 3-year term- A county or city resident at-large appointed
by agreement of the City Board and County
Commission
Position 4 A 4-year term- A city resident appointed by the City Board
Position 5 A 5-year term- A county resident appointed by the County
Commission
Position 6 A 1-year term- A county or city resident at-large appointed
by agreement of the City Board and County
Commission
Position 7 A 2-year term- A county or city resident at-large appointed
by agreement of the City Board and County
Commission
If an agreement cannot be reached by the city board and county commission on
a joint at-large appointment, the appointment shall be made by the Governor of
Tennessee. (as replaced by Ord. #05-12, Aug. 2005)
2-507. Purchase and disposal of personal property and equipment. The
Springfield-Robertson County Joint Airport Board shall have all of the authority
vested unto said board by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 42-5-201, et seq. The
duration of said board shall be until said board is terminated by either of the
establishing governing bodies. The City of Springfield and Robertson County,
Tennessee shall share equally in the proportionate expense of operation of the
airport and its joint board, and said board is authorized to dispose of and
purchase such personal property and equipment as allowed by its budget
considerations and in the best operation of the airport itself. (as replaced by
Ord. #05-12, Aug. 2005)
Change 11, December 20, 2005 2-9
2-508. Annual budget. An annual budget shall be submitted by the joint
board to the Robertson County Commission and the Springfield Board of Mayor
and Aldermen which shall include budget requests for capitol needs. This
budget request is to be submitted prior to April 1 of each year. The board shall
operate and budget on a fiscal year beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30
of the subsequent year. (as replaced by Ord. #05-12, Aug. 2005)
2-10
CHAPTER 6
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION
2-601. Springfield Historic Preservation District (S.H.P.D.).
2-602. Springfield Historic Preservation Commission (S.H.P.C.).
2-603. Administration.
2-604. Building permits procedures.
2-605. Certificate of appropriateness.
2-606. Administrative standards and legal status provisions.
2-607. Remedy of dangerous conditions.
2-608. Appeal.
2-609. Injunctive powers and penalties.
2-601. Springfield Historic Preservation District (S.H.P.D.). (1) It is the
intent of this district to preserve the historic sites and structures of the City of
Springfield. The requirements of the district are designed to protect and
preserve historic and/or architectural value; create an aesthetic atmosphere;
strengthen the economy; protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists
and visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby
provided; and promote education and patriotic heritage of the present and future
citizens of the community. In order to achieve the intent of the S.H.P.D., as
shown on the official zoning map of Springfield, Tennessee, the following
regulations shall apply:
(a) Any use permitted by the existing zoning classification is also
permitted by the S.H.P.D.
(b) The S.H.P.D. classification may be superimposed in addition
to existing zoning classification where the following criteria shall be
determined to exist by the Historic Zoning Commission.
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology,
and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, and structures that possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and
association, and:
(i) That are associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
(ii) That are associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past; or
(iii) That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, or method of construction or that represent the work of a
master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a
significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction; or
2-11
(iv) That has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
archeological information. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov. 1993, as replaced
by Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-602. Springfield Historic Preservation Commission (S.H.P.C.).
(1) Creation and appointment. In accordance with Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 13-7-402, a Historic Preservation Commission is hereby
established. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall create a five (5) member
Historic Preservation Commission which shall consist of a representative of a
local patriotic or historic organization; an architect, if available; a member of the
planning commission, at the time of his appointment; and the remaining
members shall be appointed from the Springfield Residential Historic District.
All members of the S.H.P.C. shall be resident property owners of the district if
possible. The Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed by the
mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. Appointments to membership
on the Historic Preservation Commission shall be arranged so that the term of
one member shall expire each year and his successor shall be appointed in like
manner in terms of five (5) years. All members shall serve without
compensation. The members of the commission shall elect a chairman from
among themselves to preside over meetings.
(2) Procedure. Meetings of the Historic Preservation Commission shall
be held at the call of the chairman or by the majority of the membership. All
meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The commission shall
give notice of the place, date, and time of any public hearings which they hold
under the provisions of this chapter, by publication in an official newspaper or
a newspaper of general circulation at least five (5) days immediately prior
thereto. At least three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of its business. The concurring vote of three (3) members of
the commission shall constitute final action of the commission on any matter
before it. The commission shall keep minutes of its procedures showing the vote
of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact.
(3) Powers and duties. The Springfield Historic Preservation
Commission shall have the following powers:
(a) To request, where necessary, detailed construction plans and
related data pertinent to thorough review of any proposal before the
commission.
(b) The Historic Preservation Commission shall within thirty (30)
days following availability of sufficient date, direct the granting or refusal
of a "Certificate of Appropriateness."
(c) Upon review of the application for a building permit and
"Certificate of Appropriateness," the Historic Preservation Commission
shall give prime consideration to:
2-12
(i) Historic and/or architectural value of present
structure;
(ii) The relationship of exterior architectural features of
such structures to the rest of the structures of the surrounding
area;
(iii) The general compatibility of exterior design,
arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used;
(d) Additional powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the
Springfield Historic Preservation Commission to make the following
determination with respect to the historic district:
(i) Appropriateness of the exterior architectural feature
altering or demolishing any building or structure within the
historic district. The commission may require interior and exterior
photographs, architectural measured drawings of the exterior, or
other notations of architectural features to be used for historical
documentation as a condition of any permission to demolish a
building or structure.
(ii) Appropriateness of exterior design of any new
extension of any existing building or structure within the historic
district.
(iii) The general compatibility of exterior design,
arrangement, texture, and material of the building or other
structure in question and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings in the immediate surroundings. However, the
Springfield Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider
interior arrangement or design, or alterations and additions of
structures in the rear yard and side yards which do not face a
street, nor shall it make any requirements except for the purpose
of preventing extensions incongruous to the historic aspects of the
surroundings.
(iv) The S.H.P.C. shall make recommendations for the
designation of local historic districts, landmarks and landmark
sites.
(v) The S.H.P.C. shall advise and assist property owners
and other persons and groups concerned with historic preservation
and shall undertake educational programs for the public on
historic preservation. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov. 1993, as replaced by
Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-603. Administration. (1) No building permit for construction, major
alteration or rehabilitation, moving, or demolition to be carried on within the
S.H.P.D. shall be issued by the building inspector until it is submitted to and
receives approval in writing by the Historical Preservation Commission.
2-13
(2) Administration shall be by the office of the building inspector and
the Historic Preservation Commission and all items regulated within the
S.H.P.D. shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission (through
the office of the building inspector) for its review.
(3) Building permit required. All alterations, additions or new
construction which, previous to the establishment of this S.H.P.D., required that
application be made for a building permit shall continue to require that
application be made for a building permit, and approval obtained before the
work on such alterations, additions, or new construction can begin. In addition
it shall be required that application be made in the same manner for any work
including but not limited to, alterations, additions, demolition, removal or new
construction which alters or contributes to the exterior appearance of existing
structures.
(4) Within 90 days of the passage of this district designation, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare and submit the design review
guidelines, which shall be used by the Historic Preservation Commission in the
consideration of any application for "Certificate of Appropriateness" applied for
under this chapter. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #00-06, May
2000)
2-604. Building permits procedures. (1) Applications for building permits
with the S.H.P.D shall be made to the office of the building inspector and all
such applications shall be referred directly to the Springfield Historic
Preservation Commission. A supplied "checklist" must be completed for
application. The S.H.P.C. shall have broad powers to request detailed
construction plans and related data pertinent to thorough review of any
application.
(2) Upon receiving an application for a building permit the S.H.P.C.
shall, within thirty (30) days following the availability of sufficient date, issue
to the office of the building inspector a letter stating its approval with or without
attached conditions or disapproval with the grounds for disapproval stated in
writing.
(3) The office of the building inspector shall additionally review
applications for building permits (which have received written approval from the
S.H.P.C.) in the same manner review is made of building permit applications
outside of the S.H.P.D., and final issuance or rejection shall additionally be
based upon the adopted building codes of the City of Springfield. The fee
charged for building permits within the H-1 District shall conform to existing
fee schedules for building permits in any other zoning district within the City
of Springfield. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-605. Certificate of appropriateness. No person shall, without first
applying for and obtaining a "Certificate of Appropriateness", cause or permit
any of the following changes in exterior appearances of real estate in which he
2-14
has a legal or equitable interest lying within the S.H.P.D. to include all
commercial, residential, government and all other properties.
(1) Additive changes. (a) Moving any principal or accessory building
onto or within any lot in the district or on the landmark site.
(b) Material change of the exterior appearance of any existing
building by addition, reconstruction or alteration, including change in
form.
(c) Construction of any new principal accessory building or other
structure.
(2) Changes by removal. (a) Demolition of any principal or accessory
building.
(b) Moving any principal or accessory building from the historical
zone or the landmark site.
(3) The words "change in exterior appearance," as used in this
subsection, shall apply to changes within the front or street side yard or any
structure as defined in the Springfield Zoning Ordinance, which are visible from
any public roadway within a historical zone or adjacent to a landmark site.
(Ord. # 093-25, Nov. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-606. Administrative standards and legal status provisions. (1) Liability
of Historic Preservation Commission members. Any Historic Preservation
Commission member acting within the powers granted by this chapter is
relieved from all personal liability for any damage and shall be held harmless
by the city government. Any suit brought against any member of the
commission shall be defended by a legal representative furnished by the city
government until the termination of the procedure.
(2) Jurisdiction. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have
exclusive jurisdiction relating to historic matters. Anyone who may be
aggrieved by any final order or judgement of the commission may have said
order or judgement reviewed by the courts by the procedures of statutory
certiorari as provided for in the Tennessee Code Annotated, title 27, chapter 8.
(4) Conflict of interest. Any member of the Historic Preservation
Commission who shall have a direct or indirect interest in any property which
is the subject matter of, or affected by, a decision of said commission shall be
disqualified from participating in the discussion, decision, or proceedings of the
Historic Preservation Commission in connection therewith. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov.
1993, as replaced by Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-607. Remedy of dangerous conditions. In any case where a city
enforcement agency shall order or direct the construction, removal, alteration,
or demolition of any improvement in a historic district for the purpose of
remedying conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health, or property,
nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as making it unlawful for
any person, without prior issuance of a letter of approval pursuant to this
2-15
chapter, to comply with such order of direction. However, the enforcement
agency shall give the commission notice of any proposed order or direction which
affects or may affect the exterior appearance of any structure, or site, on or in
the environs of a historic district. The commission shall be afforded adequate
opportunity to review and provide written comments upon any action proposed
by an enforcement agency within a historic district prior to the initiation of any
said action. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-608. Appeal. Anyone who may be aggrieved by any final order or
judgement of the historic preservation commission may have such order or
judgement reviewed by the courts by the procedure of statutory certiorari, as
provided in Tennessee Code Annotated, title 27, chapter 8. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov.
1993, as replaced by Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-609. Injunctive powers and penalties. (1) Where it appears that the
owner or person in charge of an improvement on a landmark site or preservation
site threatens or is about to do or is doing any work in violation of this chapter,
the city attorney for the City of Springfield shall, when directed by the mayor
or city council, forthwith apply to an appropriate court for an injunction against
such violation of this chapter. If an order of the court enjoining or restraining
such violation does not receive immediate compliance, the city attorney shall
forthwith apply to an appropriate court to punish said violation pursuant to law.
(2) A violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than
two dollars ($2.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Every day
of violation will be held to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. # 093-25, Nov.
1993, as replaced by Ord. #00-06, May 2000)
2-16
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE BOARD
[Deleted by Ord. #00-33, Feb. 2001.]
2-17
CHAPTER 8
CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS
SECTION
2-801. Appointment.
2-802. Membership and terms.
2-803. Powers.
2-804. Appeals.
2-805. Procedures of the board.
2-806. Appeals to decisions of the board.
2-801. Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the
construction board of adjustments and appeals, which shall consist of nine (9)
members. All appointments to the construction board of adjustments and
appeals shall be confirmed by a vote of the board of mayor and aldermen. (As
added by Ord. #96-13, § 1, Feb. 1996)
2-802. Membership and terms. (1) Membership. The construction board
of adjustments and appeals shall consist of nine (9) voting members and shall
be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical
codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry
representatives. One of the at-large positions shall be a representative from the
general public. No board member shall act either by vote or recommendation
in any case in which he or she has a personal or financial interest.
(2) Terms. The terms of office for each board member shall be two (2)
years. Board members shall be appointed by position number. Positions
numbered 1 through 6 shall each represent one of the wards of the city and shall
each be appointed by the alderman of the respectively numbered ward.
Positions numbered 7 through 9 shall represent the city at-large and shall be
appointed by the mayor. Positions 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 shall have terms beginning
January 1 in odd numbered years and positions 2, 4, 6 and 8 shall have terms
beginning January 1 in even numbered years. Initial appointments after the
creation of the board may be for less than two (2) years in order to maintain the
appointment schedule as set herein above. Vacancies shall be filled for an
unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to
be made. Continued absence of any member from scheduled meetings of the
board or unethical conduct by a member at a board meeting shall, at the
discretion of the majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen, render any
such member subject to immediate removal from the board.
(3) Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute
a quorum. In varying any provision of the building codes, fire codes or technical
codes or in modifying a decision of the building official, fire official or person
2-18
appointed by the city to administer the technical codes, the affirmative votes of
the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required.
(4) Secretary of the board. The building official of the city shall act as
secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all of its proceedings,
which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the
absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. The record of the
proceedings of the board shall be kept open to the public in the office of the
building official. (As added by Ord. #96-13, § 1, Feb. 1996)
2-803. Powers. The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall
have the power, as further defined in this chapter, to hear appeals of decisions
and interpretations of the building official, fire official or the person designated
by the city to administer the technical codes, and consider variances to those
decisions and interpretations of the pertinent codes. (As added by Ord. #96-13,
§ 1, Feb. 1996)
2-804. Appeals. (1) Decisions of the building official. The owner of
property, or the owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly
authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the
construction board of adjustments and appeals whenever any one of the
following conditions are claimed to exist:
(a) The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or
manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in
the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system.
(b) The provisions of the building code do not apply to the specific
case.
(c) An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be
employed in any specific case.
(d) The true intent and meaning of the building code or any of the
regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly
interpreted.
(2) Decisions of the fire official. Whenever it is claimed that the
provisions of the fire codes do not apply, or when it is claimed that the true
intent and meaning of the fire codes or any of the regulations thereunder have
been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted, the owner of such property,
building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal the decision of
the fire official to the construction board of adjustments and appeals.
(3) Decisions on the technical codes. Whenever it is claimed that the
provisions of the technical codes do not apply, or when it is claimed that the true
intent and meaning of the technical codes or any of the regulations thereunder
have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted, the owner of such property,
building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal the decision of
the building official or person appointed by the city to administer the technical
codes to the construction board of adjustments and appeals. The technical codes
2-19
include the Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Gas Code, Amusement Device
Code, Swimming Pool Code, Housing Code, Electrical Code, and the Unsafe
Buildings Code.
(4) Variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals,
when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any
provision of the building code, fire code or technical codes to any particular case
when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and
would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the building code, fire codes,
technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following:
(a) Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the property, building, structure or service system involved and which
are not applicable to others.
(b) The special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the action or inaction of the applicant.
(c) Granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this code to other
property, buildings, structures or service systems.
(d) The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make
possible the reasonable use of the property, building, structure or service
system.
(e) The variance will be in harmony with the general intent and
purpose of this code and will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(5) Conditions of the variance. In granting a variance, the board may
prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance
is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board
may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this
code.
(6) Request of appeal. Request of an appeal shall be submitted by the
property owner, the owner of the building or structure, or the owner of the
service system, or their duly authorized agent, in written format and delivered
to the building official serving as secretary of the board and the city recorder
within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building
official, fire official or person appointed by the city to administer the technical
codes.
(7) Unsafe or dangerous parcels, structures, buildings or service
systems. In the case of a parcel, structure, building or service system which, in
the opinion of the building official, fire official or person appointed by the city
to administer the technical codes, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous, he may,
in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. (As added by
Ord. #96-13, § 1, Feb. 1996)
2-20
2-805. Procedures of the board. (1) Rules and regulations. The board
shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. The board shall elect a chairman and a vicechairman
to serve one year terms. The chairman shall preside over the
meetings of the board. The vice-chairman shall serve in the absence of the
chairman. The board shall meet on call of the chairman or vice-chairman. The
board shall meet within thirty (30) calendar days after notice of appeal has been
received.
(2) Decisions. The construction board of adjustments and appeals
shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a
decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the
building official, fire official or person appointed by the city to administer the
technical codes, or varies the application of any provision of the building code,
the building official, fire official or person appointed by the city to administer
the technical codes, shall immediately take action in accordance with such
decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the
building official and shall be kept open to public inspection. A certified copy of
the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall
be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after
filing. (As added by Ord. #96-13, § 1, Feb. 1996)
2-806. Appeals to decisions of the board. Every decision of the
construction board of adjustments and appeals shall be upheld with the
exception that any interested person or party aggrieved by a decision of the
board may appeal to the elected board of mayor and aldermen, provided that
written notice to the board of mayor and aldermen of such appeal is delivered
to the city recorder within ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the
construction board of adjustments and appeals. Any decision of the board of
mayor and aldermen concerning the appeal shall be final, subject however, to
such remedy as any aggrieved person or party might have at law or in equity.
(As added by Ord. #96-13, § 1, Feb. 1996)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 3-1
TITLE 3
MUNICIPAL COURT1
CHAPTER
1. CITY COURT.
CHAPTER 1
CITY COURT
SECTION
3-101. City judge.
3-102. Maintenance of docket.
3-103. Issuance of arrest warrants.
3-104. Issuance of summonses.
3-105. Issuance of subpoenas.
3-106. Trial and disposition of cases.
3-107. Appearance bonds authorized.
3-108. Imposition of fines, penalties, and costs.
3-109. Appeals.
3-110. Bond amounts, conditions, and forms.
3-111. Disposition and report of fines, penalties, and costs.
3-112. Disturbance of proceedings.
3-113. Court costs.
3-114. Administrative fee.
3-115. Electronic traffic citation fee.
3-101. City judge. The officer designated by the charter to handle judicial
matters within the municipality shall preside over the city court and shall be
known as the city judge. (1981 code, § 1-301)
3-102. Maintenance of docket. The city judge shall keep a complete
docket of all matters coming before him in his judicial capacity. The docket shall
include for each defendant such information as his name; warrant and/or
summons numbers; alleged offense; disposition; fines, penalties, and costs
imposed and whether collected; whether committed to workhouse; and all other
information which may be relevant. (1981 code, § 1-302)
1Charter reference
See Article XI, City Court, for appointment, rehearings, restrictions on
office of city judge, etc.
3-2
3-103. Issuance of arrest warrants.1 The city judge or the lawful "acting
city judge" shall have the power to issue warrants for the arrest of persons
charged with violating municipal ordinances. (1981 code, § 1-303)
3-104. Issuance of summonses. When a complaint of an alleged
ordinance violation is made to the city judge, the judge may in his discretion, in
lieu of issuing an arrest warrant, issue a summons ordering the alleged offender
personally to appear before the city court at a time specified therein to answer
to the charges against him. The summons shall contain a brief description of
the offense charged but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the
ordinance alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear
before the city court as commanded in a summons lawfully served on him, the
cause may be proceeded with ex parte, and the judgment of the court shall be
valid and binding subject to the defendant's right of appeal. (1981 code, § 1-304)
3-105. Issuance of subpoenas. The city judge may subpoena as witnessed
all persons whose testimony he believes will be relevant and material to matters
coming before his court, and it shall be unlawful for any person lawfully served
with such a subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith. (1981 code, § 1-305)
3-106. Trial and disposition of cases. Every person charged with
violating a municipal ordinance shall be entitled to an immediate trial and
disposition of his case, provided the city court is in session or the city judge is
reasonably available. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply
when the alleged offender, by reason of drunkenness or other incapacity, is not
in a proper condition or is not able to appear before the court. (1981 code,
§ 1-306)
3-107. Appearance bonds authorized. When the city judge is not
available or when an alleged offender requests and has reasonable grounds for
a delay in the trial of his case, he may, in lieu of remaining in jail pending
disposition of his case, be allowed to post an appearance bond with the city judge
or, in the absence of the judge, with the ranking police officer on duty at the
time, provided such alleged offender is not drunk or otherwise in need or
protective custody. (1981 code, § 1-307)
3-108. Imposition of fines, penalties, and costs. All fines, penalties, and
costs shall be imposed and recorded by the city judge on the city court docket in
open court. (1981 code, § 1-308)
1See the Tennessee Code Annotated, title 40, chapter 5, for authority to
issue search warrants.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 3-3
3-109. Appeals. Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgment of
the city court against him may, within ten (10) days next after such judgment
is rendered, appeal to the next term of the circuit court upon posting a proper
appeal bond. (1981 code, § 1-309)
3-110. Bond amounts, conditions, and forms. An appearance bond in any
case before the city court shall be in such amount as the city judge shall
prescribe and shall be conditioned that the defendant shall appear for trial
before the city court at the stated time and place. An appeal bond in any case
shall be in such amount and subject to such conditions as the charter shall
prescribe. An appearance or appeal bond in any case may be made in the form
of a cash deposit or by any corporate surety company authorized to do business
in Tennessee or by two (2) private persons who individually own real property
located within the county. No other type bond shall be acceptable. (1981 code,
§ 1-310)
3-111. Disposition and report of fines, penalties, and costs. All funds
coming into the hands of the city judge in the form of fines, penalties, costs, and
forfeitures shall be recorded by him, paid over to the municipality and reported
as required by the city charter. (1981 code, § 1-311)
3-112. Disturbance of proceedings. It shall be unlawful for any person
to create any disturbance of any trial before the city court by making loud or
unusual noises, by using indecorous, profane, or blasphemous language, or by
any distracting conduct whatsoever. (1981 code, § 1-312)
3-113. Court costs. Court costs in the sum of seventy dollars ($70.00)
shall be assessed in each case in which there is a plea of guilty or a trial and
conviction in city court. Such court costs shall be in addition to any fine
assessed upon either a plea of guilty or conviction. The city judge, at his or her
discretion, may waive court costs, in whole or in part, in each separate case. (as
added by Ord. #97-26, Oct. 1997, amended by Ord. #05-24, Nov. 2005, and
replaced by Ord. # 11-09, Sept. 2011)
3-114. Administrative fee. The city court clerk shall charge and collect
an administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each traffic citation
issued for an equipment violation or for a failure to produce proof of insurance
violation when the defendant has the equipment violation corrected and verified
by a police officer prior to the case being heard in city court, or when the
defendant produces proof of insurance to the clerk of the court, prior to city
court, verifying that the insurance was valid at the time of the violation. (as
added by Ord. #15-15, Oct. 2015)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 3-4
3-115. Electronic traffic citation fee. The city court clerk shall charge and
collect an electronic traffic citation fee of five dollars ($5.00) assessable as court
costs for each traffic citation resulting in a conviction, and same shall be paid
by a defendant for any offense cited in a traffic citation that results in a plea of
guilty, nolo contendere, or a judgment of guilty. This fee shall be in addition to
all other fees, taxes, costs, penalties and charges, and shall be accounted for and
used in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-207 and state law
of general application, as may be amended from time to time.
The city court clerk shall retain one dollar ($1.00) of the fee to be
earmarked for computer hardware purchases and replacements, and the police
department shall be given four dollars ($4.00) of the fee to be placed in a special
revenue fund to be spent on an electronic citation system and program
expenditures, technology, equipment, repairs, replacement and training.
The provisions of this section shall terminate and expire automatically
five (5) years from the date of the adoption of the ordinance, as currently
provided by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-207. (as added by Ord. #15-15,
Oct. 2015)
4-1
TITLE 4
MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
CHAPTER
1. PERSONNEL SYSTEM.
2. SOCIAL SECURITY--CITY PERSONNEL.
3. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM.
CHAPTER 1
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
4-101. Purpose.
4-102. Coverage.
4-103. Administration.
4-104. Personnel rules and regulations; amendments.
4-105. Personnel policies and procedures manual.
4-106. Personnel records.
4-107. Right to contract for special services.
4-108. Discrimination.
4-101. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of
personnel administration in the City of Springfield that is based on merit and
fitness. The system shall provide means to select, develop, and maintain an
effective municipal work force through the impartial application of personnel
policies and procedures free of personal and political considerations and
regardless of race, sex, age, creed, national origin or disability.
4-102. Coverage. All positions of the city shall be divided into
classifications. The classified positions hereinafter referred to as the "classified
service" shall include all regular full-time and regular part-time positions in the
city. Other positions in the city are labeled as "non-covered" because they are
simply not covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). All non-covered
offices and positions shall be as follows:
(1) All officials elected by popular vote and persons appointed to fill
vacancies in any such elective offices.
(2) Members of appointive boards, commissions, or committees.
(3) Persons employed to render the city expert, professional, technical,
or other services of occasional character.
(4) Volunteer personnel.
(5) Persons employed by the city for not more than three (3) months
during a fiscal year for special purposes and seasonal work.
4-2
(6) Persons serving the city as independent contractors or under
specific written agreements.
(7) Persons retained as consultants.
(8) City judge.
(9) City attorney.
4-103. Administration. The city manager shall have the basic
responsibility for the personnel program. He/she specifically shall:
(1) Be responsible for effective personnel administration.
(2) Delegate to the respective department head the authority to select
and recommend for appointment all employees below the level of department
head in positions authorized by the city manager.
(3) Have final action for appointment and/or removal of regular fulltime
employees subject to the policies as set forth in the city charter, personnel
manual and state laws.
(4) Fix and establish the number of employees in the various city
departments and offices; determine their duties, authority, responsibilities in
accordance with the policies and procedures as set forth in the city charter; and
determine their compensation subject to the budget limitations established by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
4-104. Personnel rules and regulations; amendments. The city manager
shall implement and propose amendments to personnel rules and regulations
adopted by the board. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may adopt, by motion
or resolution, amendments or revisions as recommended by the city manager.
4-105. Personnel policies and procedures manual. Personnel policies and
procedures in the City of Springfield shall be as set forth in the "1992 Personnel
Policies and Procedures Manual." (Ord. # 092-21, Nov. 1992, modified; amended
by Ord. #98-13, June 1998)
4-106. Personnel records. The city manager shall maintain adequate
records of employment for all city employees.
4-107. Right to contract for special services. The Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may direct the city manager to contract with any competent agency
for the performance of such technical services in connection with the
establishment of the personnel system or with its operation as may be deemed
necessary.
4-108. Discrimination. No person in the classified service or seeking
admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged, or in
any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or
4-3
affiliations, or because of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, ancestry, age,
religious belief or disability.
4-4
1Charter reference
See also Article VIII, Administration, for personnel rules, Nepotism
Prohibited, departments, offices, etc...
CHAPTER 2
SOCIAL SECURITY--CITY PERSONNEL1
SECTION
4-201. Policy and purpose as to coverage.
4-202. Necessary agreements to be executed.
4-203. Withholdings from salaries or wages.
4-204. Appropriations for employer's contributions.
4-205. Records and reports.
4-206. Part-time personnel.
4-201. Policy and purpose as to coverage. It is hereby declared to be the
policy and purpose of this municipality to provide for all eligible employees and
officials of the municipality, whether employed in connection with a
governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old
age and survivors insurance. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose,
the municipality shall take such action as may be required by applicable state
and federal laws or regulations. (1981 code, § 1-501)
4-202. Necessary agreements to be executed. The mayor is hereby
authorized and directed to execute all the necessary agreements and
amendments thereto with the state executive director of old age insurance, as
agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in the
preceding section. (1981 code, § 1-502)
4-203. Withholdings from salaries or wages. Withholdings from the
salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in the first
section of this chapter are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at
such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or
regulations. (1981 code, § 1-503)
4-204. Appropriations for employer's contributions. There shall be
appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's
contributions, and the same shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by said laws or regulations. (1981 code, § 1-504)
4-5
4-205. Records and reports. The municipality shall keep such records
and make such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws
or regulations. (1981 code, § 1-505)
4-206. Part-time personnel. There is hereby excluded from this chapter
any authority to make any agreement with respect to employees engaged in
rendering services in part-time positions. The chairman is hereby authorized
and directed to execute an amendment to the Social Security Agreement with
the Director of Old Age and Survivors Insurance to include employees engaged
in rendering services in part-time positions, effective January 1, 1977, and to
exclude the services performed by election officials and election workers if the
remuneration paid for such services is less than $100.00 in a calendar year, to
be effective not earlier than the last day of the calendar quarter in which a
modification to the agreement is mailed to the Federal Social Security
Administration, pursuant to Federal Law. (1981 code, § 1-506)
Change 9, February 18, 2003 4-6
CHAPTER 3
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM
SECTION
4-301. Created.
4-302. Title.
4-303. Purpose.
4-304. Coverage.
4-305. Standards authorized.
4-306. Variances from standards authorized.
4-307. Administration.
4-308. Funding the program.
4-301. Created. There is hereby created an occupational safety and
health program for employees of the City of Springfield, as follows. (1981 Code,
§ 1-701, as replaced by Ord. #02-23, Jan. 2003)
4-302. Title. This chapter shall provide authority for establishing and
administering the occupational safety and health program for the employees of
the City of Springfield. (1981 Code, § 1-702, as replaced by Ord. #02-23, Jan.
2003)
4-303. Purpose. The City of Springfield, in electing to establish and
maintain an effective occupational safety and health program for its employees,
shall:
(1) Provide a safe and healthful place and condition of employment.
(2) Make, keep, preserve and make available to the Commissioner of
Labor of the State of Tennessee, designated representatives, or persons within
the Tennessee Department of Labor to whom such responsibilities have been
delegated, adequate records of all occupational accidents and illnesses and
personal injuries for proper evaluation and necessary corrective action as
required.
(3) Provide for education and training of personnel for the fair and
efficient administration of occupational safety and health standards and provide
for education and notification of all employees of the existence of this program.
(1981 Code, § 1-703, as replaced by Ord. #02-23, Jan. 2003)
4-304. Coverage. The provisions of the occupational safety and health
program for the employees of the City of Springfield shall apply to all employees
of each administrative department, commission, board, division or other agency
of the City of Springfield, whether part-time or full-time, seasonal or year round.
(1981 Code, § 1-704, as replaced by Ord. #02-23, Jan. 2003)
Change 9, February 18, 2003 4-7
4-305. Standards authorized. The occupational safety and health
standards adopted by the City of Springfield are the same as, but not limited to,
the State of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Standards promulgated,
or which may be promulgated, in accordance with section 6 of Tennessee
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1972 (Tennessee Code Annotated, title
50, chapter 3). (as added by Ord. #02-23, Jan. 2003)
4-306. Variances from standards authorized. The City of Springfield
may, upon written application to the Commissioner of Labor of the State of
Tennessee, request an order granting temporary variance from any approved
standards. Applications for variances shall be in accordance with Rules of
Tennessee Department of Labor, Occupational Safety, chapter 0800-1-2, as
authorized by Tennessee Code Annotated, title 50. Prior to requesting such
temporary variance, the City of Springfield shall notify or serve notice to
employees, their designated representatives, or interested parties and present
them with an opportunity for a hearing. The posting of notice on the main
bulletin board as designated by the City of Springfield shall be deemed sufficient
notice to employees. (as added by Ord. #02-23, Jan. 2003)
4-307. Administration. For the purpose of this chapter, the assistant fire
chief is designated as the director of occupational safety and health to perform
duties and to exercise powers assigned. The director shall develop a plan of
operation for the program and said plan shall become part of this chapter when
it satisfies all applicable sections of Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health
Plan. (as added by Ord. #02-23, Jan. 2003)
4-308. Funding the program. Sufficient funds for administering and
staffing the program pursuant to this chapter shall be made available as
authorized by the City of Springfield. (as added by Ord. #02-23, Jan. 2003)
5-1
1Charter reference
See Article IX, Finance, for competitive bidding and purchasing
procedures, accounting records, discharge of obligations, deficits,
budget requirements, etc....
TITLE 5
MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. REAL PROPERTY TAXES.
3. PRIVILEGE TAXES GENERALLY.
4. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAXES.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
5-101. Claims against city subject to setoff.
5-101. Claims against city subject to setoff. Whenever any person, firm
or corporation, having a claim against the city for services rendered,
merchandise sold, or for anything else or otherwise, is indebted to the city for
taxes or in any other manner, such debt due to the city shall be set off against
such claim against the city before the same shall be paid, and no warrant shall
be issued except for the balance found to be owing by the city after such setoff
has been made.
Whenever such a setoff has been made the recorder shall issue a warrant
to the city for the amount of such debt due to the city.
However, the board of mayor and aldermen may order such claim paid
without such setoff being made, or direct that it be made in part only. Where
the claim against the city consists of the wage or salary of a regular employee
or officer of the city, the recorder is authorized to make the setoff herein
provided for in installments. (1981 code, § 6-501)
5-2
1Charter reference
See generally Article X, Taxation, of the city charter.
CHAPTER 2
REAL PROPERTY TAXES1
SECTION
5-201. When due and payable.
5-202. When delinquent--penalty.
5-203. Penalty and interest.
5-201. When due and payable. Taxes levied by the municipality against
real property shall become due and payable annually on the date prescribed in
Article X, section 2 of the city's charter. (1981 code, § 6-101)
5-202. When delinquent--penalty. All unpaid real property taxes become
delinquent and be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of
Article X, section 2 in the city's charter. (1981 code, § 6-102)
5-203. Penalty and interest. Penalty of one half of one percent (.5%) and
interest of one percent (1%) shall be added January 1, following the due date
and on the first of each succeeding month. (As added by Ord. #095-10, Aug.
1995)
5-3
1Charter reference
See generally Article X, Taxation, of the charter.
CHAPTER 3
PRIVILEGE TAXES GENERALLY1
SECTION
5-301. Tax levied.
5-302. License required.
5-303. Inspectors required.
5-301. Tax levied. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code,
there is hereby levied on all vocations, occupations, and businesses declared by
the general laws of the state to be privileges taxable by municipalities, an
annual privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by said state laws. The
taxes provided for in the state's "Business Tax Act" (Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 67-4-701 et seq.) are hereby expressly enacted, ordained, and levied on the
businesses, business activities, vocations, and occupations carried on within the
municipality at the rates and in the manner prescribed by the said act. (1981
code, § 6-301)
5-302. License required. No person shall exercise any such privilege
within the municipality without a currently effective privilege license, which
shall be issued by the city recorder to each applicant therefor upon such
applicant's payment of the appropriate privilege tax. (1981 code, § 6-302)
5-303. Inspectors required. No person, after obtaining a Minimum
Business License which has been issued by the city clerk, shall open a place of
business to the public without prior inspection and approval by city building and
codes, city fire marshall, city health department and/or the Springfield Police
Department.
5-4
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAXES
SECTION
5-401. Wholesale beer tax to be collected.
5-402. Tax on private clubs.
5-401. Wholesale beer tax to be collected. The city recorder is hereby
directed to take appropriate action to assure payment to the municipality of the
wholesale beer tax levied by the "Wholesale Beer Tax Act," as set out in chapter
6 of title 57, Tennessee Code Annotated. (1981 code, § 6-401)
5-402. Tax on private clubs. (1) As set out in Tennessee Code Annotated,
section 57-4-301, it is hereby declared the legislative intent of this commission
that every person is exercising a taxable privilege who engages in the business
of selling, at retail in this city, alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises.
(2) A privilege tax is levied for city purposes, to be paid annually, in
the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00), on all private clubs, as defined
in Tennessee Code Annotated, section 57-4-102, which sell at retail in this city
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. (1981 code, § 6-402)
Change 14, June 15, 2010 6-1
TITLE 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER
1. POLICE AND ARREST.
2. WORKHOUSE.
3. CITATIONS, WARRANTS, AND SUMMONSES.
CHAPTER 1
POLICE AND ARREST
SECTION
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders.
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc.
6-103. Policemen to wear uniforms and be armed.
6-104. When policemen to make arrests.
6-105. Policemen may require assistance.
6-106. Disposition of persons arrested.
6-107. Police department records.
6-108. Enforcement.
6-109. Fee for copies of audio tapes and written conclusions to polygraph tests.
6-101. Policemen subject to chief's orders. All policemen shall obey and
comply with such orders and administrative rules and regulations as the police
chief may officially issue. (1981 code, § 1-201)
6-102. Policemen to preserve law and order, etc. Policemen shall
preserve law and order within the municipality. They shall patrol the
municipality and shall assist the city court during the trial of cases. Policemen
shall also promptly serve any legal process issued by the city court. (1981 code,
§ 1-202)
6-103. Policemen to wear uniforms and be armed. All policemen shall
wear such uniform and badge as the chief of police shall authorize and shall
carry a service pistol at all times while on duty unless otherwise expressly
directed by the chief for a special assignment. (1981 code, § 1-203)
6-104. When policemen to make arrests. Unless otherwise authorized or
directed in this code or other applicable law, an arrest of the person shall be
made by a policeman in the following cases:
(1) Whenever he is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person.
6-2
(2) Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer's presence by the person.
(3) Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has
reasonable cause to believe the person has committed it. (1981 code, § 1-204)
6-105. Policemen may require assistance. It shall be unlawful for any
person willfully to refuse to aid a policeman in maintaining law and order or in
making a lawful arrest when such person's assistance is requested by the
policeman and is reasonably necessary. (1981 code, § 1-205)
6-106. Disposition of persons arrested. Unless otherwise authorized by
law, when any person is arrested for any offense other than one involving
drunkenness he shall be brought before the city court for immediate trial or
allowed to post bond. When the arrested person is drunk or when the city judge
is not immediately available and the alleged offender is not able to post the
required bond, he shall be confined. (1981 code, § 1-206)
6-107. Police department records. The police department shall keep a
comprehensive and detailed daily record, in permanent form, showing:
(1) All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within the
corporate limits.
(2) All arrests made by policemen.
(3) All police investigations made, and other miscellaneous activities
of the police department. (1981 code, § 1-207)
6-108. Enforcement. The police department is responsible for the
enforcement of the laws of the State of Tennessee and the ordinances of the City
of Springfield.
6-109. Fees for copies of audio tapes and written conclusions to polygraph
tests. The City of Springfield shall charge $40.00 per requested copy of the
audio tape and $40.00 per requested copy of the written conclusion to those
persons who have been administered a polygraph test by the Springfield Police
Department. (As added by Ord. #99-12, May 1999)
6-3
CHAPTER 2
WORKHOUSE1
SECTION
6-201. County workhouse to be used.
6-202. Inmates to be worked.
6-203. Compensation of inmates.
6-201. County workhouse to be used. The county jail is hereby
designated as the municipal workhouse, subject to such contractual
arrangement as may be worked out with the county. (1981 code, § 1-401)
6-202. Inmates to be worked. All persons committed to the workhouse,
to the extent that their physical condition permits, shall be required to perform
such public work or labor as may be lawfully prescribed for the county prisoners.
(1981 code, § 1-402)
6-203. Compensation of inmates. Each workhouse inmate shall be
allowed five dollars ($5.00) per day as credit toward payment of the fine
assessed against him. (1981 code, § 1-403)
1State law reference
See Tennessee Code Annotated, section 40-24-104 for authority to
commit to the workhouse.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 6-4
CHAPTER 3
CITATIONS, WARRANTS AND SUMMONSES
SECTION
6-301. Citations in lieu of arrest in non-traffic cases.
6-302. Summonses in lieu of arrest.
6-301. Citations in lieu of arrest in non-traffic cases. Pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-101, et seq., the board of mayor and aldermen
appoints the fire chief and the deputy fire marshals in the fire department and
the codes administrator and the building and codes inspectors in the community
development department special police officers having the authority to issue
citations in lieu of arrest. The fire chief and deputy fire marshals in the fire
department shall have the authority to issue citations in lieu of arrest for
violations of the fire code and other regulations adopted in title 7 of this
municipal code of ordinances. The codes administrator and building and codes
inspectors in the community development department shall have the authority
to issue citations in lieu of arrest for violations of the building, utility and
housing codes adopted in title 12 of this municipal code of ordinances, as well as
residential yard sale violations in title 9, chapter 5.
The citation in lieu of arrest shall contain the name and address of the
person being cited and such other information necessary to identify and give the
person cited notice of the charges against him, and state a specific date and
place for the offender to appear and answer the charges against him. The
citation shall also contain an agreement to appear, which shall be signed by the
offender. If the offender refuses to sign the agreement to appear, the special
officer in whose presence the offense was committed may:
(1) Have a summons issued by the clerk of the city court; or
(2) May seek the assistance of a police officer to witness the violation.
The police officer who witnesses the violation may issue a citation in lieu of
arrest for the violation, or arrest the offender for failure to sign the citation in
lieu of arrest. If the police officer makes an arrest, he shall dispose of the person
arrested in accordance with Tennessee Code Annotated, § 7-63-104.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his agreement to appear in
court, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the citation in lieu of
arrest was issued. (as added by Ord. #10-03, March 2010, and replaced by Ord.
#17-13, Oct. 2017)
6-302. Summonses in lieu of arrest. Pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 7-63-201, et seq., which authorizes the board of mayor and
aldermen to designate certain city enforcement officers the authority to issue
ordinance summonses in the areas of sanitation, litter control and animal
control, the board designates the animal control officers in the animal control
Change 14, June 15, 2010 6-5
department and the public works operations superintendent in the sanitation
department to issue ordinance summonses in those areas. These enforcement
officers may not arrest violators or issue citations in lieu of arrest, but upon
witnessing a violation of any ordinance, law or regulation in the areas of
sanitation, litter control or animal control, may issue an ordinance summons
and give the summons to the offender.
The ordinance summons shall contain the name and address of the person
being summoned and such other information necessary to identify and give the
person summoned notice of the charge against him, and state a specific date and
place for the offender to appear and answer the charges against him.
The ordinance summons shall also contain an agreement to appear, which
shall be signed by the offender. If the offender refuses to sign the agreement to
appear, the enforcement officer in whose presence the offense occurred may:
(1) Have a summons issued by the clerk of the city court; or
(2) May seek the assistance of a police officer to witness the violation.
The police officer who witnesses the violation may issue a citation in lieu of
arrest for the violation, or arrest the offender for failure to sign the citation in
lieu of arrest. If the police officer makes an arrest, he shall dispose of the person
arrested as provided in § 6-301 above.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his agreement to appear in
court, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the ordinance
summons was issued. (as added by Ord. #10-03, March 2010)
Change 14, June 15, 2010 7-1
TITLE 7
FIRE PROTECTION AND FIREWORKS
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. FIRE CODE.
3. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
4. BURN PERMIT SYSTEM.
5. FIREWORKS.
6. RAPID ENTRY KEY LOCK BOXES.
7. AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER AND STANDPIPE SYSTEMS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
7-101. Fire limits described.
7-102. Parking prohibited within fire limits.
7-101. Fire limits described. The corporate fire limits shall be as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of 4th Ave. and Willow St. in the
center of the street and running thence with Willow St. in a southerly
direction to the center of 5th Ave. E; thence east with the center of 5th
Ave. E. to the center of Hill St.; thence south with the center of Hill St.
crossing L & N Railroad to the center of 12th Ave.; thence west with
center of 12th Ave. to the center of Cheatham St.; thence north with the
center of Cheatham St. to the center of 7th Ave.; thence west with the
center of 7th Ave. to the center of Oak St.; thence north with the center
of Oak St. to the center of 4th Ave.; thence east with the center of 4th
Ave. to the beginning. (1981 code, § 7-101)
7-102. Parking prohibited within fire limits. Notwithstanding anything
else in this code to the contrary, no person shall park or leave a vehicle parked
on any public street within the fire limits or on any other public street or alley
for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours without the prior approval of
the chief of police.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 7-2
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE
SECTION
7-201. Codes adopted.
7-202. Available in recorder's office.
7-203. Trucks for hauling gasoline, etc.
7-204. Conditions of service manual.
7-201. Codes adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 6-54-501 through § 6-54-506, and for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion the following codes are adopted:
(1) The NFPA 101-Life Safety Code, 2006 edition, as promulgated and
adopted by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by the State of
Tennessee, including all appendices, addenda and supplements thereto, is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, in its entirety, as a part of the
Springfield Municipal Code, and is hereinafter referred to as the life safety code,
with the following modifications:
(a) The construction board of adjustments and appeals as
established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code shall
act as a board of appeals for all code enforcement decisions made under
this code.
(b) All violations and penalties under this code shall be
administered as set forth in section 109 of the International Fire Code,
2012 edition, entitled "Violations" as modified.
(2) The International Fire Code, 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted
by the International Code Council, including all appendices, addenda, and
supplements thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, in its
entirety, as a part of the Springfield Municipal Code and is hereinafter referred
to as the fire prevention code of the city, with the following modifications:
(a) Whenever the "fire code official" is referred to in this code,
it shall, for the purposes of the fire prevention code, mean the fire chief
or any person the fire chief has appointed or designated to administer and
enforce the provisions of the fire prevention code.
(b) Section 108 entitled "Board of Appeals" and Appendix A
entitled "Board of Appeals" are rescinded in their entirety and shall be
substituted by the construction board of adjustments and appeals as
established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(c) Subsection 109.3 entitled "Violation Penalties" is rescinded
in its entirety and shall be substituted by a new subsection 109.3 to read
as follows:
Change 17, January 20, 2015 7-3
109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect,
install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each person shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or
continued. (Ord. #90-15, as replaced by Ord. #96-09, § 1, Feb. 1996,
amended by Ord. #98-01, March 1998, and Ord. #99-03, May 1999,
replaced by Ord. #01-01, March 2001, amended by Ord. #06-26, Nov.
2006, and replaced by Ord. #06-36, Feb. 2007, Ord. #08-09, June 2008,
Ord. #10-12, June 2010, and Ord. #14-19, Oct. 2014)
7-202. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirement of the
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the NFPA 101-Life Safety
Code and one (1) copy of the International Fire Code have been filed with the
city recorder and are available for public use and inspection. Said codes are
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and shall control
within the corporate limits. (1981 code, § 7-202, as replaced by Ord. #96-09, § 1,
Feb. 1996, Ord. #01-01, March 2001, Ord. #06-36, Feb. 2007, Ord. #10-12, June
2010, and Ord. #14-19, Oct. 2014)
7-203. Trucks for hauling gasoline, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person owning or operating a tank truck or any other vehicle used for the
purpose of transporting more than fifty (50) gallons of gasoline, kerosene,
benzol, naphtha, or other volatile liquids to park such vehicle within the central
business district or within any residential area at any time except for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious delivery of such
substances. (1981 code, § 7-205, as replaced by Ord. #96-09, §1, Feb. 1996,
Ord. #01-01, March 2001, Ord. #06-36, Feb. 2007, and Ord. #14-19, Oct. 2014)
7-204. Conditions of service manual. In the event of a conflict between
the provisions of the fire code and the requirements set forth in the City of
Springfield Conditions of Service Manual, the Conditions of Service Manual
shall control. (1981 code, § 7-206, as replaced by Ord. #96-09, § 1, Feb. 1996,
Ord. #01-01, March 2001, Ord. #06-36, Feb. 2007, and Ord. #14-19, Oct. 2014)
7-4
CHAPTER 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership.
7-302. Objectives.
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations.
7-304. Records and reports.
7-305. Chief responsible for training and maintenance.
7-306. Equipment to be used only within corporate limits generally.
7-307. Chief to be assistant to state officer.
7-301. Establishment, equipment, and membership. There is hereby
established a fire department to be supported and equipped from appropriations
by the governing body of the municipality. All apparatus, equipment, and
supplies shall be purchased by or through the municipality and shall be and
remain the property of the municipality. The fire department shall be composed
of a chief and such number of physically-fit subordinate officers and firemen as
the governing body shall approve through the budget process. (1981 code,
§ 7-301)
7-302. Objectives. The fire department shall have as its objectives:
(1) To prevent uncontrolled fires from starting.
(2) To prevent the loss of life and property because of fires.
(3) To confine fires to their places of origin.
(4) To extinguish uncontrolled fires.
(5) To prevent loss of life from asphyxiation or drowning.
(6) To perform such rescue work as its equipment and/or the training
of its personnel makes practicable. (1981 code, § 7-302)
7-303. Organization, rules, and regulations. The chief of the fire
department shall set up the organization of the department, make definite
assignments to individuals, and shall formulate and enforce such rules and
regulations as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the
fire department. (1981 code, § 7-303)
7-304. Records and reports. The chief of the fire department shall keep
adequate records of all fires, inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel, and
work of the department. He shall submit a written report on such matters to
the city manager once each month, and at the end of the year a detailed annual
report shall be made. (1981 code, § 7-304)
7-5
7-305. Chief responsible for training and maintenance. The chief of the
fire department shall be fully responsible for the training of the firemen and for
maintenance of all property and equipment of the fire department. The
minimum training shall consist of having the personnel take the fire apparatus
out for practice operations not less than once a month. (1981 code, § 7-306)
7-306. Equipment to be used only within corporate limits generally. No
equipment of the fire department shall be used for fighting any fire outside the
corporate limits unless authorized by a mutual aid agreement entered into by
the city with another incorporated city or town or county. (1981 code, § 7-307)
7-307. Chief to be assistant to state officer. Pursuant to requirements of
section 68-17-108 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, the chief of the fire
department is designated as an assistant to the state commissioner of insurance
and is subject to all the duties and obligations imposed by chapter 17 of title 68
of said Tennessee Code Annotated, and shall be subject to the directions of the
commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof. (1981 code, § 7-308)
7-6
CHAPTER 4
BURN PERMIT SYSTEM
SECTION
7-401. Fires prohibited.
7-402. Permit required.
7-403. Application for permit.
7-404. Permits denied.
7-405. Enforcement.
7-406. Outdoor grilling.
7-407. Violations and penalty.
7-401. Fires prohibited. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire
or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained without
a permit. During construction or demolition of buildings or structures, no waste
materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or in the
immediate vicinity without a permit. (Ord. #093-14, Aug. 1993, as replaced by
Ord. #96-14, § 1, Feb. 1996)
7-402. Permit required. A permit is required for all fires conducted
outside of a building. In accordance with the detailed requirements of this
jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained to conduct bonfires and outdoor rubbish
fires, or to store, handle, or use materials that are considered to present an
extra or unusual fire hazard to life or property. (Ord. #093-14, Aug. 1993, as
replaced by Ord. #96-14, § 1, Feb. 1996)
7-403. Application for permit. Application for permits shall be made to
the fire department on forms provided by the jurisdiction and shall include the
applicants answers in full to inquiries set forth on such forms. Applications for
permits shall be accompanied by such data as may be required by the fire
department. No fee is required for this burn permit. (Ord. #093-14, Aug. 1993,
as replaced by Ord. #96-14, § 1, Feb. 1996)
7-404. Permits denied. The fire department may prohibit any or all
bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make such fires hazardous. (Ord. #093-14, Aug. 1993, as replaced
by Ord. #96-14, § 1, Feb. 1996)
7-405. Enforcement. The fire department shall be authorized to enforce
controlled fires and may occasionally request, in writing, the assistance of the
police department. (Ord. #093-14, Aug. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #96-14, § 1,
Feb. 1996)
7-7
7-406. Outdoor grilling. Permitting does not apply to barbecues or
outdoor grilling. (Ord. #093-14, Aug. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #96-14, § 1, Feb.
1996)
7-407. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or agent
who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with
any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided
by state or local laws. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continued, and upon
conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits
and as provided by state and local laws. (As added by Ord. #96-14, § 1, Feb.
1996)
Change 13, July 15, 2008 7-8
CHAPTER 5
FIREWORKS
SECTION
7-501. Definition of fireworks.
7-502. Definition of 1.4G fireworks (formerly known as Class C, common
fireworks).
7-503. Definition of 1.3G fireworks (formerly known as Class B, special
fireworks).
7-504. Definition of fireworks display.
7-505. Fireworks prohibited.
7-506. Exceptions.
7-507. Public display; permit required.
7-508. Penalty for violation.
7-509. Conflict with the fire prevention code.
7-510--7-516. [Deleted.]
7-501. Definition of fireworks. Any composition or device for the purpose
of producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by
combustion, deflagration or detonation that meets the definition of 1.4G
fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth herein. (as added by Ord. #06-26, Nov.
2006, as replaced by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-502. Definition of 1.4G fireworks (formerly known as Class C common
fireworks). Small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic
composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by
combustion. Such 1.4G fireworks which comply with the construction, chemical
composition and labeling regulations of the DOTn for fireworks, UN 0336, and
the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR:
parts 1500 and 1507. (as added by Ord. #06-26, Nov. 2006, as replaced by
Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-503. Definition of 1.3G fireworks (formerly Class B, special fireworks).
Large fireworks devices, which are explosive materials, intended for use in
fireworks displays and designed to produce audible or visible effects by
combustion, deflagration or detonation. Such 1.3G fireworks include, but are not
limited to, firecrackers containing more than one hundred thirty (130)
milligrams (2 grains) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more
than forty (40) grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces,
which exceed the limits for classification of 1.4G fireworks. Such 1.3G fireworks
are also described as fireworks, UN 0335 by the DOTn. (as added by
Ord. #06-26, Nov. 2006, as replaced by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
Change 13, July 15, 2008 7-9
7-504. Definition of fireworks display. A fireworks display is a
presentation of fireworks for a public or private gathering. (as added by
Ord. #06-26, Nov. 2006, as replaced by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-505. Fireworks prohibited. With the few exceptions authorized under
this chapter, the possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of
fireworks are prohibited within the city limits of Springfield. (as added by
Ord. #06-26, Nov. 2006, as replaced by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-506. Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit
the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal
purposes or illumination, the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or
theater, the use of fireworks for military/government operations, or for public
displays of fireworks meeting the requirements of the fire prevention code. In
addition, the codes administrator may, at any time, authorize the restricted use
of 1.4G fireworks for public health purposes in order to disperse flocks of
blackbirds and other bird pests. A permit for the restricted use of fireworks for
public health purposes shall be issued and signed by the codes administrator or
his or her designee before the approved fireworks can be discharged. The
permitted fireworks shall be handled and discharged by a competent person
approved by the codes administrator or his or her designee. The duration of the
permit and the quantity of the permitted fireworks shall be the minimum
needed to accomplish the public health purpose. The permitted fireworks shall
be located and discharged in a manner that shall not be dangerous to persons
or hazardous to property. (as added by Ord. #06-26, Nov. 2006, as replaced by
Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-507. Public display; permit required. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as applying to the shipping, sale, possession and use of fireworks for
public display by holders of a permit for public display to be conducted in
accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the state fire
marshal. Such items of fireworks that are to be used for public display only and
which are otherwise prohibited for sale and use within the City of Springfield
shall include display shells designed to be fired from mortars and display set
pieces of fireworks classified as 1.3G fireworks and shall not include such items
of commercial fireworks as cherry bombs, tubular salutes, repeating bombs,
aerial bombs and torpedoes. Public displays shall be performed only under
competent supervision, and after the persons or organizations making such
displays shall have applied for and received a permit for such display issued by
the state fire marshal. A condition for state issuance of a permit for public
fireworks display is the approval of the chief official of the fire and of the police
departments of the city. Such approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of
those officials, the proposed display will be located and supervised in conformity
Change 13, July 15, 2008 7-10
with state law and will not be hazardous to life or property. (as added by
Ord. #06-26, Nov. 2006, as replaced by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-508. Penalty for violation. The violation of any part of this chapter is
hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction of any person for such
violation, that person is to be fined according to the general penalty provision
of this municipal code. Each subsequent day that any violation continues
unabated shall constitute a separate offense. (as added by Ord. #06-26, Nov.
2006, as replaced by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-509. Conflict with the fire prevention code. In the event of any conflict
between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the fire prevention
code pertaining to fireworks, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (as
added by Ord. #06-26, Nov. 2006, as replaced by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
7-510--7-516. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #07-18, Sept. 2007)
Change 13, July 15, 2008 7-11
CHAPTER 6
RAPID ENTRY KEY LOCK BOXES
SECTION
7-601. Definitions.
7-602. Compliance.
7-603. Rapid entry key lock box access system.
7-604. Not applicable.
7-605. Installation.
7-606. Key lock box contents.
7-607. Owner's responsibility.
7-608. Non-compliance.
7-609. No liability.
7-601. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) "Responsible party" means the business owner or the person(s)
charged with the responsibility for the building or the occupancy of the building.
(2) "Key lock box" means a UL "listed" box meeting the same security
key code adopted by the Springfield Fire Department.
(3) "Security padlock" means an approved padlock that utilizes the
same security key code adopted by the Springfield Fire Department. (as added
by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-602. Compliance. All new commercial and industrial buildings
permitted after the passage of the ordinance creating this chapter shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The cost of purchase or
installation, along with any cost associated with the implementation of this
program at a specific property, shall be borne by the responsible party. In
addition, the Springfield Fire Department shall designate the type of key lock
box system to be implemented within the city limits of Springfield. (as added
by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-603. Rapid entry key lock box access system. The following structures
or properties located within the City of Springfield shall be equipped with a
rapid entry key lock box system at an accessible location near the main entrance
of the structure or property or at such other location approved by the Springfield
Fire Department:
(1) All new commercial and industrial buildings;
(2) All new commercial and industrial buildings protected by an
automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system, or such buildings
that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency;
Change 13, July 15, 2008 7-12
(3) New multi-family residential dwellings that have restricted access
through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units
or mechanical rooms;
(4) Any new building that the Springfield Fire Department determines
lack of access may result in loss of life or extensive property or environmental
damage, based on factors including, but not limited to, fire load, occupant load,
exposures, building construction, or storage or handling of hazardous materials;
(5) New residential complexes where it is determined that lack of
access may result in the loss of life or extensive property damage based on
factors including, but not limited to, occupant load and building construction;
and
(6) All new properties having security gates or devices which limit
access to the building or property. (as added by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-604. Not applicable. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
those new structures where a twenty-four (24) hour, seven (7) day a week on site
security force is present, provided members of the security force respond to all
fire department responses with the correct means of accessing the affected
buildings or areas. This chapter shall also not apply to new owner occupied one
and two family dwellings. (as added by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-605. Installation. All key lock boxes shall be installed on the front of
the building near the main entrance door between four (4) and six (6) feet above
the ground, unless otherwise approved. (as added by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-606. Key lock box contents. All rapid entry key lock boxes shall contain
the following:
(1) Labeled keys for locked points of ingress or egress whether on the
interior or exterior of such building or property;
(2) Labeled keys to all fire alarm panels;
(3) Labeled keys to elevator rooms and controls;
(4) Labeled keys to all locked electrical or mechanical equipment
rooms; and
(5) Other labeled keys as may be required by the Springfield Fire
Department. (as added by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-607. Owner's responsibility. All building and property owners are
required to do the following:
(1) Install a rapid entry key lock box system;
(2) Provide the proper keys to the Springfield Fire Department for the
required access;
(3) Notify the Springfield Fire Department when the locks or keys
have been changed; and
Change 13, July 15, 2008 7-13
(4) Keep the immediate area of the rapid entry key lock box free and
clear of any and all obstructions. (as added by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-608. Non-compliance. Non-compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall subject the responsible party to a fine under the penalty provisions
of the Springfield Municipal Code. (as added by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
7-609. No liability. The City of Springfield assumes no liability for any
defects in the operation of the key lock box system, any of the keys contained
within such unit, any information stored within the key lock box or otherwise
provided to the City of Springfield, the failure or neglect of the owner or person
in control of the building or facility, or the security of any property required to
have a key lock box system. (as added by Ord. #08-08, July 2008)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 7-14
CHAPTER 7
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER AND STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
SECTION
7-701. Automatic sprinkler systems required.
7-702. Requirements determined in accordance with codes.
7-703. Applicable non-residential buildings and structures.
7-704. Applicable residential buildings and structures.
7-705. Other automatic extinguishing systems.
7-706. Reliable water supply.
7-707. Design and supervision of systems.
7-708. Installation, testing, inspection and maintenance.
7-709. Standpipe systems.
7-710. Types of standpipe systems.
7-711. Conflict with other codes.
7-701. Automatic sprinkler systems required. An approved automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided for new construction as required by the
International Building Code and the International Fire Code as adopted by the
city, and the standards set forth in §§ 7-703 and 7-704 below for certain newly
constructed buildings or structures, and for certain existing buildings and
structures that will have a change in occupancy classification such that an
automatic sprinkler system is required for the new occupancy classification
under the provisions of this chapter or other city codes and standards. The
automatic sprinkler system shall only be provided to that portion of the existing
building or structure within which the occupancy classification will change.
Buildings and structures may be constructed with fire walls meeting
International building and International fire code requirements to separate the
building or structure to less than the square footage provisions listed in § 7-703
below. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April 2009, and replaced by Ord. #11-01, March
2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
7-702. Requirements determined in accordance with codes The
requirements for sprinkler systems and standpipes shall be determined in
accordance with the most recent codes and standards adopted by the City of
Springfield and as required in §§ 7-703 and 7-704 below. Construction plans for
automatic sprinkler systems or standpipes shall note the codes under which the
buildings or structures are to be constructed. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April
2009, and replaced by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and
Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
7-703. Applicable non-residential buildings and structures. The following
types of buildings or structures, as classified under the International Building
Change 18, February 20, 2018 7-15
Code and International Fire Code, are subject to the requirements of this
chapter when the buildings are within thirty feet (30') of a property line of any
property with an existing residential use or property zoned for residential uses,
and any building or structure within the defined fire limits per § 7-101 of this
title:
(1) Assembly: All A-1 buildings or structures five thousand (5,000)
square feet or more in gross floor area,
(2) Business: All buildings or structures five thousand (5,000) square
feet or more in gross floor area.
(3) Educational: All buildings or structures except detached portables,
(4) Daycare: All buildings or structures two thousand (2,000) square
feet or more in gross floor area or licensed for twenty (20) or more children,
(5) Factory and industrial: All buildings or structures five thousand
(5,000) square feet or more in gross floor area,
(6) High hazard: All buildings or structures,
(7) Institutional: All buildings or structures,
(8) Mercantile: All buildings or structures five thousand (5,000) square
feet or more in gross floor area,
(9) Storage: All buildings or structures five thousand (5,000) square
feet or more in gross floor area,
(10) Utility and miscellaneous: All buildings or structures five thousand
(5,000) square feet or more in gross floor area. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April
2009, and replaced by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and
Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
7-704. Applicable residential buildings and structures. All residential use
buildings or structures, except one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses
constructed with a two (2) hour fire resistance rated separation wall assembly
and constructed to meet the city's adopted residential code and the related
accessory buildings, classified under the International building and fire codes,
are subject to the requirements of this chapter. All residential uses located in
a building with other occupancies defined by the International building and fire
codes requires the residential use to be constructed under the standards of the
International building and fire codes. Residential installations shall be in
accordance with NFPA standards. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April 2009, and
replaced by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and Ord. #15-09,
Aug. 2015)
7-705. Other automatic extinguishing systems. Where automatic
sprinkler protection is determined to increase the hazard to the property or its
occupants, other automatic extinguishing systems appropriate for the hazard
shall be provided. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April 2009, and replaced by
Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 7-16
7-706. Reliable water supply. Any building that is required to be
equipped with a fire department connection (FDC) for the automatic sprinkler
system as described in NFPA 13, 13D or 13R shall have a reliable water supply
for use by the fire department. A reliable water supply shall mean a fire hydrant
that meets the City of Springfield Department of Water/Wastewater
requirements. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April 2009, and replaced by
Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
7-707. Design and supervision of systems. Any automatic sprinkler
system provided as a requirement of this section, or other code requirements,
shall be designed and adequately supervised in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 72. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April 2009, and replaced
by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and Ord. #15-09, Aug.
2015)
7-708. Installation, testing, inspection and maintenance. Automatic
sprinkler systems and appurtenances shall be installed, tested, inspected, and
maintained in accordance with current NFPA standards including any and/or
all applicable local, state, and federal laws. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April
2009, and replaced by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and
Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
7-709. Standpipe systems. Any building that is required to be equipped
with a fire automatic sprinkler system shall have a standpipe systems installed
in occupancies more than two (2) stories in height and/or exceeding twenty-five
thousand (25,000) square feet or more gross floor area. One- and two-family
residential dwellings and townhouses constructed with a two (2) hour fire
resistance rated separation wall assembly and constructed to meet the city's
adopted residential code are excluded. Standpipe systems shall comply with
NFPA 14, "Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems." (as
added by Ord. #09-05, April 2009, and replaced by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011,
Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
7-710. Types of standpipe systems. Standpipe systems may be
automatic, manual, combined with a sprinkler system, wet, dry, or any
combination previously listed. The class of system installed shall be one (1) of
the following: Class I, Class II, or Class III. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April
2009, and replaced by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and
Ord. #15-09, Aug. 2015)
7-711. Conflict with other codes. Where these requirements may conflict
with the City of Springfield codes or state or federal regulations, the more
stringent requirement shall apply. (as added by Ord. #09-05, April 2009, and
Change 18, February 20, 2018 7-17
replaced by Ord. # 11-01, March 2011, Ord. #14-24, Jan. 2015, and Ord. #15-09,
Aug. 2015)
8-1
TITLE 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER
1. INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
2. BEER.
CHAPTER 1
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION
8-101. Sale, etc., of intoxicating liquor regulated.
8-102. Definitions.
8-103. Manufacture prohibited.
8-104. Wholesale selling prohibited.
8-105. Application for certificate of good moral character and city license.
8-106. State license required.
8-107. Relocation of licensed retailer.
8-108. Restriction to location.
8-109. Minimum distance requirement.
8-110. [Repealed.]
8-111. [Repealed.]
8-112. Employee permits required to work in retail liquor store.
8-113. Display of license.
8-114. Transfer of permits restricted.
8-115. Expiration and renewal of license.
8-116. New license after revocation.
8-117. Federal license, effect of.
8-118. Inspection fee.
8-119. Regulations for purchase and sale of intoxication liquors.
8-120. Advertising and signage restrictions.
8-121. Canvassers and solicitors prohibited.
8-122. Failure to pay fees.
8-123. Inspection of books, etc.
8-124. Suspension or revocation of license.
8-125. Filing period moratorium.
8-101. Sale, etc., of intoxicating liquor regulated. It shall be unlawful to
purchase or to engage in the business of selling, storing, transporting, or
distributing alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the City of
Springfield except as provided by title 57, chapter 1, Tennessee Code Annotated,
8-2
and by rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-102. Definitions. Whenever used herein, unless the context requires
otherwise:
(1) "Alcoholic beverage" or "beverage" means and includes alcohol,
spirits, liquor, wine, and every liquid containing alcohol or spirits, and capable
of being consumed by a human being, other than patented medicine or beer,
where the beer contains alcohol of five percent (5%) by weight or less.
(2) "License" means the license issued herein and "licensee" means any
person to whom such license has been issued.
(3) "Retail sale" or "sale at retail" means a sale to a consumer or to any
person for any purpose other than for resale.
(4) "Retailer" means any person who sells at retail any beverage for
the sale of which a license is required under the provisions herein.
(5) "Manufacturer" means and includes a distiller, vintner, and
rectifier. "Manufacture" means and includes distilling and rectifying, and
operating a winery.
(6) "Wholesale sale" or "sale at wholesale" means a sale to any person
for purposes of resale.
(7) "Wholesaler" means any person who sells at wholesale any
beverage for the sale of which a license is required under the provisions of Title
57, Chapter 1, Tennessee Code Annotated.
(8) "Wine" means the product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of
the juice of fresh, sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and
necessary additions to correct including champagne, sparkling, and fortified
wine of an alcoholic content not to exceed twenty-one percent (21%) by volume.
No other product shall be called "wine" unless designated by appropriate
prefixes descriptive of the fruit or other product from which the same was
predominantly produced, or an artificial or imitation wine.
(9) "Words" importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and the neuter, and singular shall include the plural.
(10) "Federal license" shall not mean tax receipt or permit. (Ord.
# 092-33, Feb. 1993, as amended by Ord. # 094-12, June 1994)
8-103. Manufacture prohibited. The manufacture of alcoholic beverages
is prohibited within the corporate limits. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-104. Wholesale selling prohibited. No person, firm, or corporation shall
engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages at wholesale within the
corporate limits. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-3
8-105. Application for certificate of good moral character and city license.
Before any character certificate or city license is issued, the following must be
accomplished.
(1) An application in writing shall be filed with the city recorder on a
form to be provided by the city, giving the following information:
(a) Name, age and address of the applicant.
(b) Number of years residence in the county.
(c) Occupation or business and length of time engaged in such
occupation or business.
(d) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
violation of any state or federal law or of the violation of this code or any
city ordinance, and the details of any such conviction.
(e) If employed, the name and address of employer.
(f) If in business, the kind of business and location thereof.
(g) The location of the proposed store for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
(h) The name and address of the owner of the store.
(i) If the applicant is a partnership, the name, age and address
of each partner, and his occupation, business or employer. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name, age and address of the stockholders
and their degrees of ownership of stock in the corporation.
(j) The information in the application shall be verified by the
oath of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or a corporation,
the application shall be verified by the oath of each partner, or by the
president of the corporation.
(k) The applicant shall place a notice in a local newspaper of
general circulation concerning the applicant's intent to seek a license
from the Alcoholic Beverage commission. The notice shall contain such
information as is prescribed in Section (16) of Chapter 0100-3-.09 of the
Local option Liquor Rules and Regulations and shall appear for at least
three (3) consecutive issues immediately preceding the date that the
applicant applies to the city for a certificate of compliance. The
application shall be accompanied by a copy of the public notice and the
sworn statement of the applicant that the notice was published in
accordance with this section and the rules of the Commission.
(l) The city shall, after examination, issue a certificate of
compliance that is to be attached to the application provided to the state
for state licensing. The city shall require a copy of all applications and
information sent to the state.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
investigation fee of five hundred ($500) dollars.
(3) The applicant for a certificate of good moral character shall agree
in writing to comply with the state and federal laws and ordinances of the city
8-4
and rules and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Commission of the state for
sale of alcoholic beverages.
(4) An applicant for a certificate of good moral character may be
required to appear in person before the Board of Mayor and Aldermen for such
reasonable examination as may be desired by the board.
(5) Each applicant shall be a resident of Robertson County. (Ord.
# 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-106. State license required. The city clerk shall not issue said license
once approved until the applicant has qualified as the licensee under the state
statutes and state rules and regulations and has exhibited to the city manager
the state retailers license issued to the applicant by the State Alcoholic Beverage
Commission. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-107. Relocation of licensed retailer. Should any retailer licensed under
this chapter relocate said business so that the new business location is not in
compliance with state law or city ordinance, the city manager shall immediately
notify the Alcoholic Beverage Commission and recommend revocation of the
license. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993, as amended by Ord. # 094-12, June 1994)
8-108. Restriction to location. Adequate off-street on-site parking space
shall be available to any proposed liquor store and be in conformance with the
zoning ordinances of the City of Springfield. No liquor store shall be located on
any property unless such property is in a commercial district. To assure that
these requirements are satisfied, no original license shall be issued until the
planning and zoning board has reviewed and recommends the site plan
submitted by the applicant to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
No retail store shall be located except on the ground floor and it shall
have one (1) main entrance opening on a public street, and such place of
business shall have no other entrance for use by the public except as hereafter
provided. When a retail store is located on the corner of two (2) public streets,
such retail store may maintain a door opening on each of the public streets.
Said building shall be of a permanent type of construction and no store shall be
located in a mobile home or other moveable type of building. Said store shall
have night lighting surrounding the outside of the premises, and shall be
equipped with a burglar alarm system on the inside of the premises and shall
be of a minimum size of 1000 square feet.
To the fullest extent, consistent with the nature of the establishment, full,
free and unobstructed vision shall be afforded from the street and public
highway to the interior of the place of sale of alcoholic beverages there sold.
(Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-5
8-109. Minimum distance requirement. No liquor store shall be located
within a 600 foot distance of separation from a church, school or other public
institution.
The distance of separation shall be determined by the length of a straight
line drawn between the closest points of the building of the church, school or
public institution and the building for which the license is sought. (Ord.
#092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-110. [Repealed]. This section was repealed by Ord. # 094-12, June
1994. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993, as repealed by Ord. # 094-12, June 1994)
8-111. [Repealed]. This section was repealed by Ord. # 094-12, June
1994. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993, as repealed by Ord. # 094-12, June 1994)
8-112. Employee permits required to work in retail liquor store. It shall
be unlawful for anyone to sell alcoholic beverages in a retail liquor
establishment unless the seller shall first acquire an I.D. permit from the
Alcoholic Beverage Commission. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993, as amended by Ord.
# 094-12, June 1994)
8-113. Display of license. Persons granted a license to carry on the
business or undertaking contemplated herein shall, before being qualified to do
business, display and post, and keep displayed and posted, in the most
conspicuous place in their premises, such license. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-114. Transfer of permits restricted. The holder of a license may not
sell, assign, or transfer such license to any other person, and said license shall
be good and valid only for the calendar year in which the same was issued.
Provided, however, that licensees who are serving in the military forces of the
United States in the time of war may appoint an agent to operate under the
license of the licensee during the absence of the licensee. In such instances, the
license shall continue to be carried and renewed in the name of the owner. The
agent of the licensee shall conform to all the requirements of a licensee. No
person who is ineligible to obtain a license shall be eligible to serve as the agent
of a licensee under this section. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-115. Expiration and renewal of license. Licenses issued under this
chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance and, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, may be renewed each year by payment of applicable
fees to the Alcoholic Beverage Commission. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993, as
amended by Ord. # 094-12, June 1994)
8-116. New license after revocation. Where a license is revoked, no new
license shall be issued to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on the same
8-6
premises until after the expiration of one (1) year from the date said revocation
becomes final and effective. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-117. Federal license, effect of. The possession of any federal license to
sell alcoholic beverages without the corresponding requisite state license, shall
in all cases be prima facie evidence that the holder of such federal license is
selling alcoholic beverages in violation of the terms of this chapter. (Ord.
# 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-118. Inspection fee. The following shall apply regarding inspection
fees:
(1) There is hereby imposed an inspection fee on all gross purchases
of alcoholic beverages made by licensees under this chapter. Said fee to be at
the maximum amount as provided for in TCA, § 57-3-501.
(2) The inspection fee shall be collected by the wholesaler from the
retailer at the time of the sale or at the time the retailer makes payment for the
delivery of the alcoholic beverages.
(3) Every such wholesaler shall hold the fees imposed under the
authority of this section until paid to the City of Springfield as hereinafter
provided.
(4) Each wholesaler making sales to retailers located within the
corporate limits of the City of Springfield shall furnish the City of Springfield
a report monthly, which report shall contain the following:
(a) The name and address of the retailer;
(b) The wholesaler price of the alcoholic beverages sold to such
retailer;
(c) The amount of tax due under this section; and
(d) Such other information as may be required by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Springfield. The monthly report shall
be furnished to the city recorder of Springfield not later than the
twentieth (20th) of the month following which the sales were made; and
the inspection fees collected by the wholesaler from the retailers located
within the City of Springfield shall be paid to the City of Springfield at
the time the monthly report is made. Wholesalers collecting and
remitting the inspecting fee to the City of Springfield shall be entitled to
reimbursement for this collection service a sum equal to five (5%) percent
of the total amount of inspection fees collected and remitted, such
reimbursement to be deducted and shown on the monthly report to the
City of Springfield.
(5) Each wholesaler who fails to collect and/or remit in a timely matter
the inspection fee imposed hereunder shall be liable in addition to the tax for a
penalty of ten (10%) percent of the fee due the City of Springfield which shall be
payable to the City of Springfield.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 8-7
(6) The City of Springfield shall have the authority to audit the records
of all wholesalers subject to the provisions of this section in order to determine
the accuracy of said monthly report. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-119. Regulations for purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors. The
following regulations shall apply in the purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to buy any alcoholic
beverages herein defined from any person who does not hold the appropriate
license under this chapter authorizing the sale of said beverages to him.
(2) No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverages from anyone
other than a licensed wholesaler, nor shall any wholesaler sell any alcoholic
beverages to anyone other than a licensed retailer.
(3) No licensee shall sell intoxicating liquors at retail in connection
with any other business or in the same store where any other business is carried
on.
(4) No holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for retail
shall sell, deliver, or cause, permit, or procure to be sold or delivered, any
alcoholic beverages on credit.
(5) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the
premises of the seller.
(6) The sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages shall be confined to the
premises of the licensee.
(7) No form of entertainment, including pin ball machines, music
machines, or similar devices, shall be permitted to operate upon any premises
from which alcoholic beverages are sold.
(8) No retailer shall own, use or possess upon the premises any
unstamped merchandise required by laws of the State of Tennessee to have
affixed thereto revenue stamps of the state.
(9) A duly authorized representative of the city in cooperation with the
Alcoholic Beverage Commission shall have the right to inspect the premises of
any licensee under this chapter during the hours when such establishments are
open for the conduct of business.
(10) No retailer shall directly or indirectly operate more than one (1)
place of business for the sale of alcoholic beverages, and the word "indirectly"
shall include and mean any kind of interest in another place of business, by way
of stock ownership, loan, partner's interest, or otherwise.
(11) No retailer shall sell, lend, or give away any alcoholic beverages to
any person who is drunk, nor shall any retailer selling alcoholic beverages sell,
lend, or give away to any person accompanied by a person who is drunk.
(12) No retailer shall sell, lend, or give away any alcoholic beverages to
a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
(13) No retailer shall sell, lend, or give away any alcoholic beverages
between 11 o'clock P.M. on Saturday and 8 o'clock A.M. on Monday of each week,
and between 11 o'clock P.M. and 8 o'clock A.M. Monday through Saturday.
8-8
(14) No retailer shall sell, lend, or give away any alcoholic beverages on
Christmas, Thanksgiving, Labor Day, New Year's Day, and the Fourth of July.
(15) No retailer of alcoholic beverages shall keep or permit to be kept
upon the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages in any unsealed bottles or
other unsealed containers. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993, as amended by
Ord. # 094-12, June 1994, and replaced by Ord. #13-17, Nov. 2013)
8-120. Advertising and signage restrictions. (1) No advertising, signs,
displays, poster, or designs intended to advertise any alcoholic beverage
specified either by name brand or inference is permitted within the corporate
limits of the City of Springfield except as approved herein inside the store. No
political advertising of or for any candidate or party by poster, handout,
matches, or other similar election campaign material shall be placed or
dispensed on the premises of a retail liquor store.
(2) Each retail liquor store is allowed two signs on the premises and
no signs off-premise. The building sign may be mounted on and parallel to the
front of the building and shall not be more than 75 square feet in area. The free
standing sign (if used) must meet the zoning requirements as to placement, etc.,
but can not have more than 32 square feet of surface area per side (maximum
of 2 sides) and not be more than 20 feet in height.
(3) No advertising material or signage is allowed in, on, or near the
inside window areas of the store. Advertising material inside the store will be
along or on shelving and display areas so as to minimize blockage of aisle ways
and line of sight of both store employees and public safety officials. (Ord.
# 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-121. Canvassers and solicitors prohibited. No holder of a license issued
shall employ any canvasser or solicitor for the purpose of receiving an order
from a consumer for any alcoholic beverages at the residence or places of
business of such consumer, nor shall any such licensee receive or accept any
such order which shall have been solicited or received at the residence or place
of business of such consumer. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the
solicitation by a state licensed wholesaler of an order from any licensed retailer
at the licensed premises. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-122. Failure to pay fees. Whenever any of the persons licensed
hereunder fails to account for or pay over to the city recorder any license fee or
inspection fee, or defaults in any of the conditions of his bond, the city manager
shall report the same to the city attorney who shall immediately institute the
necessary action for the recovery of any such license or inspection fee. (Ord.
#092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-123. Inspection of books, etc. The city manager or his designee is
authorized to examine the books, papers, and records of any licensee for the
8-9
purpose of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being
complied with. Any refusal to permit the examination of any of such books,
papers, and records, or the investigation and examination of such premises,
shall constitute sufficient reason for the revocation of a license or the refusal to
issue a license. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-124. Suspension or revocation of license. In addition to any pecuniary
penalty, any violation of the terms of this chapter shall make mandatory the
suspension of said license by the city manager for thirty (30) days and in the
discretion of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen may be cause for revocation of
said license. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
8-125. Filing period moratorium. There shall be a filing period of sixty
(60) days after the effective date of this ordinance so that no application will be
considered for approval until the planning commission convenes for its regular
May 1993 meeting in accordance with this ordinance. (Ord. # 092-33, Feb. 1993)
Change 15, December 20, 2011 8-10
CHAPTER 2
BEER
SECTION
8-201. Beer board established.
8-202. Meeting of the beer board.
8-203. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept.
8-204. Requirements for beer board quorum and action.
8-205. Powers and duties of the beer board.
8-206. Powers and duties of the city recorder.
8-207. "Beer" defined.
8-208. Permit required for engaging in beer business.
8-209. Privilege tax.
8-210. Beer permits shall be restrictive.
8-211. Minimum distance from church or school.
8-212. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes prohibited.
8-213. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders, their agents
and/or employees.
8-214. Revocation of beer permits.
8-215. Civil penalty in lieu of suspension.
8-216. Loss of clerk's certification for sale to minor.
8-217. Special occasion permit.
8-201. Beer board established. There is hereby established a beer board
to be composed of a chair plus one (1) member from each ward of the city. The
chair shall be appointed by the mayor and each alderman shall appoint a
member from their ward. The chair and board members shall each serve four (4)
year terms. The members from odd numbered wards shall be subject to
appointment in 1992 and every four (4) years thereafter, barring their conviction
of any crime involving moral turpitude or their being removed from office by a
simple majority vote of the board of mayor and aldermen. The members from
even numbered wards shall be subject to appointment in 1994 and every four (4)
years thereafter, barring their conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude
or their being removed from office by simple majority vote of the board of mayor
and aldermen.
To qualify for appointment and continued service on the board as a
member or as chair, one must reside in the city to serve as chair and in the
particular ward to serve as a member for at least one (1) year prior to
appointment and be registered to vote.
If the chair resigns for any reason the mayor shall appoint a successor to
serve the unexpired term subject to the above conditions. If a member resigns
for any reason the respective alderman for the resigning member's ward shall
appoint a successor to serve the unexpired term subject to the above conditions.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 8-11
(Ord. # 90-24, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov.
2007)
8-202. Meetings of the beer board. All meetings shall be open to the
public. The board shall hold its meetings on the second Thursday of every month
at 5:30 P.M. or by call of the chairman. (Ord. # 90-24, as replaced by Ord.
#04-06, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-203. Record of beer board proceedings to be kept. The city recorder
shall make a record of the proceedings of all meetings of the beer board. The
record shall be a public record and shall contain at least the following: The date
of each meeting; the names of the board members present and absent; the
names of the members introducing and seconding motions and resolutions before
the board; a copy of each such motion or resolution presented; the vote of each
member thereon; and the provisions of each beer permit issued by the board.
(Ord. # 90-24, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov.
2007)
8-204. Requirements for beer board quorum and action. The attendance
of at least a majority of the members of the beer board shall be required to
constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Matters before the
board shall be decided by a majority of the members present if a quorum is
constituted. (Ord. # 90-24, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and
Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-205. Powers and duties of the beer board. The beer board shall have the
power and it is hereby directed to regulate the selling, storing for sale,
distributing for sale, and manufacturing of beer within this municipality in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. # 90-24, as replaced by
Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-206. Powers and duties of the city recorder. The city recorder shall have
the authority to issue temporary beer permits to new owners of businesses at
locations where a beer permit is currently in place. The owner and location shall
meet all requirements of this chapter. The temporary beer permit shall remain
in effect pending the next meeting of the beer board at which it may take action
on the application. At that meeting the beer board may issue a beer permit in
accordance with this chapter. (Ord. #90-24, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov.
2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-207. "Beer" defined. The term "beer" as used in this chapter shall mean
and include all beer, ale, and other malt beverages, or any other beverages
having an alcoholic content of not more than eight percent (8%) by weight,
except wine as defined in Tennessee Code Annotated,§ 57-3-101. (Ord. #093-21,
Oct. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007, and
Ord. #16-19, Nov. 2016)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 8-12
8-208. Permit required for engaging in beer business. It shall be unlawful
for any person to sell, store for sale, distribute for sale, or manufacture beer
without first making application for and obtaining a permit from the beer board.
The application shall be made on such form as the board shall prescribe and/or
furnish, and pursuant to Tennessee ode Annotated, § 57-5-104, and shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). Said fee shall be in the form of a cashier's check or money order
payable to the City of Springfield. Each applicant must be a person of good
moral character and certify that he has read and is familiar with the provisions
of this chapter. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-103 the city shall
not issue a permit unless the applicant has been a citizen or lawful resident of
the United States for not less than one (1) year immediately preceding the date
upon which the application is made to the city . (Ord. #093-21, Oct. 1993, as
replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007, and Ord. #16-02,
March 2016)
8-209. Privilege tax. There is hereby imposed on the business of selling,
distributing, storing or manufacturing beer an annual privilege tax of one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company,
syndicate or association engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or
manufacture of beer shall remit the tax on January 1st of each year to the City
of Springfield, Tennessee. At the time a new permit is issued to any business
subject to this tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax
on a prorated basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next
tax payment date. (Ord. #90-24, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and
Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-210. Beer permits shall be restrictive. All beer permits shall be
restrictive as to the type of beer business authorized under them. Separate
permits shall be required for selling at retail, storing, distributing, and
manufacturing. Beer permits for the retail sale of beer may be further restricted
by the beer board so as to authorize sales only for off premised consumption. It
shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage in any type of phase of
the beer business not expressly authorized by his permit. It shall likewise be
unlawful for him not to comply with any and all express restrictions or
conditions which may be written into his permit by the beer board. (Ord.
#90-24, as amended by Ord. #091-23, Feb. 1992, repealed by Ord. #094-20, Nov.
1994, and replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-211. Minimum distance from church or school. Conditions under which
issuance of permit is prohibited are as follows:
(1) General. In the consideration of such application the city recorder
and/or the beer board shall take into consideration the proximity of schools
Change 18, February 20, 2018 8-13
(public or private), daycares, parks, playgrounds, churches, and other places of
public gathering, and interference with public health, safety and morals.
No permit shall be issued to any person for a location which fails to
comply with any health ordinances or any regulation of the department of
health or which would violate any zoning and/or code ordinances of the city.
No beer permit shall be issued to any person for the conduct of any
business at any point or place in the corporate limits of the city unless such
place is zoned for, or authorized to be used for commercial or other purposes,
corresponding to the character of the business contemplated in this chapter.
(2) "On-premise" permit. No on-premise type permits shall be issued
authorizing the storage, sale, or manufacturing of beer within three hundred
feet (300') of any school (public or private), daycare, park, playground or church
as measured on a straight line from the nearest point of the school (public or
private), daycare, park, playground, or church to the nearest point of the
building or structure where beer is stored, sold or manufactured, excepting that
this provision shall not be applicable to the renewal of any existing permit
outstanding as of September 19, 2006; and with the additional exception that
there shall be no distance requirement between a permit location and any
church that has been granted a conditional use permit within a CG, Commercial
General zoning district.
On-premise permits shall not be issued except to eating establishments
that possess seating capacities for not less than twenty-five (25) persons and
where hot meals or lunches are regularly served and where food revenues make
up at least forty percent (40%) of the gross sales of the business. The premises
must be regularly inspected by the State Health Department and have the
permit publicly displayed at all times. The premises must be equipped with
adequate toilet facilities and handwashing facilities, including hot and cold
running water, for use by customers.
This subsection shall not be applicable to qualifying entities who have
received a special occasion license under chapter 4, title 57 of Tennessee Code
Annotated.
A minimum distance requirement of one hundred feet (100') shall be
applicable to otherwise fully qualified eating establishments located in the core
area portion of the Springfield Central Business District which surrounds the
historic Robertson County Courthouse, a National Register property located in
the CC, Core Commercial Zone; and further described as within the area that
includes all buildings fronting on South Main Street between 5th Avenue West
and 6th Avenue West, all buildings fronting on 6th Avenue West between South
Main Street and South Locust Street, all buildings fronting Court Square West
between 5th Avenue West and 6th Avenue West, and all buildings fronting 5th
Avenue West between North Main Street and North Locust Street.
(3) "Off-premise" permit. No off-premise type permit will be issued
authorizing the storage, sale or manufacturing of beer within three hundred feet
(300') feet of any school (public or private), daycare, park, playground, or church
as measured on a straight line from the nearest point of the school, daycare,
Change 18, February 20, 2018 8-14
park, playground, or church to the nearest point of the building or structure
where beer is stored, sold or manufactured, excepting that this provision shall
not be applicable to the renewal of any existing permit outstanding as of
September 19, 2006; and with the additional exception that there shall be no
distance requirement between a permit location and any church that has been
granted a conditional use permit within a CG, Commercial General zoning
district.
(4) Conditions of permit. Every person to whom a beer permit is issued
agrees to the following conditions:
(a) The premises are declared to be a public place for the
purpose of inspection by city inspectors, by officers of the police
department or by any other duly authorized law enforcement officer.
(b) The permit holder shall keep invoices and all other
memoranda fully descriptive relating in any way to the storing, sale,
distribution by sale or gift or manufacture of beer, and shall permit the
city recorder or his duly authorized agents, representatives or employees
to inspect, at any time during normal business hours, all such invoices,
books, papers and memoranda as may be deemed necessary in the
opinion of the city recorder or his authorized agent, representative or
employee in ascertaining whether or not all revenue and taxes have been
paid or in determining the amount of such taxes that may be due.
(5) Revocation. Where a beer permit is revoked, no new permit shall
be issued to permit the sale of beer on the same premises to the same business
enterprise or its employees operating the premises until after the expiration of
one (1) year from the date such revocation becomes final and effective; provided
however, said premises shall be eligible for the issuance of a new beer permit to
a business enterprise or its employees, an owner and/or a lessee who was not
subject to the revocation of a beer permit at such location provided all
requirements of the code regarding the location of on and/or off-premises beer
permits shall be met. However, a permit shall not be issued to a partner,
employee, associate or relative of the holder of a revoked permit if said
relationship existed at the time of the offense.
(6) Revocation or suspension; proximity to schools, daycares, churches
or places of public gathering. (a) The city shall not suspend, revoke or
deny a permit to a business engaged in selling, distribution or
manufacturing beer on the basis of the proximity of the business to a
school (public or private), daycare, park, playground, church or other
place of public gathering if a valid permit had previously been issued to
any business on that same location. This section shall not apply if beer is
not sold, distributed or manufactured at that location during any
continuous six (6) month period.
(b) For the purposes of this section, "on that same location"
means within the boundaries of the parcel or tract of the real property on
which the business was located. The provisions of this section apply
whether or not business moves the building on the location and whether
Change 18, February 20, 2018 8-15
or not the business was a conforming or nonconforming use at the time
of the move.
(c) If a business applies for a beer permit within the continuous
six (6) month period referenced in this section, and if the city denies the
business a permit and if the business appeals that denial, a new six (6)
month continuous sale period shall begin to run on the date when the
appeal of that denial is final. (Ord. # 092-01, April 1992, as replaced by
Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, Ord. #06-14, Sept. 2006, Ord. #07-05, March
2007, Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007, Ord. # 11-11, Dec. 2011, and Ord. #13-06,
June 2013)
8-212. Issuance of permits to persons convicted of certain crimes
prohibited. No beer permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted
for the possession, sale, manufacture, or transportation of intoxicating liquor
within past five (5) years, or any felony within the past ten (10) years. (Ord. #
90-24, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-213. Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders, their
agents, and/or employees. It shall be unlawful for beer permit holders, their
agents and/or employee(s) to:
(1) Employ any person convicted for the possession, sale,
manufacturer, or transportation of intoxicating liquor within the past five (5)
years or any felony within the past ten (10) years.
(2) Allow any person under eighteen (18) years of age to loiter in or
around, or otherwise frequent any place where beer is sold at retail for
consumption on the premises. This section does not prohibit the otherwise
lawful patronage by minors of establishments whose primary activity is lawful
activity other than the sale of beer or alcohol. Primary activity for purposes of
this section means that at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the gross receipts
of the establishment are the result of activity other than the sale of beer or
alcohol. The beer permit holder shall furnish such documentation as may be
required by the city to establish this percentage.
Beer permit holders whose primary activity, as defined above, is lawful
activity other than the sale of beer or alcohol, may employ minors under
eighteen (18) years of age. However, persons under eighteen (18) years of age
who work in beer places shall not be allowed to touch, handle or move any glass,
mug, can, bottle, package, carton, case, keg or other container in which beer is
served, held or kept in storage. Persons under eighteen (18) years of age may
work in beer places only between the hours of 6:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. Persons
under eighteen (18) years of age who work in beer places and their employers
shall be required to register with the city and receive a permit authorizing the
employment of each individual minor prior to beginning work. Each permit shall
be good for a period of ninety (90) days. The permit shall contain the name and
location of the establishment, the name of the owner or manager of the
Change 18, February 20, 2018 8-16
establishment; and the name, address, date of birth and job title of the minor
being employed.
A violation of this subsection is unlawful. In addition, a violation of this
subsection shall subject the beer permit holder to the penalties and procedures
set forth in this chapter.
(3) Hours of sale. It shall be illegal for any beer license holder to make
or allow any sale, give away, or distribute any beer or alcoholic beverage
between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Monday through Saturday and
between the hours of 3:00 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. on Sunday. However, any person
holding a beer license for on-premises and/or off-premises consumption shall be
allowed to sell beer from 10:00 A.M. Sunday to 3:00 A.M. on Monday. No beer
or alcoholic beverage should be consumed or opened for consumption, on or
about any premises licensed by the City of Springfield, in either bottle, glass or
other container, after 3:15 A.M.
(4) Allow any loud, unusual, or obnoxious noises to emanate from his
premises.
(5) Make or allow any sale of beer to a person under twenty-one (21)
years of age.
(6) Make or allow any sale of beer to any intoxicated person or to any
insane, or otherwise mentally incapacitated person.
(7) Allow drunk or disreputable persons to loiter about his premises.
(8) Serve or sell on his premises any alcoholic beverage with an
alcoholic content of more than five percent (5%) by weight unless licensed for
liquor by the drink.
(9) Allow gambling on his premises.
(10) Fail to provide and maintain separate sanitary toilet facilities for
men and women.
(11) Allow beer to be distributed through sale or otherwise, from any
vending apparatus or machine.
(12) Stock or sell any drug related paraphernalia, illegal or otherwise,
as defined by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 39-1 7-402. (Ord. #90-24, as
amended by Ord. #091-23, Feb. 1992; Ord. #095-03, April 1995; and Ord. #95-22,
Dec. 1995; and replaced by Ord. #99-11, May 1999, Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004,
Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007, and Ord. #16-04, April 2016)
8-214. Revocation of beer permits. The beer board shall have the power
to revoke or suspend any beer permit, as well as issue letters of warning to
holders of beer permits, issued under the provisions of this chapter when the
holder thereof is guilty of making a false statement or misrepresentation in
his/her application or of violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
However, no beer permit shall be revoked or suspended, nor shall any
letters of warning be issued, until a public hearing is held by the board after
reasonable notice to all the known parties in interest. Proceedings under this
section may be initiated by the police chief, his designated representative or by
any member of the beer board.
Change 15, December 20, 2011 8-17
Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-608, the beer board shall
not revoke or suspend the permit of a "responsible vendor" qualified under the
requirements of Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-606 for a clerk's original
certification, unless the vendor's status as a certified responsible vendor has
been revoked by the alcoholic beverage commission. If the responsible vendor's
certification has been revoked, the vendor shall be punished by the beer board
as if the vendor were not certified as a responsible vendor. "Clerk" means any
person working in a capacity to sell beer directly to consumers for off-premises
consumption. Under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-608, the alcoholic
beverage commission shall revoke a vendor's status as a responsible vendor
upon notification by the beer board that the board has made a final
determination that the vendor has sold beer to a minor for the second time in a
consecutive twelve (12) month period. The revocation shall be for three (3) years.
(Ord. # 90-24, as amended by Ord. # 094-20, Nov. 1994, and replaced by Ord.
#04-06, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-215. Civil penalty in lieu of suspension. (1) Definition. "Responsible
vendor" means a person, corporation or other entity that has been issued a
permit to sell beer for off-premises consumption and has received certification
by the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission under the "Tennessee
Responsible Vendor Act of 2006," Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-601, et seq.
(2) Penalty revocation or suspension. The beer board may, at the time
it imposes a revocation or suspension, offer a permit holder that is not a
responsible vendor the alternative of paying a civil penalty not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense of making or
permitting to be made any sales to minors, or a civil penalty not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any other offense.
The beer board may impose on a responsible vendor a civil penalty not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense of making or permitting
to be made any sales to minors or for any other offense.
If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or suspension,
the holder shall have seven (7) days within which to pay the civil penalty before
the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the civil penalty is paid within
that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed withdrawn.
Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension by a
permit holder shall be an admission by the holder of the violation so charged
and shall be paid to the exclusion of any other penalty that the city may impose.
(Ord. # 093-21, Oct. 1993, as replaced by Ord. #04-06, Nov. 2004, and
Ord. #07-23, Nov. 2007)
8-216. Loss of clerk's certification for sale to minor. If the beer board
determines that a clerk of an off-premises beer permit holder certified under
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 57-5-606, sold beer to a minor, the beer board shall
report the name of the clerk to the alcoholic beverage commission within fifteen
(15) days of determination of the sale. The certification of the clerk shall be
Change 15, December 20, 2011 8-18
invalid and the clerk may not reapply for a new certificate for a period of one (1)
year from the date of the beer board's determination. (as added by Ord. #07-23,
Nov. 2007)
8-217. Special occasion permit. A special occasion permit may be issued
to entities qualifying for a special occasion license under Tennessee Code
Annotated, chapter 4, title 57. The entity must provide proof sufficient to the
beer board that they have obtained a special occasion license from the Tennessee
Alcoholic Beverage Commission for a special occasion. The beer board may issue
a permit for the on-premise sale of beer for the location and on the dates
approved in the state license for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon submission
of an application to the city recorder and a special occasion fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per twenty-four (24) hour period of the special occasion. For
the purpose of this provision, the board of mayor and aldermen adopts all
requirements of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission with respect to
special occasion licenses and the city recorder shall obtain a written statement
from the applicant that they are familiar with those requirements and agree to
abide by them in the on-premise sale of beer under the special occasion permit.
(as added by Ord. # 11-11, Dec. 2011)
9-1
TITLE 9
BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. PEDDLERS, ETC.
3. CHARITABLE SOLICITORS.
4. TAXICABS.
5. YARD SALES.
6. ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
9-101. "Going out of business" sales.
9-101. "Going out of business" sales. It shall be unlawful for any person
falsely to represent a sale as being a "going out of business" sale. A "going out
of business" sale, for the purposes of this section, shall be a "fire sale," "bankrupt
sale," "loss of lease sale," or any other sale made in anticipation of the
termination of a business at its present location. When any person after
advertising a "going out of business" sale adds to his stock or fails to go out of
business within ninety (90) days he shall prima facie be deemed to have violated
this section. (1981 code, § 5-102)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-2
CHAPTER 2
PEDDLERS, ETC.
SECTION
9-201. Definitions.
9-202. Permit required.
9-203. Exemptions.
9-204. Application for permit.
9-205. Issuance or refusal of permit.
9-206. Appeal.
9-207. Bond.
9-208. Loud noises and speaking devices.
9-209. Limitations on use of streets and sidewalks.
9-210. Prohibitions.
9-211. Exhibition of permit.
9-212. Revocation or suspension of permit.
9-213. Reapplication.
9-214. Number of permits.
9-215. Permits for local farmers.
9-216. Requirements for certain products.
9-217. Conduct of solicitors.
9-218. Hours in which business may be conducted.
9-219. Trespassing.
9-220. Violation and penalty.
9-221. Deleted.
9-201. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in
this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning given to them in this
chapter:
(1) "Goods," "wares" or "merchandise" shall mean all variety of
merchandise items, whether handmade or manufactured, or services, whether
personal or professional, but not necessarily limited to souvenirs, gifts, prizes,
art, school supplies, cloth, clothing or wearing apparel, toys, balloons, novelties,
small appliances, works of art or crafts, directional information and/or charts,
street photographers, tools or mechanical devices of any nature, and farm
produce.
(2) "Peddler" shall mean any person who goes from dwelling to
dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to street carrying
or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing the same
for sale, and makes sales and delivery of merchandise or services concurrently
and on-the-spot to a residential or commercial customer.
(3) "Solicitor" shall mean any person who goes from dwelling to
dwelling, business to business, place to place, or from street to street taking or
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-3
attempting to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, or personal
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery.
(4) "Transient vendor" shall mean any person who brings into
temporary premises and exhibits stocks of merchandise to the public for the
purpose of selling or offering to sell the merchandise to the public. Transient
vendor does not include any person selling goods by sample, brochure, or sales
catalog for future delivery; or to sales resulting from the prior invitation to the
seller by the owner or occupant of a residence. For purposes of this definition
"merchandise" means any consumer item that is or is represented to be new or
not previously owned by a consumer, and "temporary premises" means any
public or quasi-public place including a hotel, rooming house, storeroom,
building or part of a building, tent, vacant lot, parking lot, railroad car, or motor
vehicle which is temporarily occupied for the purpose of exhibiting stocks or
merchandise to the public. Premises are not temporary if the same person has
conducted business at those premises for more than six (6) consecutive months
or has occupied the premises as his or her permanent residence for more than
six (6) consecutive months. (Ord. # 092-17, Aug. 1992, as amended by
Ord. #094-27, Feb. 1995, and replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord.
#17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-202. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or
transient vendor to ply his trade within the corporate limits without first
obtaining a permit in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1) An application for a "peddlers and solicitors permit" shall be
submitted to the city clerk.
(2) An application for a "transient vendors permit" shall be submitted
to the community development department along with written permission from
the property owner of the location at which sales will be conducted.
(3) No permit shall be used at any time, or place, by any person other
than the one to whom it is issued and, if applicable, the location issued for.
(4) An application must be filed at least five (5) working days prior to
the event or sales activity.
(5) Each applicant shall submit to the city clerk or community
development department a copy of their State of Tennessee "certificate of
registration" per state law, except for isolated or incidental sales. (Ord. # 092-17,
Aug. 1992, as replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-203. Exemptions. The terms of this chapter shall not be applicable to
persons selling at wholesale to dealers; nor to newsboys; nor to bona fide
merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business; nor to
bona fide charitable, religious, patriotic, or philanthropic organizations; nor to
a person receiving authorization to ply his trade at a county fair or special event,
fair, festival or bazaar solely sponsored and conducted by a bona fide charitable,
religious, patriotic, or philanthropic organization. (Ord. # 092-17, Aug. 1992, as
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-4
amended by Ord. # 094-27, Feb. 1995, and replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009,
and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-204. Application for permit. Applicants for a peddlers and solicitors
permit shall file with the city clerk, and applicants for a transient vendor permit
shall file with the community development department, a sworn written
application containing the following for each peddler, solicitor or transient
vendor:
(1) Name and physical description of the applicant;
(2) Complete permanent home address and local address of the
applicant and, in the case of transient vendors, the local address from which
proposed sales will be made;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold or the nature of the solicitation;
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired, not
to exceed fourteen (14) days;
(6) Two (2) means of identification, one (1) of which must be
government issued identification that includes a clear photograph of the
applicant;
(7) The names of at least two (2) reputable local property owners who
will certify as to the applicant's good moral reputation and business
responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available
evidence as will enable an investigator to evaluate properly the applicant's
moral reputation and business responsibility;
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime or misdemeanor or for violating any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore;
(9) The last three (3) cities or towns, if that many, where the applicant
carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and, in the
case of transient vendors, the addresses from which such business was
conducted in those municipalities;
(10) An approval to use the property for the period specified, signed by
the property owner.
(11) A non-refundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid
to the city at the time the application is filed; and
(12) The applicant shall also submit as a part of the application, and at
his/her cost, a criminal history record issued by the Tennessee Bureau of
Investigation within the last thirty (30) days. (1981 code, § 5-204, as amended
by Ord. # 094-27, Feb. 1995, and replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord.
#17-13, Oct. 2017)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-5
9-205. Issuance or refusal of permit. (1) Within three (3) business days
of receipt of a complete application and all applicable fees and taxes, the
information presented on the application shall be investigated by the city.
(2) If as a result of such investigation the applicant's moral reputation
and/or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the city clerk or
community development department shall notify the applicant that his
application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. If, on the other
hand, the moral reputation and business responsibility of the applicant are
satisfactory, a revocable permit shall be issued by the city clerk or community
development department upon the payment of all applicable fees and taxes and
the filing of the bond required. A permanent record shall be kept of all permits
issued. (1981 code, § 5-205, as replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord.
#17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-206. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city clerk or
community development department in the denial of a permit shall have the
right to appeal to the board of mayor and aldermen. Such appeal shall be taken
by filing with the mayor or city manager, within fourteen (14) days after notice
of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds
for the appeal. The mayor shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal and notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant. The notice shall be in writing and shall be mailed, postage prepaid,
to the applicant at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date
set for the hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner
as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set for hearing. (1981
code, § 5-207, as replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-207. Bond. Every applicant for a permit shall file with the city clerk
or community development department a surety bond running to the city in the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The bond shall be conditioned that
the permit holder shall comply fully with the provisions of the ordinances of the
city and the statutes of the state and shall guarantee to any citizen of the city
that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied
according to the representations of the permit holder, and further guaranteeing
to any citizen of the city doing business with said permit holder that the
property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the
permit holder. Action on such bond may be brought by any person aggrieved and
for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given, but the surety may, by
paying, pursuant to order of the court, the face amount of the bond to the clerk
of the court in which the suit is commenced, be relieved without costs of all
further liability. (1981 code, § 5-208, as replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and
Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-208. Loud noises and speaking devices. No permit holder, nor any
person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-6
sound amplifying device upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks, or
other public places of the municipality or upon private premises where sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced to be capable of being plainly heard
upon the adjacent sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks, or other public places, for the
purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such
permit holder proposes to sell. (1981 code, § 5-209, as replaced by Ord. #08-32,
Feb. 2009, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-209. Limitations on use of streets and sidewalks. No permit holder
shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any
be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor shall any be permitted to operate
in a congested area where the operation might impede or inconvenience the
public use of the streets. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a
police officer or code enforcement officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or
inconvenienced. (1981 code, § 5-210, as replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and
Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-210. Prohibitions. The following activities shall be declared unlawful:
(1) Soliciting by a parked vehicle or movable receptacle on public
streets, highways, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and public places.
(2) The erection of stands or similar contrivances on public streets,
highways, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and public places for the purpose of giving
away, displaying and/or buying or selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
(3) Sale of drinks or other prepared foods and/or edible items upon
public streets, sidewalks, highways and rights-of-way, except as may be
regulated elsewhere in this code. (1981 code, § 5-211, as replaced by
Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-211. Exhibition of permit. Permit holders are required to exhibit their
permits for inspection at all times and upon the request of any police officer,
code enforcement officer, city official or citizen. Failure to exhibit a permit shall
constitute a violation of this section. (1981 code, § 5-212, as replaced by
Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-212. Revocation or suspension of permit. (1) Permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the governing body, after notice
and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained
in the application for permit or made in the course of carrying on the business
of peddler, solicitor or transient vendor;
(b) Any violation of this chapter;
(c) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor;
(d) Conducting the business of peddler, solicitor or transient
vendor, as the case may be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-7
as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(2) Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a permit shall be given
by the city recorder in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the permit
holder at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for
hearing or it shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a
summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(3) The city manager may suspend a permit pending the revocation
hearing when reasonably necessary in the public interest. (1981 code, § 5-213,
as replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-213. Reapplication. No permit holder whose permit has been revoked
shall make further application until a period of at least six (6) months has
elapsed since the last revocation. (Ord. # 092-17, Aug. 1992, as amended by
Ord. # 094-27, Feb. 1995, and replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and Ord.
#17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-214. Number of permits. Each peddler, solicitor or transient vendor
making application for a permit is only eligible to receive one (1) permit during
a calendar year, and is valid for a fourteen (14) day consecutive day period.
Transient vendor permits shall not be required for the Springfield-Robertson
County Farmers Market, or for events hosted or sponsored by the City of
Springfield or Robertson County Chamber of Commerce. A permit may not be
extended. (1981 code, § 5-305, as replaced by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, Ord.
#12-13, Dec. 2012, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-215. Permits for local farmers. Robertson County farmers selling
agricultural products, grown and produced on their own land, shall be required
to have a "transient vendors" permit, but the permit shall be valid from April
through October. The same twenty-five dollar ($25.00) transient vendor permit
fee applies, as well as the written consent from the property owner. Such
farmers shall also have an exemption from the bond and criminal history record
requirements of this chapter. Agricultural products include fruits, vegetables,
farm-fresh eggs, butter, herbs, honey, jams, jellies, sauces, nuts, bread, meat,
poultry, fish, cheese, cider, syrup, flowers , potted plants, and similar items. (as
added by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009 and replaced by Ord. #10-05, April, 2010, Ord.
#12-13, Dec. 2012, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-216. Requirements for certain products. Baked goods, farm fresh eggs,
jams, jellies, sauces, cider, breads, meat, poultry and fish offered for sale by
transient vendors shall have been prepared in legal, licensed, approved and
inspected facilities by the Tennessee Department of Agriculture or the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Proof of inspection shall be required
and must be prominently posted at the location of sale.(as added by Ord. #08-32,
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-8
Feb. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #10-05, April 2010, Ord. #12-13, Dec. 2012, and
Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-217. Conduct of solicitors. It shall be unlawful for any person receiving
a permit under this chapter to use any force, threat, harassment, coercion, or
misrepresentation of the truth to solicit contributions or anything else of value.
It shall also be unlawful for any permit holder to block, impede, hinder, interfere
with, or slow the progress of the orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(as added by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #10-05, April 2010,
Ord. #12-13, Dec. 2012, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-218. Hours in which business may be conducted. No permit holder shall
conduct business before the hour of 8:00 A.M. or after the hour of 8:00 P.M. (as
added by Ord. #08-32, Feb. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #10-05, April 2010, Ord.
#12-13, Dec. 2012, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-219. Trespassing. It shall be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass for
any peddler, solicitor or transient vendor to fail to promptly leave the private
premises of any person who requests him to leave. (as added by Ord. #08-32,
Feb. 2009, and replaced by Ord. #10-05, April 2010, Ord. #12-13, Dec. 2012, and
Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-220. Violation and penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter, or filing, or causing to be filed, an application for a permit or
certificate under this chapter containing false or fraudulent statements shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of this code. (as added by Ord. #10-05, April
2010, and replaced by Ord. #12-13, Dec. 2012, and Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-221. Deleted. (as added by Ord. #12-13, Dec. 2012, and deleted by Ord.
#17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-9
CHAPTER 3
CHARITABLE SOLICITORS
SECTION
9-301. Permit required.
9-302. Prerequisites for a permit.
9-303. Denial of a permit.
9-304. Exhibition of permit.
9-305. Conduct of solicitors.
9-301. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit
contributions or anything else of value for any real or alleged charitable,
religious, or other non-profit organization without a permit from the city clerk
authorizing such solicitations. Provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to any locally established organization or church operated exclusively for
charitable, religious, or other non-profit purposes if the solicitations are
conducted exclusively by the local members thereof, voluntarily and without
remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form
of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any such locally
established organization or church. For the purposes of this chapter, a locally
established organization or church shall be defined as one which conducts
regular meetings in Springfield, Tennessee, the majority of whose members
reside in Springfield, Tennessee, and whose organizational charter define it as
being a religious, charitable, or other non-profit organization under the most
current laws of the State of Tennessee. (1981 code, § 5-301)
9-302. Prerequisites for a permit. Applicants for a permit under this
chapter must file with the city clerk a written application on a form provided by
the city clerk. A separate application is required for each person seeking to
solicit for an organization covered by this chapter. The city clerk shall issue a
permit authorizing solicitations by charitable, religious, or other non-profit
organizations when, after an investigation by the Springfield Police Department,
he finds the following facts to exist:
(1) The applicant has not been convicted of any felony within the last
ten years and has never been convicted of any offense involving any fraudulent
transaction or enterprise.
(2) The organization for which the applicant seeks to solicit has never
engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise.
(3) The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons.
(4) The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public, but will be for a
bona fide purpose as covered by this chapter.
(5) The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the cause
described in the application. (1981 code, § 5-302)
9-10
9-303. Denial of a permit. Any applicant for a permit to make charitable
or religious solicitations may appeal to the governing body if he has not been
granted a permit within fifteen (15) days after he makes application therefor.
(1981 code, § 5-303)
9-304. Exhibition of permit. Any solicitor required by this chapter to
have a permit shall exhibit such permit at the request of any policeman or
person solicited. (1981 code, § 5-304)
9-305. Conduct of solicitors. It shall be unlawful for any person receiving
a permit authorizing solicitations under this chapter to use any force, threat,
harassment, coercion, or misrepresentation of the truth to solicit contributions
or anything else of value. It shall also be unlawful for any solicitor to block,
impede, hinder, interfere with, or slow the progress of the orderly flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No solicitation covered by this chapter shall be
conducted before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or after the hour of 8:00 p.m. except by
the request of a resident. (1981 code, § 5-305, modified)
Change 13, July 15, 2008 9-11
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS1
SECTION
9-401. Definitions.
9-402. Franchise and privilege license required.
9-403. Qualifications for franchise.
9-404. Application for franchise.
9-405. Revocation or suspension of franchise.
9-406. Annual renewal.
9-407. Semi-annual reporting of taxicabs in operation.
9-408. Taxicabs to be licensed and identified.
9-409. Annual mechanical safety inspection.
9-410. Liability insurance required.
9-411. Mechanical condition of vehicle.
9-412. Cleanliness of vehicle.
9-413. Transfer of franchise.
9-414. Suspension and revocation of franchise.
9-415. Taxicab driver's permit required.
9-416. Qualifications and application for driver's permit.
9-417. Police investigation of applicant.
9-418. Consideration of application and issuance of permit.
9-419. Fees.
9-420. Display of permit.
9-421. Suspension and revocation of permits.
9-422. Rules of driver conduct.
9-423. Taxicab service to be comprehensive.
9-424. Accidents.
9-425. Police department duty to enforce chapter.
9-426. Fares and rates.
9-427. Violations.
9-401. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used
in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) "Franchise" shall mean a certificate issued by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen of Springfield, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab
business in Springfield, Tennessee. Franchise is non-exclusive.
(2) "Holder" means a person to whom a taxicab franchise has been
issued.
1For privilege tax provisions, etc., see title 5 in this code.
Change 13, July 15, 2008 9-12
(3) "Person," when used within this chapter, means any individual,
firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock
association, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or person
representative thereof.
(4) "Taxicab" shall mean any motor vehicle engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire primarily within the corporate limits and the
suburban territory adjacent thereto, except buses and other common carriers
operating over designated routes in and through the city.
(5) "Rate card" shall mean a card issued by the city clerk for display
in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare then in force.
(6) "Conduct a taxicab business" shall be held to mean the use of one
(1) or more taxicabs within the corporate limits of the City of Springfield, by the
owner thereof, for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving
the same himself or having same driven by some other person.
(7) "Driver permit" means the permission granted by the city clerk and
chief of police to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the City of
Springfield. (1981 code, § 5-401, as amended by Ord. #091-09, Nov. 1991 and
replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-402. Franchise and privilege license required. It shall be unlawful for
any person to engage in the taxicab business unless first having obtained a
taxicab franchise from the city and having a currently effective minimum
business license as required by Tennessee Code Annotated, § 67-4-704. All
persons desiring to operate taxicab businesses within the City of Springfield are
hereby required to make application to the board of mayor and aldermen for a
franchise. This section shall not be so construed as to require any person
lawfully engaged in the taxicab business solely within another municipality to
obtain from the board of mayor and aldermen a franchise authorizing the
transportation of passengers to Springfield, Tennessee. (1981 code, § 5-402, as
amended by Ord. #091-09, Nov. 1991 and replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June
1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-403. Qualifications for franchise. No person shall be granted a
franchise to operate a taxi service unless he meets the following qualifications
to the satisfaction of the city clerk and chief of police:
(1) No person shall be eligible for a taxicab franchise if he has a bad
character or has been convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years; nor
shall such franchise be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof
would be ineligible for a franchise under the foregoing conditions.
(2) Is at least twenty-one (21) years of age and is properly licensed by
the State of Tennessee.
(3) Is clean in dress and person.
(4) At the time of application must produce affidavits of good character
from two (2) reputable citizens of this city who have known him personally and
Change 15, December 20, 2011 9-13
have observed his conduct for at least five (5) years next preceding the date of
his application for a franchise.
(5) Has not been convicted, pled guilty, placed on diversion, probation
or parole; or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony within the last ten (10) years.
If at the time of the application, the applicant is charged with any such offenses
the application shall be deferred until entry of a plea, conviction, acquittal,
dismissal, or other final disposition of the charges.
(6) Has not been convicted, plead guilty, or pled nolo contendre to
drunk driving, driving under the influence of any intoxicant or drug, hit and
run, reckless or careless driving in the last five (5) years, or been involved in
three (3) or more moving traffic violations during a period of three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of application. If at the time of the application
the applicant is charged with any such offenses the application shall be deferred
until entry of a plea, conviction, acquittal, dismissal, or other final disposition
of the charges.
(7) Provides a certified copy of his driving record that is less than
thirty (30) days old.
(8) Provides a criminal history record from the FBI. (1981 code,
§ 5-403, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-404. Application for franchise. No person shall be granted a franchise
to operate a taxi service unless he meets the application requirements as stated
herein to the satisfaction of the city clerk and chief of police. The application for
a franchise shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms provided by the City of
Springfield. The application shall be verified under oath and shall be filed under
the conditions required as follows:
(1) The application for a franchise shall state whether or not the
business is to be operated by an individual, partnership, or corporation. If by
an individual, the name of such individual, or by partnership, and if by
corporation, the place, book, and page number where such charter is of record
shall be stated on the application.
(2) The application shall state the number of cabs to be operated, the
make and year models of said cabs, and such other pertinent information as the
chief of police may require, the location of the proposed place of business, and
the proposed rates to be charged.
(3) As soon as all information required in the application is forwarded
along with the application, the chief of police shall make a thorough
investigation of the applicant, present the application to the board of mayor and
aldermen and make a recommendation to either grant or refuse a franchise to
the applicant.
(4) Subject to the provisions of § 9-402, a franchise authorizing the
operation of taxicabs within the City of Springfield, shall be issued to any
qualified applicant found to be fit, willing, and able to properly perform the
service proposed and to conform to the provisions of this chapter, provided the
Change 15, December 20, 2011 9-14
proposed service authorized by such franchise is or will be required by the
present or future public convenience and necessity. No franchise issued under
this chapter shall confer any proprietary or property rights in the use of the
streets and highways within the city.
(5) Any franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
specify the date issued and the service to be performed.
(6) The application for a franchise shall also include the following
information:
(a) The name and address of the person making application for
the franchise.
(b) The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts
of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments.
(c) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers.
(d) The location of any proposed depots and terminals.
(e) The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the
vehicle or vehicles of the applicant.
(f) Procedures for training drivers.
(g) Rules and regulations governing driver appearance and
conduct.
(h) Such additional information as the board of mayor and
aldermen may require. (1981 code, § 5-404, as replaced by Ord. #96-27,
§ 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-405. Revocation or suspension of franchise. The board of mayor and
aldermen, after a public hearing, may revoke or suspend any taxicab franchise
for misrepresentations or false statements made in the application therefore or
for traffic violations or violations of this chapter by the taxicab owner or any
driver. (1981 code, § 5-405, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and
Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-406. Annual renewal. Each taxicab franchise shall be issued for one (1)
year and shall expire on the anniversary date of the certificate. A certificate
may be renewed for each successive year by the person or corporation making
the original application by meeting all the requirements of the original franchise
application. This includes submitting an updated certified driving record along
with an updated criminal history. Failure to renew by the anniversary date
shall result in forfeiture of the franchise. An updated FBI criminal history shall
be submitted every five (5) years after the date of the issuance of the initial
franchise certificate as a part of the annual renewal. A TBI criminal history less
than thirty (30) days old shall be submitted with the annual renewal in every
year that an FBI criminal history is not required. (1981 code, § 5-406, as
replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, Ord. #08-05, July 2008, and
Ord. # 11-04, June 2011)
Change 13, July 15, 2008 9-15
9-407. Semi-annual reporting of taxicabs in operation. Persons granted
a taxicab franchise shall provide a semi-annual report to the city clerk
identifying the taxicabs being insured and operated. The report shall include
the make, model and license number of each taxicab in operation along with
documentation exhibiting current liability insurance. (1981 code, § 5-408, as
replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-408. Taxicabs to be licensed and identified. No taxicab shall be
operated unless it bears a state license duly issued. Each taxicab shall be
equipped with a light on its top which identifies the vehicle as a taxicab. Each
taxicab shall bear on the outside of each front door, in painted or permanently
affixed letters not less than three (3) inches in height, the name of the company
and may, in addition, bear an identifying design which has been approved by the
Springfield Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Each taxicab shall bear on the rear
and on each side, in painted or permanently affixed numbers not less than three
(3) inches in height, a number identifying each taxicab. Any operating taxicab
that is ten (10) years old or older shall undergo an annual mechanical safety
inspection performed by a local automotive mechanical shop approved by the
City of Springfield or the service shop of a new and/or used car dealership
authorized to sell and service that particular make of vehicle. Any taxicab
placed into operation after the effective date of this chapter must conform to the
uniform paint color selected by the franchise holder for his vehicles. Any
franchise holder whose taxicabs are non-compliant with the safety and
identification requirements of this chapter shall immediately remove from
operation any non-compliant taxicab or have his franchise revoked. Any
franchise holder whose taxicabs were in operation prior to the effective date of
this chapter and whose taxicabs are non-compliant with the safety and
identification requirements of this chapter shall have ninety (90) days from the
effective date of this chapter to bring his taxicabs into full compliance. Any
franchise holder whose taxicabs were in operation prior to the effective date of
this chapter and whose taxicabs are still non-compliant after ninety (90) days
from the effective date of this chapter shall immediately remove from operation
any non-compliant taxicab or have his franchise revoked. (1981 code, § 5-409,
as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-409. Annual mechanical safety inspection. Any taxicab required by
this chapter to undergo an annual safety inspection shall be inspected for the
proper operating condition of the vehicle's brakes; frame; power steering; tires;
wheel studs and lug nuts; wheel bearings; rack and pinion steering or gear box
steering; u-joints; struts; control arms and bushings; all steering parts including
drag link, tie rods, tie rod ends, idler arm, pitman arm and ball joints; constant
velocity axles, including joints and boots; headlights; turning lights; windshield
wipers; horn; and rear vision mirror. Any system, part or mechanical device
that fails inspection shall be repaired or replaced before the taxicab is returned
to operation to carry passengers. The city clerk shall provide the franchise
Change 13, July 15, 2008 9-16
holder with an annual mechanical safety inspection form for each taxicab that
is to be completed by the local automotive mechanical shop approved by the City
of Springfield or the service shop of the authorized sales and service dealership
performing the inspection and signed by the service shop supervisor. The
annual mechanical safety inspection form shall be returned to the city clerk fully
completed and signed within three (3) days after the inspection, accompanied
by receipts from the authorized sales and service dealership evidencing payment
for the inspection and the performance of any required repairs or replacements.
(1981 code, § 5-410, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05,
July 2008)
9-410. Liability insurance required. No taxicab franchise shall be issued
or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability
insurance policy or bond for each vehicle authorized in an amount equal to that
required by the state's financial responsibility law as set out in Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 55, chapter 12,. The insurance policy or bond required by this
section shall contain provisions that it shall not be canceled except after at least
twenty (20) days written notice is given by the insurer to both the insured and
the city clerk. (1981 code, § 5-411, as amended by Ord. #091-09, Nov. 1991 and
replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-411. Mechanical condition of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate any taxicab in the municipality unless such taxicab is
equipped with four (4) wheel brakes, front and rear lights, safe tires, horn,
muffler, windshield wipers, and rear vision mirror, all of which shall conform to
the requirements of state motor vehicle law. Each taxicab shall be equipped
with a handle or latch or other opening device attached to each door of the
passenger compartment so that such door may be operated by the passenger
from the inside of the taxicab without intervention or assistance of the driver.
The taxicab shall be equipped with seat belts and child restraint device. All
drivers and passengers are required to use seat belts and each cab will have the
appropriate child restraint device available for children as required by
Tennessee State Law. The motor and all the mechanical parts shall be kept in
such condition or repair as may be reasonably necessary to provide for the safety
of the public and the continuous satisfactory operation of the taxicab. (1981
code, § 5-412, as amended by Ord. #091-09, Nov. 1991 and replaced by Ord.
#96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-412. Cleanliness of vehicles. All taxicabs operated in the city shall, at
all times, be kept in a reasonably clean and sanitary condition. They shall be
thoroughly swept and dusted at least once each day. At least once every week
they shall be thoroughly washed and the interior cleaned with a suitable
antiseptic solution. (1981 code, § 5-413, as amended by Ord. #091-09, Nov. 1991
and replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
Change 15, December 20, 2011 9-17
9-413. Transfer of franchise. No franchise may be sold, assigned,
mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the board of mayor
and aldermen, and then only if the board shall be of the opinion that the
purchaser or future operator thereof is in all respects qualified under the
provisions of this chapter to conduct the business and to render the service for
which the franchise was originally issued. (1981 code, § 5-414, as amended by
Ord. #091-09, Nov. 1991 and replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and
Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-414. Suspension and revocation of franchise. A franchise issued under
the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the board of
mayor and aldermen if the holder thereof has:
(1) (a) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter, ordinances,
laws or regulations of the City of Springfield, the United States, or the
State of Tennessee or any other state.
(b) Discontinued operations for more than five (5) days.
(2) Prior to any suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given
notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be
heard by the board of mayor and aldermen. (1981 code, § 5-415, as replaced by
Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-415. Taxicab driver's permit required. No person shall operate a
taxicab upon the streets of Springfield and no person who owns or controls a
taxicab shall permit it to be driven unless the driver has then in force a taxicab
driver's permit issued by the city clerk. (1981 code, § 5-416, as replaced by Ord.
#96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-416. Qualifications and application for driver's permit. No person shall
be issued a taxicab driver permit unless he complies with the following to the
satisfaction of the chief of police and city clerk:
(1) Is at least twenty-one (21) years of age and holds a proper driver's
license issued by the state of Tennessee;
(2) Is clean in dress and person;
(3) An application for taxicab driver permit shall be filed with the city
clerk on forms provided by the city. The application shall be verified under oath
and shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, address of current residence, date and location
of birth and other personal information as required;
(b) Experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers;
(c) Education and history of employment;
(4) Produces affidavits of good character from two (2) reputable
citizens of the city who have known him personally and have observed his
conduct for at least two (2) years next preceding the date of his application;
Change 15, December 20, 2011 9-18
(5) Has not been convicted, pled guilty, placed on diversion, probation
or parole or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony within the last ten (10) years.
If at the time of the application the applicant is charged with any such offenses
the application shall be deferred until entry of a plea, conviction, acquittal,
dismissal, or other final disposition of the charges;
(6) Has not been convicted, plead guilty, or pled nolo contendere to
drunk driving, driving under the influence of any intoxicant or drug, hit and
run, reckless or careless driving in the last five (5) years, or been involved in
three (3) or more moving traffic violations during a period of three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of application. If at the time of the application
the applicant is charged with any such offenses the application shall be deferred
until entry of a plea, conviction, acquittal, dismissal, or other final disposition
of the charges;
(7) Is familiar with the state and local traffic laws;
(8) Provides a certified copy of driving record from the state motor
vehicle department less than thirty (30) days old;
(9) Provides a copy of his/her current Tennessee driver license;
(10) Provides a criminal history from the FBI; or
(11) For the initial application for a taxicab driver permit only, provides
a criminal history from the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI) less than
thirty (30) days old and a receipt from the Robertson County Sheriff's
Department as proof that the applicant has been fingerprinted in order to make
application for an FBI criminal history. However, an initial taxicab driver
permit issued with only a submitted criminal history from the TBI shall be
deemed temporary and shall only be in effect for a maximum period of one
hundred eighty (180) days. A completed FBI criminal history shall be submitted
before the expiration of the temporary taxicab driver permit in order to convert
the temporary taxicab driver permit to a permanent taxicab driver permit. The
date of the issuance of the temporary taxicab driver permit shall then become
the anniversary date of the permanent taxicab driver permit. A temporary
taxicab driver permit shall not be renewable nor shall a former temporary
taxicab permit holder, whose temporary permit expired, be allowed to apply for
another temporary permit. An unexpired temporary taxicab driver permit shall
be surrendered to the city clerk upon the issuance of a permanent taxicab driver
permit. (1981 code, § 5-417, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996,
Ord. #08-05, July 2008, Ord. #08-28, Dec. 2008, and Ord. # 11-04, June 2011)
9-417. Police investigation of applicant. The police department shall
conduct an investigation on each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit and a
report of such investigation and a copy of police record of the applicant, if any,
shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the city clerk and
chief of police. No license shall be issued to any person who is under twenty-one
(21) years of age. (1981 code, § 5-418, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1 June 1996,
and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
Change 15, December 20, 2011 9-19
9-418. Consideration of application and issuance of permit. The city
clerk and chief of police shall upon consideration of the application, and the
reports and certificates required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the
application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal
appearance before the city manager to offer evidence why his application should
be reconsidered. Upon approval of an application for a temporary or permanent
taxicab driver permit the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant that
shall bear the name, address, color, age and signature of the applicant. A
permanent taxi driver permit shall be issued for one (1) year and shall expire on
the anniversary date. An updated FBI criminal history record shall be
submitted every five (5) years thereafter as a part of the annual permanent taxi
driver permit renewal. A TBI criminal history less than thirty (30) days old
shall be submitted with the annual permanent taxi driver permit renewal in
every year that an FBI criminal history is not required. (1981 code, § 5-420, as
replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, Ord. #08-05, July 2008, and Ord. # 11-
04, June 2011)
9-419. Fees. Each application for a new taxicab franchise or renewal of
an existing taxicab franchise under the provisions of this chapter shall be
accompanied by the applicable minimum business license as required by state
law, along with a non-refundable fee in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). Each application for a temporary taxicab driver permit or renewal of
a permanent taxicab driver permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Each application for the annual
renewal of a permanent taxicab driver permit shall be filed with the city clerk.
The application shall include the non-refundable fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00), the required criminal history, and a certified copy of the driving record
which is less than thirty (30) days old. There shall be a fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) charged for the replacement of an unexpired taxicab driver permit that
has been lost or damaged. (1981 code, § 5-421, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1,
June 1996, Ord. #08-05, July 2008, Ord. #08-28, Dec. 2008, and Ord. # 11-04,
June 2011)
9-420. Display of permit. Every driver permitted under this chapter
shall post his driver's permit in such a place in his taxicab as to be in full view
of all passengers while such driver is operating the taxicab. (1981 code, § 5-422,
as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-421. Suspension and revocation of permits. The city manager may
suspend any driver's permit issued under this chapter for a driver failing or
refusing to comply with the provisions hereof, such suspension to last for a
period or not more than sixty (60) days. However, there shall be no revocation
in any instance without reasonable notice to the person or driver affected and
after a reasonable hearing. Also any person who willfully and deliberately
violates, or fails to comply with, or procures, aids, or abets in the violation of any
Change 15, December 20, 2011 9-20
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Every driver
permitted under this chapter shall comply with all city, state, and federal laws.
(1981 code, § 5-423, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05,
July 2008)
9-422. Rules of driver conduct. Taxicab drivers shall adhere to the
following rules of conduct:
(1) No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or permitted to do so
unless he is properly licensed by the State of Tennessee.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver, while on duty, to be
under the influence of, or to drink any intoxicating or alcoholic beverage; to use
any profane or obscene language; to shout or call to prospective passengers; to
unnecessarily blow the automobile horn; or to unreasonably disturb the peace,
quiet, and tranquility of the city in any way.
(3) No taxicab driver shall engage in selling or delivering any
intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, illegal drugs or any illegal act,
business, or purpose.
(4) Taxicab drivers shall always deliver their passengers to their
destination by the most direct available route.
(5) No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a
passenger without the consent of such other passenger.
(6) No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey an orderly
person, or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or
forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.
(7) Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway but shall pull up to the right hand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or
in the absence of a sidewalk to the extreme right hand side of the street and
there receive or discharge passengers, except upon a one-way street, where
passengers may be received or discharged at either the right or left sidewalk, or
side of the street in the absence of a sidewalk.
(8) Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment
of the regular fare in advance, and may refuse employment unless so prepaid.
(9) Every taxicab driver, while on duty shall keep a clean and
well-groomed appearance and shall be dressed in a neat and professional
manner. The following items of clothing are prohibited while operating a
taxicab: t-shirts, exposed undergarments, tank tops, swimwear, jogging suits,
body suits, cut off pants, sandals, clogs, and other similar attire. Offensive
words or symbols on clothing are prohibited.
(10) Taxicab drivers shall not smoke in the vehicle or allow passengers
to smoke inside the taxicab.
(11) Taxicab drivers must be able to speak English fluently. (1981 code,
§ 5-424, modified, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05,
July 2008)
Change 15, December 20, 2011 9-21
9-423. Taxicab service to be comprehensive. Holders of a franchise shall
maintain a central place of business for the purpose of receiving calls and
dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside
the corporate limits of Springfield as soon as they can do so and if said services
cannot be rendered within a reasonable time they shall then notify the
prospective passengers how long it will be before the said call can be answered
and give the reason therefore. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call
anywhere in the corporate limits of the City of Springfield at any time when
such holder has an available cab shall be deemed a violator of this chapter and
the certificate granted to such holder shall be revoked at the discretion of the
board of mayor and aldermen. (1981 code, § 5-425, as replaced by Ord. #96-27,
§ 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-424. Accidents. All accidents arising from or in connection with the
operation of taxicabs shall be reported in accordance with the requirements of
the state motor vehicle code. (1981 code, § 5-426, as replaced by Ord. #96-27,
§ 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-425. Police department duty to enforce chapter. The police department
is hereby given the authority and is instructed to watch and observe the conduct
of holders and drivers operating under this chapter. Upon discovering a
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the police department shall report the
violation to the city manager who will order or take appropriate action. (1981
code, § 5-427, as replaced by Ord. #96-27, § 1, June 1996, and Ord. #08-05, July
2008)
9-426. Fares and rates. All taxicabs operating under the provisions of
this chapter shall charge a basic fee or rate which shall be approved by the
board of mayor and aldermen. No changes in these rates shall be made at any
time without the approval of the board. When changes are desired by the taxicab
owners or operators to be made in the rate schedule, the taxicab owners or
operators shall submit to the board a proposed schedule of rates showing the
changes desired to be made. (as added by Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
9-427. Violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating any section
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine under the
general penalty clause for this code. (as added by Ord. #08-05, July 2008)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-22
CHAPTER 5
YARD SALES
SECTION
9-501. Definitions.
9-502. Property permitted to be sold.
9-503. Locations.
9-504. Number of garage sales allowed.
9-505. Hours of operation.
9-506. Display of sale property.
9-507. Advertising.
9-508. Persons exempted from chapter.
9-509. Violations and penalty
9-510.--9-512. Deleted.
9-501. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
(1) "Garage sales" shall mean and include all general sales, open to the
public, conducted from or on any premises in any residential zone, as defined by
the zoning ordinance1, for the purpose of disposing of personal property
including but not limited to all sales entitled "garage" "lawn" "yard" "attic,"
"porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale. This
definition does not include the operation of such businesses carried on in a
nonresidential zone where the person conducting the sale does so on a regular
day-to-day basis. This definition shall not include a situation where no more
than two (2) specific items or articles are held out for sale and all
advertisements of such sale specifically names those items to be sold, such as a
personal car or truck for sale, registered to the residential property owner.
(2) "Personal property" shall mean property which is owned, utilized
and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and
acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not
include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on
consignment. (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-502. Property permitted to be sold. It shall be unlawful for any person
to sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this chapter, property other
than personal property. (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-503. Locations. Garage sales shall be held on residential property by
the property owner, or with a residential neighborhood/subdivision yard sale.
1Municipal code reference
Zoning ordinance: title 14, chapter 2.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-23
Nonresidential and other off-premise garage sales are not allowed. (as replaced
by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-504. Number of garage sales allowed. Each residential property owner
or residential neighborhood/subdivision shall be allowed to conduct two (2) yard
sales each year. (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-505. Hours of operation. Garage sales shall be limited in time to no
more than 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. on three (3) consecutive days or on two (2)
consecutive weekends (Saturday and Sunday). (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct
2017)
9-506. Display of sale property. Personal property offered for sale may be
displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport, and/or in a front, side or
rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a
garage sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-way. A vehicle offered for
sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such front
or side yard. (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-507. Advertising. (1) Signs permitted. Only the following specified signs
may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale:
(a) Two (2) signs permitted. Two (2) signs of not more than four
(4) square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the
residence or nonresidential site where the garage sale is being conducted.
(b) Directional signs. Two (2) signs of not more than two (2)
square feet each are permitted, provided that the premises on which the
garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and written
permission to erect such signs is received from the property owners on
whose property such signs are to be placed. The signs shall not be allowed
on public property, (i.e. utility poles, street signs, etc).
(2) Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be
exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the day such sale is to commence.
(3) Removal of signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of
the garage sale activities. (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-508. Persons exempted from chapter. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to or affect the following:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
(3) Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other
business establishment on a regular, day-to-day basis from or at the place of
business wherein such sale would be permitted by zoning regulations of the City
of Springfield, or under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof,
Change 18, February 20, 2018 9-24
or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor in which sale
would be conducted from properly zoned premises, and not otherwise prohibited
by other ordinances. (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-509. Violations and penalty. Complaints regarding exceeding the
allowed number of residential garage sales and associated violations shall be
investigated by a city codes official, and if found to be in violation, issued a
citation as provided by title 6, chapter 3. Nonresidential and off-premise garage
sales shall be found in violation of this chapter and issued a citation or summons
by a city police officer. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this
chapter shall be punished according to the general penalty provisions of this
municipal code of ordinances. (as replaced by Ord. #17-13, Oct 2017)
9-510.9-512. Deleted. (as deleted by Ord. #17-13, Oct. 2017)
9-25
CHAPTER 6
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION
9-601. Purpose and intent; findings.
9-602. Definitions.
9-603. License to operate -- general.
9-604. Same application.
9-605. Employees and entertainers/performers permits; application.
9-606. Investigations of applicants' qualifications.
9-607. Qualifications for license to operate, permit.
9-608. Inspections; notice of results.
9-609. Injunctions.
9-610. Revocation, suspension or annulment of licenses.
9-611. Termination and renewal of licenses and permits; applications; fees.
9-612. Prohibited hours of operation; hours open for inspection.
9-613. Duties and responsibilities of operators, entertainers/performers/
employees.
9-614. Prohibited activities.
9-615. Exhibition of films, videos or live sex shows in booths, cubicles, rooms
or stalls.
9-616. Display of license.
9-617. Adult entertainment appeals board - created.
9-618. Same -- membership; terms; compensation.
9-619. Same -- vacancy and removal.
9-620. Same -- officers and staff.
9-621. Same -- meetings.
9-622. Same -- powers.
9-623. Same -- procedures of hearing.
9-624. Penalties for violation.
9-601. Purpose and intent; findings. It is the purpose of this chapter to
regulate adult-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to govern the operation of adult-oriented businesses within
the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended
market. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-26
9-602. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires:
"Adult arcade" Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting [and/or] describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
"Adult book store" An establishment having as more than 50% of the face
value of its stock in trade, books, magazines, motion pictures, periodicals and
other materials which are distinguished or characterized by depicting,
describing, or relating to "specified anatomical areas" as defined below.
"Adult motion picture theater" Any public place, whether open or
enclosed, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities," or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below) for observation by
patrons therein.
"Adult-oriented establishment" Includes but is not limited to "adult
bookstores," "adult motion picture theaters," or "adult cabarets" and further
means any premises to which the public patrons or members are invited or
admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles,
rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises
for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an
entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or
a member when such entertainment is held, conducted, or maintained for a
profit, direct or indirect. An "adult-oriented establishment" further includes,
without being limited to any "adult entertainment studio" or any premises that
is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented as
an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio,
sensitivity studio, model studio, escort service, escort or any other term of like
import.
"Adult theater or adult cabaret" A theater, concert hall, auditorium,
nightclub, club, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which
regularly features:
(1) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(2) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other video or
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
"Board" The adult entertainment appeals board.
"City" The City of Springfield.
"Employee" Any person who performs any service on the premises of an
adult-oriented establishment on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated as any employee, independent
9-27
contractor, agent or otherwise. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively
on the premises for repair of the premises or for delivery of goods to the
premises.
"Entertainer/performer" Any person who provides entertainment within
an adult-oriented establishment, as defined in this section, whether or not a fee
is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not entertainment is
provided an employee or as an independent contractor.
"Escort" A person who, for monetary consideration in the form of a fee,
commission, salary or tip, dates, socializes, visits, consorts with, accompanies,
or offers to date, socialize, visit, consort or accompany to social affairs,
entertainment or places of amusement or within any place of public resort or
within any private quarters of a place of public resort.
"Escort service" A person as defined herein, who, for a fee, commission,
profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish
escorts or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts.
"Open office" An office at the escort service from which the escort
business is transacted and which is open to patrons or prospective patrons
during all hours which escorts are working, which is managed or operated by an
employee, officer, director or owner of the escort service having authority to bind
the service to escort and patron contracts and adjust patron and consumer
complaints.
"Operator" Any person, partnership, or any other type of organization
where two or more persons have a financial interest, joint venture or corporation
operating, conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
"Specified anatomical areas" means:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
(2) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely opaquely covered.
"Specified sexual activities" means:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
(3) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-603. License to operate - general. (1) Except as provided in subsection
(5), from and after the effective date of this part,1 no adult-oriented
establishment shall be operated or maintained in the city without first obtaining
a license to operate issued by the city clerk.
1These provisions were taken from Ord. #95-19, which passed 3rd reading
Oct. 17, 1995.
9-28
(2) A license may be issued only for one adult-oriented establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation
which desires to operate more than one adult-oriented establishment must have
a license for each location.
(3) No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation. No person who is ineligible to obtain a license under
the chapter shall be eligible to serve as the agent of a license under this section.
(4) No person shall be an entertainer/performer or employee on the
premises of an adult-oriented business without first obtaining a valid work
permit issued by the city clerk. A work permit, once issued, shall be valid for
employment of the employee or entertainer/performer at any adult-oriented
business within the city.
(5) It is unlawful for any entertainer/performer, employee or operator
to knowingly work in or about or to knowingly perform any service directly
related to the operation of any unlicensed adult-oriented establishment.
(6) All existing adult-oriented establishments at the time of the
passage of this chapter must submit an application for a license within thirty
(30) days of the effective date of this chapter. If a license is not applied for
within such thirty-day period, then such existing adult-oriented establishment
shall cease to operate.
(7) No license shall be issued by the city clerk unless the applicant
certifies, by proof satisfactory to the clerk, that the applicant has satisfied the
rules, regulations and provisions of the applicable zoning requirements in the
city. Any zoning requirement shall be in addition to and an alternative to any
requirement of this legislation.
(8) No adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or maintained
in the city within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet, measured from property line to
property line, of a school, educational facility, church or place of worship,
day-care center, nursing home, library, park, cemetery, mortuary or hospital.
(9) The property line of such establishment shall not be located closer
than 1,500 feet from the site of any public amusement or entertainment activity,
public gathering places, including, but not limited to, any area devoted to public
recreation activity, city hall, city parks, arcades, motion picture theaters,
bowling alleys, golf courses, miniature golf, playgrounds, ice-skating or
roller-skating rinks, or arenas, community centers and similar amusements
offered to the general public.
(10) No adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or maintained
in the city within two hundred (200) feet, measured from property line to
property line, of a boundary of a residential zone.
(11) No adult-oriented business establishment shall be operated or
maintained in the city within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet, measured from
property line to property line, of another adult-oriented business establishment.
(As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-29
9-604. Same application. (1) Any person, partnership, or corporation, or
any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial
interest, desiring to secure a license shall make application to the city clerk.
The city clerk shall establish procedures for the issuance of a license.
(2) The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the
clerk. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of a plus or minus six
(6) inches. In addition, the diagram of any adult-oriented business which
exhibits, on the premises, in a viewing booth of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction, or
which provides private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing live sex
shows which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas must
comply with the requirements of section 9-613 of this chapter.
(3) An applicant for a license, including any partner or limited partner
of the partnership applicant, and any officer or director of the corporation rate
applicant who is also interested directly in the actual operation of the business
shall furnish the following information under oath:
(a) Name and address, including any aliases;
(b) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
(c) Whether such applicant has been convicted of or pleaded
nolo contenders to, any of the offenses of aggravated rape, rape,
aggravated sexual battery, indecent exposure, prostitution, patronizing
prostitution, promoting prostitution, aggravated prostitution, rape of a
child, any crime involving obscenity, or any crime involving the sexual
exploitation of children;
(d) Whether such applicant has previously violated this chapter
within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application;
(e) The address of the adult-oriented establishment to be
operated by the applicant.
(4) A license fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be submitted
with the application for a license. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-605. Employees and entertainers/performers permits; application.
(1) Any person desiring to secure a permit shall make application to
the city clerk. The city clerk shall establish procedures and criteria for the
issuance of a permit. The application shall be filed in triplicate with and dated
by the city clerk.
(2) The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the
city clerk. An application for a permit shall furnish the following information
under oath;
9-30
(a) Name and address, including any aliases;
(b) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
(c) Whether such applicant has been convicted of or pleaded
nolo contenders to, any of the offenses of aggravated rape, rape,
aggravated sexual battery, indecent exposure, prostitution, patronizing
prostitution, promoting prostitution, aggravated prostitution, rape of a
child, any crime involving obscenity, or any crime involving the sexual
exploitation of children;
(d) Whether such applicant has previously violated this chapter
within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application;
(e) A permit fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be submitted for
a permit. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-606. Investigations of applicants' qualifications. (1) No license or
permit shall be issued unless the city police department has investigated all
applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that investigations shall
be filed in writing with the chief of police no later than twenty (20) days after
the date of the application. Within ten (10) days, or a reasonable time
thereafter, of receiving the results of the investigation conducted by the city
police department, the city clerk shall notify the applicant that the application
is granted, denied or held for further investigation. Such additional
investigation shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) days unless otherwise
agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation,
the city clerk shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is
granted or denied.
(2) Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation,
the city clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action.
If the applicant requests a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of notification
of denial, a public hearing shall be held thereafter before the board, at which
time the applicant may present evidence bearing upon the question.
(3) Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application or the applicant's refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding
the application or the applicant's refusal to submit to or cooperate with any
investigation required by this part constitutes an admission by the applicant
that the applicant is ineligible for such license and shall be ground for denial
thereof by the chief of police. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-607. Qualifications for license to operate, permit. (1) To receive a
license to operate an adult-oriented establishment, an applicant must meet the
following standards:
(a) If the applicant is an individual:
9-31
(i) The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of
age;
(ii) The applicant shall not have been convicted of, or
pleaded nolo contendere to, any of the offenses of aggravated rape,
rape, aggravated sexual battery, indecent exposure, prostitution,
patronizing prostitution, promoting prostitution, aggravated
prostitution, rape of a child, any crime involving the sexual
exploitation of children; and
(iii) The applicant shall not have previously violated this
chapter within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date
of the application.
(b) If the applicant is a corporation:
(i) All officers and directors of the corporation shall be at
least eighteen (18) years of age;
(ii) No officer or director shall have been convicted of, or
pleaded nolo contender to, any of the offenses of aggravated rape,
rape, aggravated sexual battery, indecent exposure, prostitution,
patronizing prostitution, promoting prostitution, aggravated
prostitution, rape of a child, any crime involving obscenity, or any
crime involving the sexual exploitation of children; and
(iii) No officer or director shall have previous violated this
chapter within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date
of the application.
(c) If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other
type of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial
interest:
(i) All persons having a financial interest in the
partnership, joint venture or other type of organization who also
have an interest in the actual operation of the business shall be at
least eighteen (18) years of age;
(ii) No such person shall have been convicted of, or
pleaded nolo contender to, any of the offenses of aggravated rape,
rape, aggravated sexual battery, indecent exposure, prostitution,
patronizing prostitution, promoting prostitution, aggravated
prostitution, rape of a child, any crime involving obscenity, or any
crime involving the sexual exploitation of children; and
(iii) No such person shall have previous violated this
chapter within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date
of the application.
(2) To receive a permit, the applicant must meet the following
qualifications:
(a) The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(b) The applicant shall not have been convicted of, or pleaded
nolo contenders to, any of the offenses of aggravated rape, rape,
aggravated sexual battery, indecent exposure, prostitution, patronizing
9-32
prostitution, promoting prostitution, aggravated prostitution, rape of a
child, any crime involving the sexual exploitation of children; and
(c) The applicant shall not have previously violated this chapter
within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-608. Inspections; notice of results. In order to effectuate the provisions
of this chapter, the chief of police or his/her authorized representative, as well
as the city building and codes department, is empowered to conduct
investigations of persons engaged in the operation of any adult-oriented
establishment and inspect the license of the operators and the premises of an
establishment for compliance. Refusal of an operation or establishment to
permit inspections shall be grounds for revocation, suspension or refusal to issue
licenses provided by this part. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-609. Injunctions. The chief of police has the power and authority to
enter into any court of the State of Tennessee having proper jurisdiction to seek
an injunction against any person or adult-oriented establishment not in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and is further empowered to
enter into any such court to enforce the provisions of this chapter in order to
ensure compliance with such provisions. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct.
1995)
9-610. Revocation, suspension or annulment of licenses.
(1) The chief of police shall revoke or suspend a license for any of the
following reasons:
(a) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was
given on any application.
(b) The operator or entertainer/performer, or any employee of
the operator, violates any provision of this part or any rule or regulation
adopted by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter; provided, that in
the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely
that of an employee or entertainer/performer, the penalty shall not exceed
a license suspension of thirty (30) days if the chief of police shall find that
the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation
and could not, by the exercise of due diligence, have had such actual or
constructive knowledge.
(c) The operator, entertainer/performer, or employee becomes
ineligible to obtain a license or permit.
(d) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this part is not paid.
(e) An operator employs an entertainer/performer, employee, or
independent contractor who does not have a permit or provides space on
the premises, whether by lease or otherwise, to an independent contractor
who performs as an entertainer/performer without a permit.
9-33
(f) Any intoxicating liquor or alcoholic beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the adult-oriented establishment.
(g) There exists on the premises a violation of law which
threatens the public health or safety; provided, however, that prior to a
suspension of any license on this ground, the operator will be given
written notice of the condition giving rise to the threat to health or safety
and will be given ten (10) days to rectify the situation before the notice of
suspension is sent.
(2) The chief of police, before revoking or suspending any license or
permit, shall give the holder thereof at least ten (10) days' written notice of the
charges against the holder and the opportunity for a public hearing before the
board, at which time the holder may present evidence bearing upon the
question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing. If the
licensee or permittee requests a hearing in writing within ten (10) days, no
action shall be taken to revoke or suspend the license or permit until the
hearing has been held in accordance with board procedure and the board has
rendered a decision.
(3) The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall
automatically and immediately revoke the license. The transfer of any interest
in a non-individual operator's license shall automatically and immediately
revoke the license held by the operator.
(4) Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to
receive a license for five (5) years from the date of revocation. (As added by Ord.
#95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-611. Termination and renewal of licenses and permits; applications;
fees. (1) Every license and permit issued under this part will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and
must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any
operator, employee or entertainer/performer desiring to renew a license or
permit shall make application to the city clerk. The application for renewal
must be filed not later than sixty (60) days before the license or permit expires.
The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city
clerk. The application for renewal shall contain such information and data,
given under oath or affirmation, as may be required by the chief of police, but
not less than the information contained in the original application.
(2) Fees.
(a) A license renewal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal
fee, a late penalty of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed against the
applicant who files for a renewal less than thirty (30)days before the
license expires.
(b) A permit renewal fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be
submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal
fee, a late penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed against the
9-34
applicant who files for a renewal less than thirty (30) days before the
license expires.
(3) Whenever a renewal application is denied, the city clerk shall send
notice to the applicant by certified mail informing him in writing of the specific
reasons for such action. The notice shall inform the applicant of his right to
request a hearing before the board within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice
of denial. If the applicant requests a hearing in writing within ten (10) days, the
applicant's current permit or license shall remain in effect until the board has
rendered a decision on the applicant's appeal.
(4) If the city police department is aware of any information bearing
on the operator's or employee's or entertainer/performer's qualifications, the
information shall be filed in writing with the chief of police not later than ten
(10) days after the date of the application renewal. (As added by Ord. #95-19,
§ 1, Oct. 1995)
9-612. Prohibited hours of operation; hours open for inspection.
(1) No adult-oriented establishment shall be open between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(2) All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the city police department or such other persons as the chief
of police may designate. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-613. Duties and responsibilities of operato r s ,
entertainers/performers/employees. (1) The operator shall maintain a register
of all employees and entertainers/performers, showing the name, the aliases
used by the individual, home address, birth date, telephone number, date of
employment and termination, and duties of each employee. The above
information on each employee/entertainer/performer shall be maintained in the
register on the premises for a period of three (3) years following termination of
working at the establishment.
(2) The operator shall make the employee register available
immediately for inspection by the chief of police or city police department upon
demand of a member of the chief of police or city police department at all
reasonable times.
(3) Every act or omission by an employee/entertainer/performer
constituting a violation of the provisions of this part shall be deemed the act or
omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the
operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's or
entertainer/performer's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
cause the omission.
(4) An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees
and entertainers/performers while on the licensed premises and any act or
9-35
omission of any employee or entertainer/performer constituting a violation of the
provisions of this part shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for
purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked,
suspended or renewed.
(5) No operator, employee or entertainer/performer of an
adult-oriented establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around or to
frequent an adult-oriented establishment or to allow any minor to view adult
entertainment as herein defined. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-614. Prohibited activities. (1) No operator, entertainer/performer or
employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall permit to be performed, offer
to perform, perform, or allow patrons to perform sexual intercourse or oral or
anal copulation or other contact stimulation of the genitalia.
(2) No operator, entertainer/performer or employee of an
adult-oriented establishment shall encourage or permit any person upon the
premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any
other person.
(3) No operator, entertainer/performer or employee of an
adult-oriented establishment shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or
clothing so as to commit the offense of public nudity. (As added by Ord. #95-19,
§ 1, Oct. 1995)
9-615. Exhibition of films, videos or live sex shows in booths, cubicles,
rooms or stalls. A person who operates or causes to be operated an
adult-oriented business which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of
less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette,
or other video reproduction, or which provides private or semiprivate booths or
cubicles for viewing live sex shows, which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted.
A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designate street or object and should be drawn to a designate
scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
9-36
(2) It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises. Further, it is the duty
of the owners and operators of the premises and the employees who are present
to ensure that no more than one person occupies a booth, cubicle, viewing room
or stall at any time, and that all entrances to booths or other viewing areas (and
to the aisles, walkways and hallways leading to booths or other viewing areas)
are maintained free of any obstruction such as a door, curtain, panel, board,
plat, ribbon, cord, rope, chain or other device.
(3) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view
required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
(4) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also
be the duty of all employees present in the premises, to ensure that the line of
sight and view area specified in subsection (3) remains unobstructed by any
doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any
patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted.
(5) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one foot candle as measured at the
floor level.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall be the
duty of all employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
(7) No operator, owner or employee shall allow openings of any kind
to exist between viewing rooms or booths, and no person shall make or attempt
to make an opening of any kind between booths or rooms. The operator or
owner shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the
viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
(8) The owner or operator shall cause all floor coverings in viewing
booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting, and
shall cause all wall surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing booths to be
constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable
materials. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-37
9-616. Display of license. A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the
common area of the premises, and shall read as follows:
THIS ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS IS REGULATED BY THE
OFFICIAL CODE OF THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, SECTION 9-601 ET SEQ.
EMPLOYEES AND PERFORMERS ARE NOT PERMITTED TO HAVE
SEXUAL CONTACT WITH PERSONS ON THE PREMISES. (As added by Ord.
#95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-617. Adult entertainment appeals board -- created. There is created for
the city the adult entertainment appeals board, sometimes referred to in this
chapter as the "board." (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-618. Same -- Membership; terms; compensation. The Board shall
consist of seven (7) members. Each ward representative shall be appointed to
that membership by the alderman for that ward. The mayor shall appoint a
member at large who shall be deemed the chairperson. Each term of office shall
run concurrent with the elected officials term of office. Members of the board
shall serve without compensation. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-619. Same -- vacancy and removal. Any vacancy due to any cause shall
be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment. Any member of the board may be removed from office for cause
by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the city council after a hearing by the city council.
(As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-620. Same -- officers and staff. The board shall elect from its
membership a vice chairman, who shall be selected for one-year terms. The
chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall serve as the secretary
of the board and shall serve as the custodian of its records and minutes. (As
added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-621. Same -- meetings. Regular sessions of the board shall be held once
each month on such date and at such time and place as established by the board,
unless no business is scheduled to come before the board, in which case no
meeting need be held. The presence of four (4) members shall constitute a
quorum, and the concurring vote of at least four (4) members shall be necessary
to uphold or overturn a decision of the chief of police. (As added by Ord. #95-19,
§ 1, Oct. 1995)
9-622. Same -- powers. The board is hereby vested with the power to
assist in the regulation of adult-oriented businesses by:
(1) Hearing and deciding appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the chief of police in carrying out the
enforcement of this chapter, whereby it is alleged in writing that the chief of
police is in error.
9-38
(2) Promulgating such rules and regulations as are necessary for the
conduct of its meetings and to carry out its duties, and filing such rules with the
city clerk.
(3) Compelling the attendance of witness, the production of books,
papers, records, or other documents relevant or material to any matter in
question before the board. (As added by Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
9-623. Same -- procedures of hearings. (1) Upon receiving a written
request for a hearing, the board shall send the party requesting the hearing a
notice stating the time and place of the hearing and the right to be represented
by counsel. All hearings shall be open to the public.
(2) At the hearing of the case, the party requesting the hearing shall
appear on his own behalf or be represented by counsel. All witness shall be
sworn. The chairman shall allow the appealing party to present witnesses on
his behalf and to cross examine all witness testifying against him.
(3) All decisions of the board shall be in writing, setting forth the
findings of the board, and shall be signed. Any decision of the board to deny,
suspend, or revoke a license or permit shall not take effect earlier than ten (10)
days after the date the decision was rendered in order that the party receiving
the decision may have adequate time to seek judicial review.
(4) Minutes shall be kept of all proceedings before the board in
permanent form, and a record shall be kept of the actions of the board with
respect to all hearings.
(5) A record (which may consist of a tape or similar electronic
recording) shall be made of all oral proceedings. Such record or any part thereof
shall be transcribed on request of any party at such party's expense, or may be
transcribed by the board at its expense. If the board elects to transcribe the
proceedings, any party shall be provided copies of the transcript upon payment
to the agency of a reasonable compensatory fee. Should a party desire a court
reporter to be present at the hearing, he or his representative must arrange for
the court reporter's presence.
(6) Any party aggrieved by an action of the board may appeal the
board's decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. (As added by Ord. #95-19,
§ 1, Oct. 1995)
9-624. Penalties for violation. (1) Any person, partnership or corporation,
or any other type of organization where two or more persons have a financial
interest, who is found to have violated this chapter shall be fined a definite sum
not exceeding the maximum fine for the violation of any Springfield municipal
ordinance; such violation shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of
any license.
(2) Each violation of this part shall be considered a separate offense,
and any violation continuing more than twenty-four (24) hours shall be
considered a separate offense for each day of violation. (As added by
Ord. #95-19, § 1, Oct. 1995)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 10-1
TITLE 10
ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL
SECTION
1. IN GENERAL.
2. DOGS AND CATS.
3. VICIOUS DOGS.
4. PIT BULLS.
CHAPTER 1
IN GENERAL
SECTION
10-101. Running at large prohibited.
10-102. Animals prohibited.
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean.
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided.
10-105. Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance prohibited.
10-106. Cruel treatment prohibited.
10-107. Seizure and disposition of animals.
10-108. Noisy pets prohibited.
10-109. Animal waste.
10-101. Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
owning or being in charge of any hogs, cows, swine, sheep, horses, mules, goats,
llamas, emus, or any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, or other domestic fowl,
cattle, or livestock, knowingly or negligently to permit any of them to run at
large in any street, alley, or unenclosed lot within the corporate limits. (1981
code, § 3-101, as replaced by Ord. #04-23, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #13-23, Jan.
2014)
10-102. Animals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
hogs, cows, swine, sheep, horses, mules, goats, llamas, emus, or any chickens,
ducks, geese, turkeys, or other domestic fowl, cattle or livestock within the
corporate limits unless the property is zoned agriculture and contains five (5) or
more acres.
This section shall not be applicable to property used to keep the
aforementioned animals as of the effective date of the enactment of this chapter.
The keeping of said animals shall be treated as a non-conforming use as
authorized by the Springfield Zoning Ordinance. At such time as the property
ceases to be used to keep said animals, this section shall be applicable to said
property. (as replaced by Ord. #04-23, Nov. 2004, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 10-2
10-103. Pen or enclosure to be kept clean. When animals or fowls are
kept within the corporate limits, the building structure, corral, pen, or enclosure
in which they are kept shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. (1981 code, § 3-103, and replaced by Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-104. Adequate food, water, and shelter, etc., to be provided. No animal
or fowl shall be kept or confined in any place where the food, water, shelter, and
ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the preservation of its health,
safe condition, and wholesomeness for food if so intended. (1981 code, § 3-104,
and replaced by Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-105. Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance prohibited. No
animal or fowl shall be kept in such a place or condition as to become a nuisance
because of either noise, odor, contagious disease, or other reason. (1981 code, § 3-
105, and replaced by Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-106. Cruel treatment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to beat or otherwise abuse or injure any animal or fowl. (1981 code, § 3-106, and
replaced by Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-107. Seizure and disposition of animals. Any animal or fowl found
running at large or otherwise being kept in violation of this chapter may be
seized by the animal care and control officer or by any police officer and confined
in a pound provided or designated by the governing body. If the owner is known
he shall be given notice in person, by telephone, or by a postcard addressed to
his last-known mailing address. The notice shall state that the impounded
animal or fowl must be claimed within seven (7) days by paying the pound costs
or the same will be humanely destroyed or sold. If not claimed by the owner, the
animal or fowl shall be sold or humanely destroyed, or it may otherwise be
disposed of as authorized by the governing body. (1981 code, § 3-107, and
replaced by Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-108. Noisy pets prohibited. No person shall own, keep or harbor any
animal which by loud and frequent barking, whining, howling or other noise,
annoys or disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood. (as added by
Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014
10-109. Animal waste. The owner of every animal shall be responsible for
the removal of any excreta deposited by their animal(s) on public walks and
property, recreation areas, or private property belonging to others. Every owner
while in the process of walking or riding his animal(s) shall be required to carry
on his person a bag or scooping device of adequate size to collect and carry the
excreta to be removed so that it can be disposed of in a proper and sanitary
manner. This section shall not apply to guide dogs and other service animals.
(as added by Ord. #15-20, Nov. 2015)
Change 17, February 20, 2018 10-3
CHAPTER 2
DOGS AND CATS
SECTION
10-201. Definitions.
10-202. Vaccinations.
10-203. Dogs not to run at large.
10-204. Impoundment; redemption by owner.
10-205. Disposition of unlicensed or unclaimed dogs/cats.
10-206. Confinement of dogs/cats which have bitten persons, are suspected of
rabies, etc.
10-207. Authority to impound dogs/cats.
10-208. Interfering with police officers or health department officials.
10-209. Law enforcement work dogs.
10-210. Destruction of vicious or infected dogs running at large.
10-211. [Deleted.]
10-201. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
(1) "Owner." Any person having a right of property in a dog or cat, or
who keeps, harbors or habitually feeds a dog or cat, or who has it in his care, or
acts as its custodian, or who permits a dog or cat to habitually remain on or
about any premises occupied by that person.
(2) "Vaccination." The process whereby an animal is immunized
against rabies using a vaccine and a technique approved by the board of health.
(3) "City veterinarian." Person employed or hired on a contract basis
by the City of Springfield who meets the standards of veterinary medicine for
the State of Tennessee. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced by Ord. #96-54, § 1,
Feb. 1997, Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-202. Vaccinations. (1) Vaccinations of dogs or cats required. It shall
be unlawful for any owner to keep, harbor or permit to remain on or about any
premises any dog or cat over six (6) months of age which has not been vaccinated
against rabies as required by the board of health. A certificate of such
vaccination shall be issued by a licensed veterinarian duly authorized to
administer such a vaccination, and such certificate shall be kept by the person
who owns, keeps, or harbors such dog or cat, subject to the inspection of the
animal care and control and police departments.
(2) Standard for vaccine and vaccination. It shall be the duty of the
veterinarian, duly licensed by the state board of veterinary medical examiners
and approval by the board of health, to administer such a vaccination and to
Change 18, February 20, 2018 10-4
perform such vaccination in such a manner as meets the standard of the State
Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, and replaced
by Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-203. Dogs not to run at large. (1) Every person owning or having
possession, charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall keep such dog
exclusively upon his own premises; provided, however, that such dog may be off
such premises if it is under the control of a competent person and restrained by
a chain, leash, or other restraining device being no greater than fifteen feet (15')
in length. A dog, not classified as vicious, that is upon the running board or in
the bed of a truck, or is enclosed within the cab of a vehicle shall be considered
on the premises of the owner.
(2) Any dog found running at large or any dog or cat found without a
proper rabies tag may be seized by the proper authorities of the animal control
and police departments. Any owner whose dog is found to be running at large
or whose dog or cat has not been vaccinated against rabies shall be guilty of a
violation.
(3) When any person is charged with a violation of this section, the
animal control officer, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to
issue a citation for such violation. When a citation is issued for the violation of
this section, it shall be the duty of the court in which such case is set for trial to
try the same without the issuance or service of a warrant upon such defendant,
provided the defendant has signed a waiver on such citation agreeing to come
to court and waiving the issuance and service of a warrant upon him.
(Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced by Ord. #96-54, § 1, Feb. 1997, Ord. #00-01,
March 2000, Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, Ord. #12-01, April 2012, Ord. #13-23, Jan.
2014, and Ord. #15-21, Nov. 2015)
10-204. Impoundment; redemption by owner. When any dog is found
running at large or when any dog or cat is found without a proper rabies tag, it
shall be impounded, and the owner, if the dog/cat bears a tag of identification,
shall be sent by mail a postcard addressed to the last known mailing address or
notified in person, to appear within five (5) days and redeem his dog/cat, and he
shall pay the established impoundment fee for each dog/cat so seized and
impounded, and the established boarding fee for each day or fraction thereof the
dog/cat remains unclaimed. It the dog/cat so seized has not been vaccinated, the
owner shall, before he is permitted to regain possession of such dog/cat, have
such dog/cat vaccinated and licensed and present the license registration to the
animal care and control authority. No impounded dog shall be released without
wearing a collar and a leash.
The payment of this fee and the delivery of the dog/cat to the owner shall
not relieve the owner from any other penalty for the violation of this chapter. If
the owner does not appear after notice has been mailed to him, or if after
appearing, declines to pay the fee as set out about and redeem his dog/cat, the
dog/cat shall be disposed of in accordance with § 10-205. If the dog/cat
10-5
impounded does not have the proper collar and rabies tag, the dog/cat shall be
disposed of in three (3) days, in accordance with § 10-205. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec.
1990, as replaced by Ord. #96-54, § 1, Feb. 1998, Ord. #00-01, March 2000,
Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-205. Disposition of unlicensed or unclaimed dogs/cats. (1) It shall be
the duty of the animal care and control officer to keep all dogs/cats so
impounded for the period of three (3) days. Any dog/cat found without a proper
rabies tag is not redeemed or claimed at the expiration of three (3) days from the
date notice is mailed to the owner, such dog/cat may be disposed of as follows:
(a) Whenever any individual shall apply to the animal control
department for permission to adopt any impounded dog/cat remaining
unclaimed, the animal care and control department may surrender such
dogs/cats to the individual for adoption upon a payment of the established
fees set by the board of mayor and aldermen.
All animals adopted from the shelter shall be vaccinated against
rabies, and spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian. The costs of
these services shall be included in the established fees for adoption
services. If the dog or cat is not sexually mature at the time of adoption,
the new owner shall sign a written agreement with the animal care and
control department stating that the new owner shall have the dog or cat
spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days
after the dog or cat reaches six (6) months of age.
All animals adopted shall have a collar and leash, either furnished
or purchased by the persons adopting the animals, when they leave the
animal shelter.
(b) Whenever any dogs/cats remain unclaimed, such dogs/cats
may be destroyed in manner to be determined by the animal care and
control officer.
(2) Any unidentified dog/cat which the animal care and control officer
determines to be suffering from rabies or other infections or dangerous diseases
or to be in misery, need not be released, but may be disposed of immediately.
(3) Nothing in this part shall be construed to authorize the animal care
and control department to spay or neuter a dog or cat, if such dog or cat is being
claimed by and returned to its lawful owner. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as
replaced by Ord. #96-54, § 1, Feb. 1997, Ord. #00-01, March 2000, Ord. #00-26,
Jan. 2001, Ord. #01-27, Aug. 2001, Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23,
Jan. 2014)
10-206. Confinement of dogs/cats which have bitten persons, are
suspected of rabies, etc. If any animal has bitten any person, or is suspected of
having bitten any person, or is for any reason suspected of being infected with
rabies, the animal care and control officer may cause the animal to be confined
or isolated for such time as it is deemed necessary to protect the safety of people
10-6
and property. Such confinement or isolation shall be at a place designated by the
animal care and control officer or health department. (Ord. #90-16, Dec. 1990,
as replaced by Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-207. Authority to impound dogs/cats. All police officers and animal
care and control officers or other duly authorized persons shall have the right
to take up and put into the City of Springfield shelter any dog/cat found in
violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced
by Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-208. Interfering with police officers or health department officials. It
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder any police officer or
any official of the health department, including the animal care and control
officer, in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty in enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced by Ord. #08-27,
Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-209. Law enforcement work dogs. The provisions of this chapter do not
apply to a dog being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law
enforcement officer's official duties. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced by
Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-210. Destruction of vicious or infected dogs running at large. When,
because of its viciousness or apparent infection with rabies, a dog found running
at large cannot be safely impounded it may be summarily destroyed by any
policeman or other properly designated officer. (as added by Ord. #00-01, March
2000, and replaced by Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008, and Ord. #13-23, Jan. 2014)
10-211. [Deleted.] (as added by Ord. #00-01, March 2000, and deleted by
Ord. #08-27, Nov. 2008)
10-7
CHAPTER 3
VICIOUS DOGS
SECTION
10-301. Definitions.
10-302. Vicious dogs prohibited.
10-303. Impoundment; proceedings against owner.
10-301. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
(1) "Confined" shall mean securely confined indoors, within an
automobile or other vehicle, or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen
or structure upon the premises of the owner of such dog. Such pen or structure
must have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom
secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than
two (2) feet.
(2) "Vicious dog" shall mean any dog which attacks or bites a person
or a domestic animal on any public or private property without provocation, or
any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting. (Ord.
# 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced by Ord. #00-27, Jan. 2001)
10-302. Vicious dogs prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor a vicious dog within the area of the City of Springfield unless the
vicious dog is confined. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced by Ord. #00-27,
Jan. 2001)
10-303. Impoundment; proceedings against owner. (1) Impoundment.
Any vicious dog, may be taken into custody by the appropriate authorities of the
Springfield Police Department and impounded. The fees imposed shall be
imposed upon and paid by the owner of such vicious dog so impounded to cover
the costs of the City of Springfield in impounding the dog.
(2) Court proceeding against owner. If any vicious dog is impounded,
the appropriate authorities of the Springfield Police Department may institute
proceedings in the Springfield City Court against the owner charging the owner
with violation of this division. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
preventing appropriate authorities of the Springfield government or a
complaining citizen from instituting a proceeding in the Springfield City Court
for violation of this division where there has been no impoundment.
(3) Court findings. If a complaint has been filed in the Springfield City
Court against the owner of a dog for violation of this division, the dog shall not
be released from impoundment or disposed of except on order of the court,
payment of all charges and costs under this chapter, including penalties for
violating this chapter. The court may, upon making a finding that the dog is a
10-8
vicious dog pursuant to this chapter, order the dog to be destroyed in an humane
manner by the department of health. (Ord. # 90-16, Dec. 1990, as replaced by
Ord. #00-27, Jan. 2001)
Change 15, December 20, 2011 10-9
CHAPTER 4
PIT BULLS
SECTION
10-401. Definitions.
10-402. Restrictions.
10-403. Standards and requirements.
10-404. Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited.
10-405. Animals born of registered dogs.
10-406. Rebuttable presumption.
10-407. Failure to comply.
10-408. Violations and penalties.
10-401. Definitions. The word pit bull as used in this chapter shall have
the following meanings:
(1) The bull terrier breed of dog; and
(2) Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog; and
(3) The American pit bull terrier breed of dog; and
(4) The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog, all of the above
breeds to be identified as described by the American Kennel Club and United
Kennel Club; and
(5) Dogs of mixed breed or of other breeds than above listed which
breed or mixed breed is known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; and
(6) Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breeds of bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, American
pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier; and any other breed commonly
known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; or a combination of any of
these breeds. (as added by Ord. #00-28, Jan. 2001, and replaced by Ord. #11-10,
Dec. 2011)
10-402. Restrictions. It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any
way possess a pit bull dog within the corporate limits of Springfield, Tennessee,
except as provided in this chapter. (as added by Ord. #00-28, Jan. 2001, and
replaced by Ord. # 11-10, Dec. 2011)
10-403. Standards and requirements. The following standards and
requirements apply to pit bull dogs located within the corporate limits.
(1) Registration. Each owner, keeper, harborer, or possessor of a pit
bull dog shall register such dog with the city recorder.
(2) Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to go
outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no
longer than four feet (4') in length. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to be
kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a
Change 15, December 20, 2011 10-10
person of suitable age and discretion is in physical control of the leash. Such
dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, or
structures. In addition, a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from
biting persons or other animals shall muzzle all pit bull dogs on a leash outside
the animals' kennel.
(3) Confinement. All pit bull dogs shall be securely confined indoors or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and
muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure
sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine pit
bull dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are
within the structure and the structure must have a secure floor attached to the
sides of the pen or the sides or the pen must be embedded in the ground no less
than two feet (2'). All structures erected to house pit bull dogs shall comply with
all zoning and building ordinances and regulations of the City of Springfield and
shall be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(4) Confinement indoors. No pit bull dog may be kept on a porch, patio
or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such
building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog may be kept in a house or
structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors
are the only obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
(5) Signs. All owners, keepers, harborers, or possessors of pit bull dogs
shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by
the public using the words "Beware of Dog." In addition, a similar sign is
required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal.
(6) Identification photographs. All owners, keepers, possessors, or
harborers of pit bull dogs must provide to the city recorder two (2) color
photographs of the dog clearly showing the color and approximate size of the
animal.
(7) Reporting requirements. All owners, keepers, possessors, or
harborers of pit bull dogs shall within ten (10) days of the incident report the
following information in writing to the city recorder as required hereinafter:
(a) The removal from the city or death of a pit bull dog; or
(b) The birth of offspring of a pit bull dog; or
(c) The new address of a pit bull dog owner should the owner
move within the corporate limits of the city. (as added by Ord. #00-28,
Jan. 2001, and replaced by Ord. # 11-10, Dec. 2011)
10-404. Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited. No person shall sell,
barter or in any other way transfer possession of a pit bull dog to any person
within the City of Springfield unless the recipient person registers the pit bull
dog with the city recorder at the time of transfer. The owner of a pit bull dog
may sell or otherwise dispose of a pit bull dog or the offspring of such dog to
Change 15, December 20, 2011 10-11
persons who do not reside within the City of Springfield. (as added by
Ord. #00-28, Jan. 2001, and replaced by Ord. # 11-10, Dec. 2011)
10-405. Animals born of registered dogs. All offspring born of pit bull
dogs within the City of Springfield shall be registered with the city recorder
within six (6) weeks of the birth of such animal. (as added by Ord. #00-28, Jan.
2001, and replaced by Ord. # 11-10, Dec. 2011)
10-406. Rebuttable presumptions. There shall be a rebuttable
presumption that any dog registered within the City of Springfield as a pit bull
dog or any of those breeds defined by § 10-401 hereof is in fact a dog subject to
the requirements of this chapter. (as added by Ord. #00-28, Jan. 2001, and
replaced by Ord. # 10-11, Dec. 2011)
10-407. Failure to comply. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper,
harborer, or possessor of a pit bull dog within the City of Springfield to fail to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any dog found to be subject of a
violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate seizure and
impoundment. In addition, failure to comply will result in the revocation of the
license of such animal resulting in the immediate removal of the animal from
the City of Springfield. (as added by Ord. #00-28, Jan. 2001, and replaced by
Ord. # 11-10, Dec. 2011)
10-408. Violations and penalties Any persons violating or permitting the
violation of any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
the fine prescribed in the general penalty clause of the Springfield Municipal
Code. Each day that such violation shall continue constitutes a separate offense.
Further, the city court may order the dog removed from the City of Springfield.
Should the defendant refuse to remove the dog from the City of Springfield, the
city judge shall find the defendant in contempt and order the immediate
confiscation and impoundment of the animal. In addition to the foregoing
penalties, any person who violates this chapter shall pay all expenses, including
sums for shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and expert testimony, which
are necessitated by the person's failure to abide by the provisions of this code.
(as added by Ord. #00-28, Jan. 2001, and replaced by Ord. # 11-10, Dec. 2011)
Change 12, February 20, 2007 11-1
Ord. #094-14 (Sept. 1994) added these provisions as section 11-107. 1
However, since there was only one section in title 11, chapter 1, these provisions
were added as section 11-102.
TITLE 11
MUNICIPAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER
1. GENERALLY.
2. ENUMERATED.
3. FALSE ALARMS.
CHAPTER 1
GENERALLY
SECTION
11-101. Misdemeanors of the state adopted.
11-102. Possession of weapons at meetings unlawful.
11-101. Misdemeanors of the state adopted. Pursuant to Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 16-18-302(a), the municipal court for the City of Springfield
possesses jurisdiction in and over cases for violation of the laws and ordinances
of the municipality; or arising under the laws and ordinances of the
municipality; and the City of Springfield municipal court also possesses
jurisdiction to enforce any municipal law or ordinance that mirrors,
substantially duplicates or incorporates by cross-reference the language of a
state criminal statue if, and only if, the state criminal statute duplicated or
cross referenced is a class C misdemeanor. (1981 Code, § 10-101, as replaced
Ord. #06-21, Oct. 2006)
11-102. Possession of weapons at meetings unlawful. (1) It shall be 1
unlawful for any individual or employee to possess a weapon at meetings
conducted by, or on premises owned, operated, managed or under control of the
City or Springfield. Notice of such prohibition shall be posted or otherwise
noticed to all affected employees. (Public Chapter No. 943, SECTION 9. TCA
Code 39-17-1315)
(2) This prohibition does not apply to any certified law enforcement
officer of the State of Tennessee who is charged with the enforcement of the laws
of this state.
(3) Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be brought
before the city court of the City of Springfield with a fine not to exceed the
maximum allowed by state law. (Ord. 094-14, §§ 1--3, Sept. 1994)
11-2
CHAPTER 2
ENUMERATED
SECTION
11-201. Assault and battery.
11-202. Disorderly conduct.
11-203. Indecent or improper exposure or dress.
11-204. Escape from custody or confinement.
11-205. Resisting or interfering with city personnel.
11-206. Impersonating a government officer or employee.
11-207. Weapons and firearms generally.
11-208. Throwing of missiles.
11-209. False emergency alarms, reports, etc.
11-210. Trespassing on trains.
11-211. [Repealed.]
11-212. Abandoned refrigerators, etc.
11-213. Curfew for minors.
11-214. Malicious mischief.
11-215. Trespassing.
11-216. Posting notices, etc.
11-217. Drinking beer, etc., on streets, etc.
11-218. Coercing people not to work.
11-219. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc.
11-220. Interference with traffic.
11-221. Anti-noise regulations.
11-222. Fortune telling, etc.
11-223. Criminal trespass.
11-224. Trespass by motor vehicle.
11-201. Assault and battery. An "assault" is an unlawful attempt,
coupled with a present ability, to commit a bodily injury on the person of
another.
(1) It shall be unlawful to beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict
violence on another where the circumstances show malice.
(2) It shall be unlawful to assault another with intent to commit
murder, rape, mayhem, robbery or larceny.
(3) It shall be unlawful to assault another with a lethal or dangerous
weapon, instrument or thing with intent to commit upon the person of another
any bodily injury where no considerable provocation appears or where the
circumstances of the assault show malice. (1981 code, § 10-201)
11-202. Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person within
the area of the City of Springfield, Tennessee, to violate any of the following
subsections of this section:
11-3
(1) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner
toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or
health; or
(2) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner
toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being
destroyed or damaged; or
(3) Any person who shall disturb the peace of others by conduct or
"fighting words" calculated to provoke violence or violation of the law.
(4) Any person who shall cause, provoke, or engage in any fight, brawl
or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another;
or
(5) Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to
obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks,
artifices or devices; or
(6) Any person who shall accost or attempt to force his company upon
any female or attempt to pick up any female; or
(7) Any person who shall use "fighting words" directed towards any
person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; or
(8) Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's
pursuit of a lawful occupation; or
(9) Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on
any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful
authority.
Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be
charged with the offense of "disorderly conduct," and on conviction thereof, may
be found guilty of disorderly conduct. (1981 code, § 10-202)
11-203. Indecent or improper exposure or dress. It shall be unlawful for
any person publicly to appear naked or in any indecent or lewd dress, or
otherwise to make any indecent exposure of his or her person. (1981 code,
§ 10-206)
11-204. Escape from custody or confinement. It shall be unlawful for any
person under arrest or otherwise in custody of or confined by the municipality
to escape or attempt to escape, or for any other person to assist or encourage
such person to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement.
(1981 code, § 10-209)
11-205. Resisting or interfering with city personnel. It shall be unlawful
for any person knowingly to resist or in any way interfere with or attempt to
interfere with any officer or employee of the municipality while such officer or
employee is performing or attempting to perform his municipal duties. (1981
code, § 10-210)
11-4
11-206. Impersonating a government officer or employee. No person
other than an official police officer of the municipality shall wear the uniform,
apparel, or badge, or carry any identification card or other insignia of office like
or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the
official police officers of the municipality. Furthermore, no person shall
deceitfully impersonate or represent that he is any government officer or
employee. (1981 code, § 10-211)
11-207. Weapons and firearms generally. It shall be unlawful for any
person to carry in any manner whatever, with the intent to go armed, any razor,
dirk, knife, blackjack, brass knucks, pistol, revolver, or any other dangerous
weapon or instrument. It shall also be unlawful for any unauthorized person to
discharge a firearm within the municipality. (1981 code, § 10-212)
11-208. Throwing of missiles. It shall be unlawful for any person
maliciously to throw any stone, snowball, bottle, or any other missile upon or at
any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property or upon or at any
person. (1981 code, § 10-214)
11-209. False emergency alarms, reports, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person intentionally to make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for
police or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the commission of such an
act. It shall also be unlawful for any person knowingly to make to the police
department any other false, misleading, or unfounded report, or knowingly to
offer any false, misleading, or unfounded information of any type whatsoever,
for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the police department or with
the intention of misleading any police officer. (1981 code, § 10-217)
11-210. Trespassing on trains. It shall be unlawful for any person to
climb, jump, step, stand upon, or cling to, or in any other way attach himself to
any locomotive engine or railroad car unless he works for the railroad
corporation and is acting in the scope of his employment or unless he is a lawful
passenger or is otherwise lawfully entitled to be on such vehicle. (1981 code,
§ 10-221)
11-211. [Repealed.] This section was repealed by Ord. #99-11, § 2, May
1999. (1981 code, § 10-222, as repealed by Ord. #99-11, § 2, May 1999)
11-212. Abandoned refrigerators, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended, unused,
or discarded refrigerator, icebox, or other container with any type latching or
locking door without first removing therefrom the latch, lock, or door. (1981
code, § 10-223)
11-213. Curfew for minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years to idle, wander, stroll, remain or play on or upon the
11-5
public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public
grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, or
vacant lots between the hours of 12 midnight and 5:00 A.M. the following day,
unless the minor is accompanied by his parent or parents, guardian, or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or the minor is returning
directly home from a meeting, entertainment, recreational activity, dance, or
place of employment. (Ord. # 85-04, Sept. 1985)
11-214. Malicious mischief. It shall be unlawful and deemed to be
malicious mischief for any person willfully, maliciously, or wantonly to damage,
deface, destroy, conceal, tamper with, remove, or withhold real or personal
property which does not belong to him. (1981 code, § 10-225)
11-215. Trespassing. The owner or person in charge of any lot or parcel
of land or any building or other structure within the corporate limits may post
the same against trespassers. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any
such posted lot or parcel of land or into any such posted building or other
structure without the consent of the owner or person in charge.
It shall also be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass for any peddler,
canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, or other person to fail to leave promptly
the private premises of any person who requests or directs him to leave. (1981
code, § 10-226)
11-216. Posting notices, etc. No person shall fasten, in any way, any
show-card, poster, or other advertising device upon any public or private
property unless legally authorized to do so. (1981 code, § 10-227)
11-217. Drinking beer, etc., on streets, etc. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drink or consume, or have an open container of beer or intoxicating
liquor in or on any public street, alley, avenue, highway, sidewalk, public park,
public school ground, or other public place unless the place has an appropriate
permit and/or license for on premises consumption. (1981 code, § 10-229)
11-218. Coercing people not to work. It shall be unlawful for any person
in association or agreement with any other person to assemble, congregate, or
meet together in the vicinity of any premises where other persons are employed
or reside for the purpose of inducing any such other person by threats, coercion,
intimidation, or acts of violence to quit or refrain from entering a place of lawful
employment. It expressly is not the purpose of this section to prohibit peaceful
picketing. (1981 code, § 10-230)
11-219. Caves, wells, cisterns, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit to be maintained on property owned or occupied by him any cave, well,
cistern, or other such opening in the ground which is dangerous to life and limb
without placing thereon an adequate cover or safeguard. (1981 code, § 10-231)
11-6
11-220. Interference with traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stand, sit, or engage in any activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk,
bridge, or public ground in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere
unreasonably with the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon.
(1981 code, § 10-232)
11-221. Anti-noise regulations. Subject to the provisions of this section,
the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise is
prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental
to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and
welfare is prohibited.
(1) Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. The following acts,
among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in
violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
(a) Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device
on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck, or other vehicle while not in
motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching,
apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or
as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended;
the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud
or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
(b) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio,
phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but
not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or
amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with
motion pictures, radio, or television, in such a manner or with such
volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.,
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office
or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any
person in the vicinity.
(c) Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling, or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of any persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel, or other
type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.
(d) Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any person in the vicinity.
(e) Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck,
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to cause loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
(f) Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to
11-7
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of
proper municipal authorities.
(g) Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(h) Building operations. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in any residential area or
section or the construction or repair of streets and highways in any
residential area or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and
6:00 P.M. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building
inspector granted for a period while the emergency continues not to
exceed thirty (30) days. If the building inspector should determine that
the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of
streets and highways between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., and
if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to
any party in interest through delay, he may grant permission for such
work to be done between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or
during the process of the work.
(i) Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation
of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is
in session.
(j) Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud
and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and other
containers.
(k) Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum,
loudspeaker, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose
of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale or display of
merchandise.
(l) Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of
mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or
standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes.
(2) Exceptions. None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply
to or be enforced against:
(a) Municipal vehicles. Any vehicle of the municipality while
engaged upon necessary public business.
(b) Repair of streets, etc. Excavations or repairs of bridges,
streets, or highways at night, by or on behalf of the municipality, the
county, or the state, when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impracticable to perform such work during the day.
11-8
(c) Noncommercial and nonprofit use of loudspeakers or
amplifiers. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the
course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character and in
the course of advertising functions sponsored by nonprofit organizations.
However, no such use shall be made until a permit therefor is secured
from the city recorder. Hours for the use of an amplifier or public address
system will be designated in the permit so issued and the use of such
systems shall be restricted to the hours so designated in the permit.
(1981 code, § 10-233)
11-222. Fortune telling, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold
himself forth to the public as a fortune teller, clairvoyant, hypnotist, spiritualist,
palmist, phrenologist, or other mystic endowed with supernatural powers. (1981
code, § 10-234)
11-223. Criminal trespass. (1) A person commits criminal trespass who,
knowing he does not have the owner's effective consent to do so, enters or
remains on property, or a portion thereof. Knowledge that the person did not
have the owner's effective consent may be inferred where notice against entering
or remaining is given by:
(a) Personal communication to the person by the owner or by
someone with apparent authority to act for the owner;
(b) Fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to exclude
intruders; or
(c) Posting reasonably likely to come to the attention of
intruders.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
(a) The property was open to the public when the person
entered and remained;
(b) The person's conduct did not substantially interfere with the
owner's use of the property; and
(c) The person immediately left the premises upon request.
(3) For purposes of this section, "enter" means intrusion of the entire
body. (1981 code, § 10-236, as replaced by Ord. # 094-19, Oct. 1994)
11-224. Trespass by motor vehicle. (1) Any person who drives, parks,
stands, or otherwise operates a motor vehicle on, through or within a parking
area, driving area or roadway located on privately owned property which is
provided for use by patrons, customers or employees of business establishments
upon such property, or adjoining property or for use otherwise in connection
with activities conducted upon such property, or adjoining property, after such
person has been requested or ordered to leave the property or to cease doing any
of the foregoing actions is guilty of a trespass. A request or order under this
section may be given by a law enforcement officer or by the owner, lessee, or
other person having the right to the use or control of the property, or any
11-9
authorized agent or representative thereof, including, but not limited to, private
security guards hired to patrol the property.
(2) As used in this section, "motor vehicle" includes an automobile,
truck, van, bus, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, motor bike, mo-ped,
go-cart, all terrain vehicle, dune buggy, and any other vehicle propelled by
motor.
(3) A property owner, lessee or other person having the right to the use
or control of property may post signs or other notices upon a parking area,
driving area or roadway giving notice of this section and warning that violators
will be prosecuted; provided, however, that the posting of signs or notices shall
not be a requirement of prosecution under this section and failure to post signs
or notices shall not be a defense to prosecution hereunder. (as added by Ord.
# 094-19, Oct. 1994)
11-10
These provisions were taken from Ord. #095-20. Section 5 of 1
Ord. #095-20 provides "That this ordinance shall take effect February 1, 1996
after its passage upon third and final reading, the public welfare and the
welfare of the city requiring it." This ordinance passed third and final reading
November 21, 1995.
CHAPTER 3
FALSE ALARMS1
SECTION
11-301. Definitions.
11-302. Classification of alarm systems.
11-303. Nonconforming systems.
11-304. Class I alarm system.
11-305. Class II alarm system.
11-306. Class III alarm system.
11-307. Alarm system requirements, generally.
11-308. Permits required.
11-309. Permit application.
11-310. Issuance of permit and decal.
11-311. Permit fees.
11-312. Term of permit and renewal.
11-313. Inspection of alarm systems.
11-314. Current information required.
11-315. False alarm fees.
11-316. Appeals.
11-317. Fee assessment.
11-318. Notices.
11-319. Penalty.
11-301. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires:
(1) "Alarm system." A device or system of interconnected devices,
including hardware and related appurtenances, mechanical or electrical,
designed to give warning of activities indicative of felony or criminal conduct
requiring urgent attention and fire alarms to which the police department
and/or fire department are expected to respond, but does not include alarms
installed in conveyances.
(2) "Alarm user." The person, firm, partnership association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure or facility or portion thereof, wherein an alarm system is maintained.
(3) "Annunciator." That part of an alarm system, other than an
automatic dialer, which communicates the fact that the system has been
triggered.
11-11
(4) "Audible annunciator." An annunciator which gives alarm by
means of a bell, siren, buzzer or similar sound producing device mounted at
some location other than wholly within a building; or which, when activated, is
clearly audible at a distance of fifty feet or more outside of any building in which
it is mounted.
(5) "Automatic dialer." A device which is programmed to select a
telephone number and deliver a warning message or signal over standard
telephone lines using telephone voice communication equipment.
(6) "Chief." The chief of police of the City of Springfield or a police
officer under his jurisdiction designated by him to exercise any power or duty
conferred under this chapter.
(7) "Department." The City of Springfield Police Department.
(8) "Springfield Police Department telephone line." A telephone line
which rings or terminates on the premises of the Springfield Police Department.
(9) "False alarm." Any activation of an alarm system upon or following
which communication is made to the department that an alarm has been
triggered, except alarms resulting from one of the following causes:
(a) Criminal activity or unauthorized entry,
(b) Alarms caused by acts of nature such as hurricanes,
tornadoes, other severe weather conditions,
(c) Fire causing structural damage to the protected premises
verified by the fire department,
(d) Telephone line malfunction verified in writing to the
department by at least a first line telephone company supervisor within
seven days of the occurrence.
If the alarm when communicated to the department before an officer is
dispatched to investigate is clearly identified to the department as resulting
from authorized entry, authorized system test or other non-criminal cause, it
shall not be considered as a false alarm. If police units responding to an alarm
and checking the protected premises according to standard department
operating procedure, do not discover any evidence of unauthorized entry or
criminal activity, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the alarm is
false. Entries in the police department computer system shall be prima facie
evidence of the facts stated therein with regard to alarms and responses.
(10) "On-premise annunciator." An annunciator which is designed to
give warning only to a person or persons on the protected premises, and which
is neither an "audible" or "remote" annunciator as those terms are defined in
this section.
(11) "Hearing officer." An employee of the City of Springfield
designated by the chief of police to act as an impartial arbitrator at hearings
related to the enforcement of the herein chapter.
(12) "Protected premises." All of that contiguous area, including
buildings, protected by a single alarm system and under common ownership and
use.
(13) "Remote annunciator." An annunciator located at a terminal not
a part of the protected premises.
11-12
(14) "Sensor." That part of an alarm system which is designated to
detect the happenings of some event or existence of some condition indicative of
criminal activity or unauthorized entry.
(15) "Visual annunciator." An annunciator installed entirely on the
protected premises and which gives inaudible warning by means of a flashing
light or other visible signal.
(16) "Calendar year." January 1 through December 31. (As added by
Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-302. Classification of alarm systems. (1) A Class I Alarm System is
one which incorporates a remote annunciator installed at a place other than on
the premises of the city, which does not incorporate an automatic dialer.
(2) A Class II Alarm System is one which incorporates an automatic
dialer not programmed to select Springfield Police Department telephone line.
(3) A Class III Alarm System is one which the only annunciator is an
audible annunciator located at the protected premises, and which does not
incorporate an automatic dialer.
(4) Exempt alarm systems are: (a) those which incorporate only an
on-premises annunciator, a visual annunciator, or any combination thereof, (b)
alarm systems owned, maintained and monitored by any government law
enforcement agency to protect their premises, and (c) alarm systems protecting
property of the City of Springfield. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-303. Non conforming systems. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person,
natural or corporate, to sell, offer to sale, install, maintain, lease, operate or
assist in the operation of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system over any
telephone lines exclusively used by the public to directly request emergency
service from the City of Springfield Police Department.
No automatic telephone dialer shall be programmed to dial any telephone
number of the Springfield Police Department.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to sell,
offer to sell, install, maintain, lease or operate or assist in the operation of an
alarm system which terminates at the Springfield Police Department through
an annunciator panel. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-304. Class I alarm system. (1) Any person reporting to the police on
any alarm from a Class I Alarm System shall give the following information:
(a) The alarm system permit number, and principal of business
name;
(b) The type of premises (warehouse, residence, etc.) and the
name, if any, by which the premises are known;
(c) The address of the protected premises, which shall be
repeated a second time at the end of the message;
(d) The name and telephone number of some responsible person
having access to the protected premises; and
11-13
(e) The type of criminal activity indicated, e.g., burglary in
progress, robbery, etc.
(2) If the Class I Alarm System incorporates an audible annunciator,
it shall be subject to the requirements specified in section 11-306. (As added by
Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-305. Class II alarm system. (1) Any person reporting to the police on
any alarm from a Class II Alarm System shall give the information specified in
section 11-304.
(2) No Class II Alarm System shall be programmed to select any
telephone line the user of which has not previously given consent to such
programming.
(3) If the Class II Alarm System incorporates an audible annunciator,
it shall be subject to the requirements specified in section 11-306. (As added by
Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-306. Class III alarm system. (1) Each Class III Alarm System shall
be so programmed that each audible annunciator will automatically silence
within fifteen minutes after being activated, and will not sound again unless a
new act or circumstance triggers a sensor.
(2) No test of a Class III Alarm System shall be so conducted between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
(3) The chief of police may, by written notice, require the posting of the
information required by subsection (1) of section 11-304. (As added by Ord.
#095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-307. Alarm system requirements, generally. (1) No alarm system
shall be installed, used or maintained in violation of any of the requirements of
this code, or of any applicable statute, law or administrative regulation of the
United States of America, the State of Tennessee, or any administrative
rulemaking body thereof.
(2) The alarm user shall be responsible for training and re-training all
employees, family members and other persons who may make regular use of the
protected premises and who may, in the normal course of their activities, be in
a position to accidentally trigger a sensor. Such training shall include
procedures and practices to avoid accidental alarms, and steps to follow in the
event the system is accidentally triggered.
(3) The alarm user shall, at all times, be responsible for the proper
maintenance and repair of the system, and for the repair or replacement of any
component, method of installment, design feature or like condition which may
give rise to a false alarm.
(4) All alarm systems shall have a back-up power supply that will
become effective in the event of power failure or outage in the source of
electricity from the utility company.
(5) The application for a Class I, Class II and Class III Alarm System
Permit shall list the name and phone number of at least one (1) responsible
11-14
person (other than the principal or a member of his household) having access to
the premises who may be notified and assist the police in the event the alarm
is activated. The principal shall immediately notify the Springfield Police
Department of any changes in this information. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1,
Nov. 1995)
11-308. Permits required. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use
or maintain any alarm system without a current valid permit therefor.
(2) City police may refuse to respond to an alarm from a system
without a permit.
(3) No permit shall be required for an exempt alarm system as defined
in section 11-302 and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to such
systems.
(4) Violation of this provision shall be an infraction. Each day during
which the violation is maintained or continued shall be deemed a separate
infraction.
(5) In the event police investigate an alarm, the permit holder or an
agent shall cooperate by promptly coming to the premises upon request. Refusal
shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit.
(6) If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or
more structures having different addresses, a separate permit will be required
for each structure. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-309. Permit application. Each application for an alarm system
permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the chief of police and shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the principal of the
protected premises.
(2) The type of premises (home, office, variety store, etc.) and any
business name by which the premises is known.
(3) The address of the protected premises; including, if it is in a
residential, commercial or industrial complex (office building, apartment house,
shopping center, etc.) any name by which the complex is commonly known.
(4) The names, addresses and telephone numbers, including home
phone numbers, of all agents.
Change 13, July 15, 2008 11-15
(5) The number and type of annunciators and automatic dialers which
the alarm system incorporates, the location of all remote annunciators, and the
names and phone numbers of all persons or businesses which are or may be
preselected for automatic dialer contact.
(6) Each application shall list an emergency telephone number of the
alarm user or his representative to permit prompt notification of alarm calls and
facilities assisting the police in the inspection of the property. Changes in
emergency telephone numbers shall be kept current, and failure to provide
updated information may constitute grounds for revocation of the permit.
(7) The application shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed under
section 11-311. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-310. Issuance of permit and decal. (1) Upon receipt by the Springfield
Police Department of the permit application and fee, the chief shall undertake
whatever investigation he deems necessary. If it appears to the chief that the
proposed system will comply with the provisions of this chapter, he shall so
notify his designee who shall issue to the applicant a permit bearing an
identifying number specifying the class of alarm system for which it is issued
and setting forth the expiration date of the permit. The city shall not, by the
issuance of any alarm system permit, be obligated to respond or accord any
priority to an alarm from such system.
(2) A decal with the alarm user's permit number will be issued with
the alarm permit. This decal must be permanently posted on or near the front
entrance to the premises so that the information provided on the decal is visible
from the outside of the structure. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-311. Permit fees. The fees for alarm system permits and renewals
shall be as follows:
Class I $ 25.00 - Bi-Annually
Class II $ 25.00 - Bi-Annually
Class III $ 10.00 - One time only (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov.
1995)
11-312. Term of permit and renewal. (1) Class I and Class II Alarm
System Permits shall expire on December 31 of the second calendar year
following the year of issue.
(2) Class III Alarm System Permits have no expiration date and shall
be valid until terminated or suspended.
(3) An alarm system permit of any class shall automatically terminate
upon any change of principal, class of system or protected premises. No permit
may be transferred to another principal, different class of system or protected
premises. No refunds will be given on termination or suspension of any permit
for any reason.
11-16
(4) Renewal permits shall be dated January 1. The renewal permit
will not be issued until the fee is paid and a late charge of $5.00 per month will
be assessed on all permit holders who do not pay the renewal fee prior to
expiration of their existing permits. The renewal application shall contain the
principal's signed statement that there have been no changes in principal,
protected premises or class of alarm systems. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1,
Nov. 1995)
11-313. Inspection of alarm systems. Prior to issuing an alarm system
permit, and at any time thereafter during the term thereof, the chief of police
may inspect any alarm system for which a permit is required. Such inspection
shall be for the purpose of ascertaining that information furnished by the
applicant or permittee is correct, and that the system is maintained in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1,
Nov. 1995)
11-314. Current information required. Within ten days following any
change of circumstances which renders obsolete any of the information
submitted pursuant to section 11-309, the alarm user shall file an amendment
to his application setting forth the currently accurate information. No
additional fee shall be required unless the change has terminated the permit as
provided in section 11-312. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the permit. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-315. False alarm fees. (1) Whenever an alarm is activated in the city,
thereby requiring an emergency response to the location by the police
department, and the police department does respond, a police officer on the
scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the
system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact
required as indicated by the alarm system or whether in some way the alarm
system malfunctioned and thereby activated a false alarm.
(2) If the police officer at the scene of the activated alarm system
determines the alarm to be false, said officer shall make a report of the false
alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user, at
the address of the said alarm system installation location, advising alarm user
of the false alarm.
(3) The chief of police shall have the right to inspect any alarm system
on the premises to which a response has been made and he may cause an
inspection of such system to be made at any reasonable time thereafter to
determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of this chapter.
(As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-316. Appeals. (1) A hearing officer shall be appointed by the chief of
police to hear appeals from alarm users on the issue of whether the alarm
11-17
system in question activated a false alarm, as determined by a police officer at
the scene of such activated alarm.
(2) Upon receipt of any false alarm report from the city, the alarm user
shall have ten days, orally or in writing, to request a hearing before the said
hearing officer.
(3) At the hearing, which must be scheduled and concluded within 15
days from the date the request for same is received, the alarm user shall have
the right to present evidence and testimony.
(4) The hearing officer shall make written findings available to the
alarm user and the chief of police within ten days from the date the hearing is
concluded.
(5) A decision by the chief of police to uphold or to cancel the false
alarm report which is the subject of the herein section must be made within ten
days from the receipt of the above findings by the chief of police.
(6) Until all of the steps set forth in this section 11-316 have been
completed, the false alarm in question will be considered to have been genuine
and will not be considered the basis for the prima facie presumption that the
involved alarm system is malfunctioning. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1,
Nov. 1995)
11-317. Fee assessment. (1) It is hereby found and determined that all
false alarms constitute a public nuisance. The permit holder will be billed a
$25.00 service charge per false alarm occurrence after the third such false alarm
in any calendar year. Each service charge incurred shall be billed and payment
shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt thereof. Failure
to make payment within thirty (30) days of receipt of the bill shall result in the
user's permit being revoked.
(2) Any permit revoked shall not be reinstated until all outstanding
false alarm service charges are paid in full together with a $50.00 reinstatement
fee. There shall be no refund of any unused portion of a permit fee. (As added
by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
11-318. Notices. (1) Notice or billing from the city to any permit holder
shall be deemed to have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing
is deposited in the U.S. Mail, first class postage, prepaid, addressed to the
permit holder at the address shown in the city's permit records. A certificate
signed by the person who mailed the notice shall be prima facie evidence of the
facts stated therein with respect to such notice.
(2) Notice to the city or payment under this chapter shall be effective
when received at the appropriate city office. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1,
Nov. 1995)
11-319. Penalty. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any
provision of this chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding the
11-18
maximum fine for the violation of any Springfield Municipal Ordinance. Each
day during which violation is maintained or continued shall be deemed a
separate offense. (As added by Ord. #095-20, § 1, Nov. 1995)
Change 17, January 20, 2015 12-1
TITLE 12
BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES
CHAPTER
1. BUILDING CODES.
2. PLUMBING CODE.
3. [DELETED.]
4. MECHANICAL CODE.
5. [DELETED.]
6. FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE.
7. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
8. [DELETED.]
9. SLUM CLEARANCE.
10. RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGULATIONS.
11. BUILDING, UTILITY, ETC. CODES.
12. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
CHAPTER 11
BUILDING CODES
SECTION
12-101. Building code adopted.
12-102. Residential building code adopted.
12-103. Modifications to the building code.
12-104. Modifications to the residential building code.
12-105. Available in recorder's office.
12-106. Discontinuance of utilities.
12-107. Paved driveways required.
12-108. Paved driveways required for certificate of occupancy.
12-101. Building code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, use, occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenance connected or attached to any building or structure, the
1Municipal code reference
Fire code: title 7.
Gas code: title 19.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 12-2
International Building Code,1 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, including all appendices, addenda and supplements
thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, in its entirety, as part
of the Springfield Municipal Code, and is hereinafter referred to as the building
code. (Ord. #88-14, Nov. 1988, as replaced by Ord. #96-01, Feb. 1996,
Ord. #01-02, March 2001, Ord. #03-12, Aug. 2003, and Ord. #04-16, Nov. 2004,
Ord. #08-01, March 2008, and Ord. #14-14, Oct. 2014)
12-102. Residential building code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted
by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the
purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, repair, use, occupancy,
location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every one- and two-family
residential building or structure, the International Residential Code for Oneand
Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, including all appendices, addenda and supplements
thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, in its entirety, as part
of the Springfield Municipal Code, and is hereinafter referred to as the
residential building code. (1981 Code, § 4-102, as replaced by Ord. #96-01, Feb.
1996, Ord. #01-02, March 2001, Ord. #03-12, Aug. 2003, Ord. #04-16, Nov. 2004,
Ord. #08-01, March 2008, and Ord. #14-14, Oct. 2014)
12-103. Modifications to the building code. The International Building
Code, 2012 edition, adopted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby modified
as follows:
(1) Whenever the "building official" is referred to in this code, it shall,
for the purposes of the building code, mean such person as the City of
Springfield shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the building code.
(2) Sidewalks and driveway construction, when in the public
right-of-way and/or adjoining a public street, shall be approved by the director
of public works and/or city engineer in a written statement to the building
official prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(3) All permit fees and scales for calculating permit fees shall be
established by the board of mayor and aldermen by separate ordinance.
(4) Section 113 entitled "Board of Appeals" shall be rescinded in its
entirety and shall be substituted by the Construction Board of Adjustments and
Appeals as established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(5) Subsection 114.4, entitled "Violation penalties" shall be rescinded
in its entirety and shall be substituted by a new Subsection 114.4 to read as
follows:
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 12-3
114.4. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates a provision of
this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the building official,
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall
be subject to a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this code is committed or continued. (1981 Code, § 4-103, as replaced by
Ord. #96-01, Feb. 1996, Ord. #01-02, March 2001, Ord. #03-12, Aug. 2003,
Ord. #04-16, Nov. 2004, Ord. #08-01, March 2008, and Ord. #14-14, Oct.
2014)
12-104. Modifications to the residential building code. The International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, adopted by
the provisions of this chapter, is hereby modified as follows:
(1) Whenever the "building official" is referred to in this code, it shall,
for the purposes of the residential building code, mean such person as the City
of Springfield shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the residential building code.
(2) Sidewalk and driveway construction, when in the public right-ofway
and/or adjoining a public street, shall be approved by the director of public
works and/or city engineer in a written statement to the building official prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(3) All permit fees and scales for calculating permit fees shall be
established by the board of mayor and aldermen by separate ordinance.
(4) Section R112, entitled "Board of Appeals" shall be rescinded in its
entirety and shall be substituted by the Construction Board of Adjustments and
Appeals as established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(5) Subsection R 113.4, entitled "Violation penalties" shall be rescinded
in its entirety and shall be substituted by a new Subsection R113.4 to read as
follows: R113.4. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates a provision
of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be subject to
a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or
continued.
(6) Chapter 1 entitled "Scope and Administration" is amended by
amending section Rl02 entitled "Applicability" by amending subsection R102.6
entitled "Partial invalidity" by adding a new subsection R102.6.1 entitled
"Automatic sprinkler systems" to read as follows: R102.6.1 Automatic fire
Change 18, February 20, 2018 12-4
sprinkler systems. Any provisions contained within this code relating to
automatic fire sprinkler systems shall not be construed to be mandatory unless
specifically adopted in accordance with the provisions contained in Tennessee
Code Annotated title 68, section 120, part 101. However, should an automatic
fire sprinkler system be utilized, it must comply fully with all requirements
contained herein.
(7) Table R301.2(1) is amended by adding the following Design Criteria
in the appropriate fields: Ground Snow Load -- 15#, Wind -- 90 mph 3 sec gust,
Seismic Design Category -- C, Weathering -- Severe Frost Line Depth -- 12 in.,
Termite -- Moderate to Heavy, Winter Design Temp -- 14 deg. F, Ice Shield
Underlayment Required -- No, Flood Hazard -- See FEMA/DFIRM FloodMap,
Air Freezing Index -- 332, Mean Annual Temperature -- 59.2 deg. F.
(8) Chapter 11 entitled "Energy Efficiency" is amended by deleting
subsections N1101.1 to N1 105.6.3 in their entirety and substituting a new
subsection N1101.1 entitled "Scope" to read as follows: N1101.1 Scope. The
provisions of the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code shall regulate
the energy efficiency for the design and construction of buildings regulated by
this code.
(9) Appendix L entitled "Permit Fees" is deleted in its entirety.
(10) Section R313.1 regarding Automatic Sprinkler systems in
Townhouses, replace the existing exception with the following exception: "An
automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required if a 2 hour fire
resistance rated wall exists between units, if such walls do not contain plumbing
and/or mechanical equipment, ducts, or vents in the common wall."
(11) Delete Section R313.2 Automatic Sprinkler systems in 1&2 Family
Dwellings. (1981 Code, § 4-104, as replaced by Ord. #96-01, Feb. 1996, Ord.
#01-02, March 2001, Ord. #03-12, Aug. 2003, Ord. #04-16, Nov. 2004,
Ord. #08-01, March 2008, Ord. #14-14, Oct. 2014, and Ord. #17-06, July 2017)
12-105. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirement of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54- 502, one (1) copy of the building code and one
(1) copy of the residential building code have been filed with the city recorder
and are available for public use and inspection. Said building code and
residential building code are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein and shall control within the corporate limits. (as replaced by Ord.
#03-12, Aug. 2003, Ord. #04-16, Nov. 2004, Ord. #08-01, March 2008, and
Ord. #14-14, Oct. 2014)
12-106. Discontinuance of utilities. In addition to other penalties, the
building official of the city may order the discontinuance of utility services to
any building in violation of this chapter. This may be done only when the owner
of the building has been given at least ten (10) days notice by certified mail of
the violation, and has failed to make substantial progress toward correcting the
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-5
violations. (as replaced by Ord. #03-12, Aug. 2003, Ord. #04-16, Nov. 2004,
Ord. #08-01, March 2008, and Ord. #14-14, Oct. 2014)
12-107. Paved driveways required. All new single-family, two-family or
multifamily residential structures shall have paved driveways, turn-arounds
and parking areas constructed of concrete or hot mix asphalt. Each unit shall
have either a dedicated parking area for a minimum of two (2) vehicles, with a
minimum parking area dimension of three hundred sixty (360) square feet and
a minimum width of eight feet (8'), that is located in the side-yard; or a one (1)
vehicle garage or carport; or a garage that will accommodate two (2) or more
vehicles. Residential structures with a one (1) vehicle garage or carport shall
have a total minimum paved parking area, both under roof and open driveway,
of three hundred sixty (360) square feet. The width of a driveway apron shall
extend no more than six feet (6') in front of the house or residential structure.
Residential structures sitting a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') or more
from the edge of the street shall be paved from the edge of the street for a
distance of at least one hundred (100) linear feet. Circular, semi-circular, or
similarly designed driveways shall only be allowed for single-family residential
structures that, in addition, have garages that will accommodate a minimum of
two (2) vehicles. The parking of vehicles in front of any new single-family,
two-family, or multi-family residential structure shall not be allowed in the area
between the house or residential section of the structure and the street, unless
authorized by this section or the planning commission in subdivision or site plan
approval. (as added by Ord. #06-22, Dec. 2006, and replaced by Ord. #08-01,
March 2008, and Ord. #14-14, Oct. 2014)
12-108. Paved driveways required for certificate of occupancy. A
certificate of occupancy for any new single-family, two-family or multi-family
residential structure shall not be issued until a paved driveway in compliance
with this chapter has been constructed. (as added by Ord. #06-22, Dec. 2006,
and replaced by Ord. #08-01, March 2008, and Ord. #14-14, Oct. 2014)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-6
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE1
SECTION
12-201. Plumbing code adopted.
12-202. Modifications.
12-203. Available in recorder's office.
12-204. Conditions of service manual.
12-205. Discontinuance of utilities.
12-201. Plumbing code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of securing the beneficial interests and purposes of public safety, health and
general welfare through the regulation of the installation and maintenance of
all plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems, the
International Plumbing Code,2 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, including all appendices, addenda, and supplements
thereto, with the exception of Appendix A, is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference, in its entirety, as a part of the Springfield Municipal Code and is
hereinafter referred to as the plumbing code. (1981 code, § 4-201, as replaced
by Ord. #96-02, March 1996, Ord. #06-32, Jan. 2007, Ord. #09-01, April 2009,
and Ord. #14-15, Oct. 2014)
12-202. Modifications. The International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition,
adopted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby modified as follows:
(1) Whenever the "code official" is referred to in this code, it shall, for
the purposes of the plumbing code, mean such person as the City of Springfield
shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the provisions of
the plumbing code.
(2) All permit fees and scales for calculating permit fees shall be
established by the board of mayor and aldermen by separate ordinance.
(3) Section 109 entitled "Means of Appeal" is rescinded in its entirety
and shall be substituted by the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals
as established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(4) Subsection 108.4 entitled "Violation penalties" is rescinded in its
entirety and shall be substituted by a new Subsection 108.4 to read as follows:
1Municipal code reference
Water and Sewer: title 18.
2Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-7
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect,
install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each person shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or
continued. (1981 code, § 4-203, as replaced by Ord. #96-02, March 1996,
Ord. #06-32, Jan. 2007, Ord. #09-01, April 2009, and Ord. #14-15, Oct.
2014)
12-203. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirement of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the plumbing code has
been filed with the city recorder and is available for public use and inspection.
Said plumbing code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein and shall control within the corporate limits and shall control over
property, structures, appliances, and service systems outside the corporate city
limits which are connected to the City of Springfield Water/Wastewater System.
(1981 code, § 4-203, as replaced by Ord. #96-02, March 1996, Ord. #06-32, Jan.
2007, Ord. #09-01, April 2009, and Ord. #14-15, Oct. 2014)
12-204. Conditions of service manual. In the event of a conflict between
the provisions of the plumbing code and the requirements set forth in the City
of Springfield Conditions of Service Manual, the Conditions of Service Manual
shall control. (1981 code, § 4-204, as replaced by Ord. #96-02, March 1996,
Ord. #06-32, Jan. 2007, Ord. #09-01, April 2009, and Ord. #14-15, Oct. 2014)
12-205. Discontinuance of utilities. In addition to other penalties, the
building official of the city may order the discontinuance of utility services to
any building in violation of this chapter. This may be done only when the owner
of the building has been given at least ten (10) days notice by certified mail of
the violation, and has failed to make substantial progress toward correcting the
violations. (as added by Ord. #96-02, March 1996, and replaced by Ord. #06-32,
Jan. 2007, Ord. #09-01, April 2009, and Ord. #14-15, Oct. 2014)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-8
CHAPTER 3
[as deleted by Ord. #07-07, May 2007]
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-9
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION
12-401. Mechanical code adopted.
12-402. Modifications.
12-403. Available in recorder's office.
12-404. Discontinuance of utilities.
12-401. Mechanical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose
of securing the beneficial interests and purposes of public safety, health and
general welfare through the regulation of the installation and maintenance of
all mechanical systems, which may be referred to as service systems, the
International Mechanical Code,1 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, including all appendices, addenda, and supplements
thereto, with the exception of Appendix B, is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference, in its entirety, as a part of the Springfield Municipal Code and is
hereinafter referred to as the mechanical code. (Ord. #88-14, Nov. 1988, as
replaced by Ord. #96-04, Feb. 1996, Ord. #01-03, March 2001, Ord. #06-33, Jan.
2007, Ord. #09-03, April 2009, and Ord. #14-16, Oct. 2014)
12-402. Modifications. The International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition,
adopted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby modified as follows:
(1) Whenever the "code official" is referred to in this code, it shall, for
the purposes of the mechanical code, mean such person as the City of Springfield
shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the provisions of
the mechanical code.
(2) All permit fees and scales for calculating permit fees shall be
established by the board of mayor and aldermen by separate ordinance.
(3) Section 109 entitled "Means of Appeal" is rescinded in its entirety
and shall be substituted by the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals
as established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(4) Subsection 108.4 entitled "Violation penalties" is rescinded in its
entirety and shall be substituted by a new subsection 108.4 to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect,
install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-10
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each person shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or
continued. (as added by Ord. #96-04, Feb. 1996, and replaced by
Ord. #01-03, March 2001, Ord. #06-33, Jan. 2007, Ord. #09-03, April
2009, and Ord. #14-16, Oct. 2014)
12-403. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirement of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54- 502, one (1) copy of the mechanical code has
been filed with the city recorder and is available for public use and inspection.
Said mechanical code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein and shall control within the corporate limits and shall control over
property, structures, appliances, and service systems outside the corporate city
limits which are connected to the City of Springfield Gas System. (as added by
Ord. #96-04, Feb. 1996, and replaced by Ord. #01-03, March 2001, Ord. #06-33,
Jan. 2007, and Ord. #09-03, April 2009, and Ord. #14-16, Oct. 2014)
12-404. Discontinuance of utilities. In addition to other penalties, the
building official of the city may order the discontinuance of utility services to
any building in violation of this chapter. This may be done only when the owner
of the building has been given at least ten (10) days notice by certified mail of
the violation, and has failed to make substantial progress toward correcting the
violations. (as added by Ord. #96-04, Feb. 1996, and replaced by Ord. #01-03,
March 2001, Ord. #06-33, Jan. 2007, Ord. #09-03, April 2009, and Ord. #14-16,
Oct. 2014)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-11
CHAPTER 5
[as deleted by Ord. #07-07, May 2007]
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-12
CHAPTER 6
FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE
SECTION
12-601. Definitions.
12-602. Purposes of law, construction, effect.
12-603. Unlawful housing practices.
12-604. Blockbusting.
12-605. Exemptions from housing provisions.
12-606. Provisions for enforcement.
12-607. Agency no defense in proceeding against real estate dealer.
12-608. Establishment of procedures for conciliation.
12-609. Findings of hearing committee; nature of affirmative action.
12-610. Investigations, powers, records.
12-611. Conspiracy to violate this ordinance unlawful.
12-612. When effective; lapse.
12-601. Definitions. Except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following terms as used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
(1) "Hearing committee" means the Planning Commission of the City
of Springfield, Tennessee. Said committee shall hear, make determinations, and
issue findings in all cases of discriminatory practices in housing resulting from
conciliation failure.
(2) "Conciliation agreement" means a written agreement or statement
setting forth the terms of the agreement mutually signed and subscribed to by
both complainant(s) and respondent(s) and witnessed by a duly authorized
enforcing agent.
(3) "Conciliation failure" means any failure to obtain a conciliation
agreement between the parties to the discrimination charge or a breach thereof.
(4) "Discrimination" means any direct or indirect act or practice of
exclusion, distinction, restriction, segregation, limitations, refusal, denial, or any
other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a person
or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex, or the aiding,
abetting, inciting, coercing or compelling thereof.
(5) "Real property" includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands,
tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments,
corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest in the above.
(6) "Housing accommodations" includes improved and unimproved
property and means a building, structure, lot or part thereof which is used or
occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home
or residence of one or more individuals.
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-13
(7) "Real estate operator" means any individual or combination of
individuals, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, partnerships,
associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, trust, unincorporated organizations, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers or other legal or commercial entity, the city or any of its agencies or
any owner of real property that is engaged in the business of selling, purchasing,
exchanging, renting or leasing real estate, or the improvements thereof,
including options, or that derives income, in whole or in part, from the sale,
purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate; or an individual employed by
or acting on behalf of any of these.
(8) "Real estate broker" or "real estate salesman" means an individual
whether licensed or not who, on behalf of others, for a fee, commission, salary
or other valuable consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of
receiving or collecting the same, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or
leases real estate, or the improvements thereon, including options, or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others such an activity; or who
advertises or holds themselves out as engaged in such activities; or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate on behalf of others a loan secured by
mortgage or other encumbrances upon a transfer of real estate, or who is
engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection
of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the
sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real estate through its listing in a
publication issued primarily for such purpose, or an individual employed by or
acting on behalf of any of these. (1981 code, § 4-801)
12-602. Purposes of law, construction, effect. (1) The general purposes
of this ordinance are:
(a) To provide for execution, within the City of Springfield of the
policies embodied in Title VIII of Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968 as
amended.
(b) To safeguard all individuals within the city from
discrimination in housing opportunities because of race, color, religion,
national origin, or sex; thereby to protect their interest in personal
dignity and freedom from humiliation; to secure the city against domestic
strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions; to
preserve the public health and general welfare; and to further the
interests, rights, and privileges of individuals within he city.
(2) Nothing contained in the ordinance shall be deemed to repeal any
other law of this city relating to discrimination because of race, color, religion,
national origin or sex. (1981 code, § 4-802)
12-603. Unlawful housing practices. It is an unlawful practice for a real
estate owner or operator or for a real estate broker, real estate salesman, or any
individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these:
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-14
(1) To refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or
withhold real property from an individual because of his or her race, color,
religion, national origin or sex.
(2) To discriminate against an individual because of his or her race,
color, religion, national origin or sex in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the
sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property or in the furnishing of facilities
or services in connection therewith.
(3) To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to purchase, rent
or lease real property from an individual because of his or her race, color,
religion, national origin or sex.
(4) To refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental, or lease of real property
to an individual because of his or her race, color, religion, national origin or sex.
(5) To represent to an individual that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to refuse to
permit an individual to inspect real property because of his or her race, color,
religion, national origin or sex.
(6) To print, circulate, post, or mail or cause to be printed, circulated,
posted or mailed an advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application for the
purchase, rental, or lease of real property, or to make a record of inquiry in
connection with the prospective purchase, rental, or lease of real property, which
indicates, directly or indirectly, a limitation, specification, or discrimination as
to race, color, religion, national origin or sex or an intent to make such a
limitation, specification, or discrimination.
(7) To offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property for
sale, rental, or lease with the understanding that an individual may be
discriminated against in the sale, rental, or lease of that real property or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith because of race, color,
religion, national origin, or sex.
(8) To otherwise deny to or withhold real property from an individual
because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. (1981 code, § 4-803)
12-604. Blockbusting. It is an unlawful practice for a real estate owner
or operator, a real estate broker, a real estate salesman, a financial institution,
an employee of any of these, or any other person, for the purpose of inducing a
real estate transaction from which he may benefit financially:
(1) To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition with respect to race, color, religion or national origin of the owners
or occupants in the block, neighborhood, or areas in which the real property is
located.
(2) To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of
property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in
the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real
property is located. (1981 code, § 4-804)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-15
12-605. Exemptions from housing provisions. (1) Nothing in section
12-603 shall apply:
(a) To the rental of housing accommodations in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner or member of his family resides
in one of the housing accommodations.
(b) To the rental of one room or one rooming unit in a housing
accommodation by an individual if he or a member of his family reside
therein.
(c) To a landlord who refuses to rent to an unmarried
male-female couple.
(2) A religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting
the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such a religion is restricted
on account of race, color, sex, or national origin.
(3) Single sex dormitory rental property shall be excluded from the
provisions of this act which relate to discrimination based on sex. (1981 code,
§ 4-805)
12-606. Provisions for enforcement. (1) The violation of any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in the
amount of $50.00 to be recovered in a civil action, provided that in the case of
a continuing violation, the total penalty shall not exceed $1,000.00.
(2) The city may sue in a civil act through the general court of justice
for appropriate remedies to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, including
temporary restraining orders and mandatory and prohibitory injunctions.
(3) In addition to appropriate civil and/or equitable remedies for
enforcement of this ordinance, a violation of this ordinance shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. (1981 code, § 4-806)
12-607. Agency no defense in proceeding against real estate dealer. It
shall be no defense to a violation of this ordinance by a real estate owner or
operator, real estate broker, real estate salesman, a financial institution, or
other person subject to the provisions of this chapter, that the violation was
requested, sought, or otherwise procured by a person not subject to the
provisions of this chapter. (1981 code, § 4-807)
12-608. Establishment of procedures for conciliation. (1) The city shall
designate an agent(s) to investigate, make determinations of probable cause,
and seek to conciliate apparent violations of this ordinance. Conciliation efforts
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-16
may be initiated by any person(s) said to be subject to discrimination as defined
in this ordinance.
(2) The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Springfield shall
establish a hearing committee which in turn shall adopt formal rules and
procedures to hear complaints and make appropriate findings. Such procedures
shall be made known to all parties of a given charge of discrimination. Hearings
by the committee shall commence whenever the agent(s) acting on behalf of the
city decides a conciliation failure has occurred and the respondent agrees to
participate in the hearing committee proceedings. A hearing open to the public
may be initiated by the responding party at any time during the conciliation
process. (1981 code, § 4-808)
12-609. Findings of hearing committee; nature of affirmative action.
(1) If the hearing committee determines that the respondent has not
engaged in an unlawful practice, the committee shall state its findings of fact
and conclusions of law and shall issue an order dismissing the complaint. A
copy of the order shall be delivered to the complainant, the respondent, the city
attorney, and such other public officers and persons as the committee deems
proper.
(2) If the hearing committee determines that the respondent has
engaged in an unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact and conclusions
of law and shall negotiate such affirmative action as in its judgment will carry
out the purposes of this chapter. A copy of the findings shall be delivered to the
respondent, the complainant, the city attorney and such other public officials,
officers and persons as the committee deems proper.
(3) Affirmative action negotiated under this section may include, but
not be limited to:
(a) Extension to all individuals of the full and equal enjoyment
of the advantages, facilities, privileges, and services of the respondent.
(b) Reporting as to the manner of compliance.
(c) Posting notices in conspicuous places in the respondent's
place of business in a form prescribed by the hearing committee.
(d) Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment, or sublease of real
property to an individual.
(e) Payment to the complainant of damages for injury caused by
an unlawful practice including compensation for humiliation and
embarrassment, and expenses incurred by the complainant as a direct
result of such unlawful practice.
(4) The provisions for conciliation and affirmative action shall not
preclude or in any way impair the enforcement provisions of this ordinance.
(1981 code, § 4-809)
12-610. Investigations, powers, records. (1) In connection with an
investigation of a complaint filed under this ordinance, the enforcing agent(s)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-17
at any reasonable time may request voluntary access to premises, records and
documents relevant to the complaint and may request the right to examine,
photograph, and copy evidence.
(2) Every person subject to this ordinance shall make, keep and
preserve records relevant to the determination of whether unlawful practices
have been or are being committed, such records being maintained and preserved
in a manner and to the extent required under the Civil Rights Act of 1968 and
any regulations promulgated thereunder.
(3) A person who believes that the application to it of a regulation or
order issued under this section would result in undue hardship may apply to the
hearing committee for an exemption from the application of the regulation or
order. If the committee finds that the application of the regulation or order to
the person in question would impose an undue hardship, it may grant
appropriate relief. (1981 code, § 4-810)
12-611. Conspiracy to violate this ordinance unlawful. It shall be an
unlawful practice for a person, or for two or more persons to conspire:
(1) To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person
because he or she has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this ordinance,
or because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing under
this ordinance.
(2) To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of
the acts or practices declared unlawful by this ordinance or any order issued
thereunder.
(3) To obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions
of this ordinance or any order issued thereunder.
(4) To resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with the enforcing agent(s),
hearing committee, or any of its members or representatives in the lawful
performance of duty under this ordinance. (1981 code, § 4-811)
12-612. When effective; lapse. This ordinance shall be effective 30 days
after its passage;1 provided, that it shall cease to be effective upon receipt by the
city of written notification from the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) that HUD will not recognize this ordinance,
including any amendments thereto, to be substantially equivalent to the
provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 so as to require HUD to refer housing
discrimination complaints to the City of Springfield, in accordance with federal
law and regulations. (1981 code, § 4-812)
1Date of passage: January 28, 1978.
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-18
CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION
12-701. Property maintenance code adopted.
12-702. Modifications to the property maintenance code.
12-703. Available in recorder's office.
12-704. Discontinuance of utilities.
12-701. Property maintenance code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for
the purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; and providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; the International
Property Maintenance Code,1 2012 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, including all appendices, addenda and supplements
thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, in its entirety, as part
of the Springfield Municipal Code, and is hereinafter referred to as the property
maintenance code. (Ord. #88-14, Nov. 1998, as replaced by Ord. #96-06, Feb.
1996, Ord. #04-17, Nov. 2004, Ord. #08-02, March 2008, and Ord. #14-17, Oct.
2014)
12-702. Modifications to the property maintenance code. The
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, adopted by the
provisions of this chapter, is hereby modified as follows:
(1) Whenever the "code official" is referred to in this code, it shall, for
the purposes of the property maintenance code, mean such person as the City
of Springfield shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the property maintenance code.
(2) Subsection 102.3, entitled "Application of other codes" is amended
by deleting "ICC Electric Code" and substituting "National Electric Code" and
deleting the last sentence.
(3) Section 111, entitled "Means of Appeal" shall be rescinded in its
entirety and shall be substituted by the Construction Board of Adjustments and
Appeals as established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-19
(4) Subsection 106.4, entitled "Violation penalties" shall be rescinded
in its entirety and shall be substituted by a new Subsection 106.4 to read as
follows:
106.4. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates a provision of
this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be
subject to a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). Each person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is
committed or continued. In addition to the penalties prescribed herein,
such person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in chapter 9, title
12 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(5) Subsection 201.3, entitled "Terms defined in other codes" is
amended by deleting "ICC Electric Code" and substituting in lieu thereof
"National Electric Code."
(6) Subsection 302.1, entitled "Sanitation" is amended by adding to the
end of the paragraph the sentence: "Furniture intended for indoor use shall not
be placed in yards or porches."
(7) Subsection 302.8, entitled "Motor vehicles" is amended by adding
to the end of the paragraph the sentence: "Parking of vehicles over sidewalks,
on the path of a sidewalk, or on lawns shall be prohibited."
(8) Subsection 304.14, entitled "Insect screens" is amended by
inserting the works "April 1 to October 1" in lieu of "[DATE] to [DATE]."
(9) Subsection 502.4, entitled "Employees' facilities" is amended by
deleting the words "and one drinking facility."
(10) Subsection 502.4.1, entitled "Drinking facilities" is rescinded in its
entirety. (as added by Ord. #96-06, Feb. 1996, and replaced by Ord. #04-17,
Nov. 2004, Ord. #08-02, March 2008, and Ord. #14-17, Oct. 2014)
12-703. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirement of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the property maintenance
code shall be filed with the city recorder and is available for public use and
inspection. Said property maintenance code is adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein and shall control within the corporate limits. (as
added by Ord. #96-06, Feb. 1996, and replaced by Ord. #04-17, Nov. 2004,
Ord. #08-02, March 2008, and Ord. #14-17, Oct. 2014)
12-704. Discontinuance of utilities. In addition to other penalties, the
code official of the city may order the discontinuance of utility services to any
building in violation of this chapter. This may be done only when the owner of
the building has been given at least ten (10) days notice by certified mail of the
violation, and has failed to make substantial progress toward correcting the
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-20
violations. (as added by Ord. #96-06, Feb. 1996, and replaced by Ord. #04-17,
Nov. 2004, Ord. #08-02, March 2008, and Ord. #14-17, Oct. 2014)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-21
CHAPTER 8
[as deleted by Ord. #07-07, May 2007]
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-22
CHAPTER 9
SLUM CLEARANCE
SECTION
12-901. Findings of board.
12-902. Definitions.
12-903. "Public officer" designated; powers.
12-904. Initiation of proceedings; hearings.
12-905. Orders to owners of unfit structures.
12-906. When public officer may repair, etc.
12-907. When public officer may remove or demolish.
12-908. Lien for expenses; sale of salvaged materials; other powers not limited.
12-909. Basis for finding of unfitness.
12-910. Service of complaints or orders.
12-911. Appeals.
12-912. Enjoining enforcement of orders.
12-913. Additional powers of public officer.
12-914. Powers conferred are supplemental.
12-915. Structures unfit for human habitation or use deemed unlawful.
12-901. Findings of board. Pursuant to Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 13-21-1010 et seq., the board of mayor and aldermen finds that there exists in
the city structures which are unfit for human occupation or use due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities,
lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions
rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to
the health, safety and morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the city. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-902. Definitions. (1) "Dwelling" means any building or structure, or
part thereof, used and occupied for human occupation or use or intended to be
so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or
usually enjoyed therewith.
(2) "Governing body" shall mean the board of mayor and aldermen
charged with governing the city.
(3) "Municipality" shall mean the City of Springfield, Tennessee, and
the areas encompassed within existing town limits or as hereafter annexed.
(4) "Owner" shall mean the holder of title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
(5) "Parties in interest" shall mean all individuals, associations,
corporations and others who have interest of record in a dwelling and any who
are in possession thereof.
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-23
(6) "Place of public accommodation" means any building or structure
in which goods are supplied or services performed, or in which the trace of the
general public is solicited.
(7) "Public authority" shall mean any officer who is in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the city or state relating to health,
fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning structures in the city.
(8) "Public officer" shall mean the officer or officers who are authorized
by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 13-21-101, et seq.
(9) "Structure" means any dwelling or place of public accommodation
or vacant building or structure suitable as a dwelling or place of public
accommodation. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-903. "Public officer" designated; powers. There is hereby designated
and appointed a "public officer," to be the codes administrator, or his designee
of the city, to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, which powers shall
be supplemental to all others held by the building official. (as added by Ord.
#04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-904. Initiation of proceedings; hearings. Whenever a petition is filed
with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of the
city charging that any structure is unfit for human occupancy or use, or
whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any structure
is unfit for human occupation or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause be served upon
the owner of, and parties in interest of, such structure a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before
the public official (or his designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not less than
ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the service of the complaint;
and the owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the
time and place fixed in the complaint; and the rules of evidence prevailing in the
courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public
officer. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-905. Orders to owners of unfit structures. If, after such notice and
hearing as provided for in the preceding section, the public officer determines
that the structure under consideration is unfit for human occupation or use, he
shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order;
(1) If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of the reasonable value), requiring the owner, within the time
specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such structure to render it fit
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-24
for human occupation or use or to vacate and close the structure for human
occupation or use; or
(2) If the repair, alteration or improvement of said structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not to exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the value of the premises), requiring the owner within the
time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure. (as added by
Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-906. When public officers may repair, etc. If the owner fails to
comply with the order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close the
structure as specified in the preceding section hereof, the public officer may
cause such structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or the be vacated and
closed; and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human occupation or use. The use or occupation of this building for human
occupation is prohibited and unlawful." (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-907. When public officer may remove or demolish. If the owner fails
to comply with an order, as specified above, to remove or demolish the structure,
the public officer may cause such structure to be removed and demolished. (as
added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-908. Lien for expenses; sale of salvaged materials; other powers not
limited. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements,
or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be
assessed against the owner of the property, and shall upon the filing of the
notice with the office of the Register of Deeds of Robertson County, be a lien on
the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state, county
and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments,
and any valid lien, right, or interest in such property duly recorded or duly
perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be
collected by the municipal tax collector or county trustee at the same time and
in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the
costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty
and interest as delinquent property taxes. In addition, the city may collect the
costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed in any
competent jurisdiction. The city may bring one (1) action for debt against more
than one or all of the owners of the properties against whom said costs have
been assessed and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in one (1)
action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of the parties. If the
structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the
materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the
cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-25
in the Chancery Court of Robertson County, Tennessee by the public officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be
disbursed by such court to the person found to be entitled thereto by final order
or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or
limit in any way the power of the City of Springfield to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-909. Basis for a finding of unfitness. The public officer defined herein
shall have the power and may determine that a structure is unfit for human
occupation or use if he finds that conditions exist in such structure which are
dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants or users
of such structure, the occupants or users of neighboring structures or other
residents of the City of Springfield. Such conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the
hazard of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light,
or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; or uncleanliness.
(as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-910. Service of complaints or orders. Complaints or orders issued by
the public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons, either
personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. In addition, a copy of
such complaint or order shall be posed in a conspicuous place on premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also
be filed for record in the Register's Office of Robertson County, Tennessee, and
such filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices
provided by law. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-911. Appeals. Owners and parties in interest of structures affected
by an order issued by the public officer pursuant to this chapter may appeal a
decision of the public officer as provided in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield
Municipal Code. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-912. Enjoining enforcement of orders. Any person affected by an order
issued by the public officer, or, if appealed, the decision of the construction board
of adjustments and appeals or board of mayor and aldermen, served pursuant
to this chapter may file a complaint in chancery court for an injunction
restraining the public official from carrying out the provisions of the order, and
the court may, upon the filing of such a suit, issue a temporary injunction
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-26
restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided,
however, that within sixty (60) days after the posting and service of the order
of the public officer, or, if appealed, the date of entry of the decision of the
construction board of adjustments and appeals or board of mayor and aldermen
in the minutes of the applicable body, such person shall file such complaint in
the court. The remedy provided herein shall be the exclusive remedy and no
person affected by an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any
damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the public officer, or because
of noncompliance by such person with any order of the public officer. (as added
by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-913. Additional powers of public officer. The public officer, in order
to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, shall
have the following powers in addition to those otherwise granted herein:
(1) To investigate conditions of the structures in the city in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provide that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession and in compliance with legal
requirements for gaining entry;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter; and
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov.
2004)
12-914. Powers conferred are supplemental. This chapter shall not be
construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the city with regard to the
enforcement of the provisions of its charter or any other ordinances or
regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers
conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers
conferred by the charter and other laws. (as added by Ord. #04-21, Nov. 2004)
12-915. Structures unfit for human habitation or use deemed unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of record to create, maintain or permit to be
maintained in the city structures which are unfit for human occupation or use
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to health, safety and morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of
the residents of the city. Violations of this section shall subject the offender to
a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day a violation is
allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (as added by Ord.
#04-21, Nov. 2004)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-27
CHAPTER 10
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGULATIONS
SECTION
12-1001. Registration required.
12-1002. Registration application.
12-1003. Inspection required.
12-1004. Property maintenance.
12-1005. Frequency of inspection.
12-1006. Registration certificate required.
12-1007. Certificate registration date.
12-1008. Certificate transferability.
12-1009. Request for additional inspections.
12-1010. Exemptions.
12-1011. Records.
12-1012. Other actions, prosecutions, court cases.
12-1013. Nuisances, injunction.
12-1014. Penalties.
12-1015. Saving clause.
12-1016. Severability.
12-1001. Registration required. All owners of residential rental property
within the city shall register each rental unit owned or operated within the city.
An owner of residential rental property shall file a registration application with
the community development department within thirty (30) days after assuming
ownership or control of the property, or after altering the number or size of
rental units at a previously registered property. All owners of residential rental
property at the time of the incorporation by ordinance of this chapter within the
Springfield Municipal Code shall file a registration application for their property
within sixty (60) days after the effective date of said ordinance. The owner shall
be responsible for all sub-leasing of his residential property. (as added by
Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1002. Registration application. Registration shall be made upon
forms furnished by the community development department and shall
specifically require the following minimum information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the property owner;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of any designated local
property manager;
(3) The street address of the rental property; and
(4) The name, telephone number and address of the person authorized
to make or authorized to order repairs or services to the property, if the person
is different than the owner or local manager.
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-28
(5) The square footage of living rooms, dining rooms and bedrooms to
determine occupancy load. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1003. Inspection required. All residential rental units shall be
inspected periodically by the city for compliance with this chapter and all other
applicable laws. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1004. Property maintenance. All residential rental units shall comply
with the property maintenance code adopted by the city. (as added by
Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1005. Frequency of inspections. All residential rental units subject
to this chapter shall be inspected periodically; but nothing shall preclude the
inspection of the residential rental unit upon a complaint being made under the
provisions of other city ordinances or state laws. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec.
2005)
12-1006. Registration certificate required. No person shall rent or allow
for the occupancy of any residential rental unit that is subject to this chapter
without having a valid, current certificate of registration for that unit. The
certificate shall be kept on the property at all times and shall state the
maximum number of residents allowed to occupy the unit. The maximum
occupancy number shall be established or confirmed by the city's code
enforcement officer using standards contained within the property maintenance
code. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1007. Certificate registration date. The certificate of registration
issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire three (3) years from the date of
issuance. The expiration date shall be prominently displayed on its face. (as
added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1008. Certificate transferability. A certificate of registration issued
shall not be transferred to succeeding owners. Upon the transfer of ownership
of the property, a new certificate of registration shall be required. (as added by
Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1009. Request for additional inspections. The owner or designated
property manager of any residential unit that is subject to this chapter may
request additional inspections of the rental units at any time. (as added by
Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1010. Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Residential rental units owned and operated by any governmental
agency;
(2) Residential rental units licensed and inspected by the state; and
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-29
(3) Hotels that do not rent to permanent residents and nursing homes
or assisted living or retirement facilities.
(4) Apartment complexes that already keep the required registration
information on file and accessible. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1011. Records. All records, files and documents pertaining to the
rental registration and rental unit inspection program shall be maintained by
the community development department and made available to the public as
allowed or required by state law or city ordinance. (as added by Ord. #05-23,
Dec. 2005)
12-1012. Other actions, prosecutions, court cases. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the city from taking action under any of its fire codes,
building codes, technical codes, zoning ordinance, or other health and safety
codes, ordinances or laws for violations thereof to seek injunctive relief or
criminal prosecution of such violations in accordance with the terms and
conditions or the particular code, ordinance or law under which the city would
proceed against the property owner, designated property manager or occupant
of any residential rental unit covered by this registration and inspection
chapter. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1013. Nuisances, injunction. Any violation of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this
chapter, the city attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. Such
application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order,
temporary injunction and permanent injunction. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec.
2005)
12-1014. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine under the general penalty clause of this code.
(as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1015. Saving clause. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under
any act or ordinance hereby repealed pursuant to this chapter, nor shall any just
or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter. (as added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
12-1016. Severability. The various parts, sections and clauses of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section or clause is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby. (as
added by Ord. #05-23, Dec. 2005)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-30
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS
SECTION
12-1101. Acceptability.
12-1102. Scope.
12-1103. Radio coverage.
12-1104. FCC approval/compliance.
12-1105. Enhanced amplification systems.
12-1106. Testing.
12-1107. Annual test.
12-1108. Penalties.
12-1101. Acceptability. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall
maintain, erect, or construct any building or structure or any part thereof, or
cause the same to be done which fails to allow adequate radio coverage for
emergency services communication. (as added by Ord. #05-31, Feb. 2006)
12-1102. Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to public
buildings and structures and privately owned buildings and structures to which
the public has or may have access to, including all basements and/or sub-level
structures. (as added by Ord. #05-31, Feb. 2006)
12-1103. Radio coverage. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall
maintain, erect, construct or modify any building or structure or any part
thereof, or cause the same to be done which fails to allow adequate radio
coverage for emergency services personnel.
The City of Springfield emergency services with consideration to police,
fire and emergency medical services shall determine the frequency range or
ranges that must be supported.
Adequate radio coverage shall constitute a successful communication
between emergency service providers' equipment at hip level (2-3 feet above the
ground) in the building, units in the field, and the communications center. (as
added by Ord. #05-31, Feb. 2006)
12-1104. FCC approval/compliance. If amplification is used to achieve
adequate signal strength, all equipment must have FCC approval and FCC
identification numbers clearly marked on the amplifier. A copy of the make and
model numbers shall be provided to the City of Springfield radio maintenance
personnel.
The occupant of the building shall comply with all FCC regulations, if
required, for the equipment being installed. (as added by Ord. #05-31, Feb.
2006)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-31
12-1105. Enhanced amplification systems. Where buildings and
structures are required to provide amenities to achieve adequate signal
strength, they shall be equipped with any of the following to achieve the
required radio coverage: radiating cable system(s); internal multiple antennal
system(s) with a frequency range as established under the radio coverage
section, with amplification system(s) as needed; voting receiver system(s) as
needed; or bi-directional amplifier system(s) (BDA).
If any part of the installed system or systems contains an electrically
powered component, the system shall be capable of operation on an independent
battery or generator system for a period of at least three (3) hours without
external power input or maintenance. The battery system shall automatically
charge in the presence of external power,
Amplification equipment must have adequate environmental controls to
meet the heating, ventilation, cooling, and humidity requirements of the
equipment that will be utilized to meet requirements. The area where the
amplification equipment is located must also be free of hazardous materials. All
communications equipment including amplification systems, cable and antenna
systems shall be grounded. (as added by Ord. #05-31, Feb. 2006)
12-1106. Testing. Testing shall be performed with the actual frequencies
in coordination with the police, fire, emergency medical service, communications
center, and radio maintenance personnel.
All testing shall be done in the presence of the appropriate emergency
services departments and radio maintenance personnel at no expense to the City
of Springfield.
Both inbound and outbound radio signals shall be tested on each and
every floor above and below ground including stairwells, basements, penthouse
facilities and parking areas of the structure to assure a ninety-five percent (95%)
area of coverage in radio communication.
A certificate of occupancy may be denied for new buildings or structures
for failure to comply with these requirements. (as added by Ord. #05-31, Feb.
2006)
12-1107. Annual test. An annual test may be conducted by any of the
appropriate emergency services departments or radio maintenance personnel.
After providing reasonable notice to the owner or occupant, emergency service
personnel and/or radio maintenance personnel shall have the right to enter the
property to conduct the field test, to be certain that the required level of radio
coverage is present.
If the communications appear to have degraded or if the tests fail to
demonstrate adequate system performance, the owner of the building or
structure is required to remedy the problem within sixty (60) days following the
annual test and restore the system in a manner consistent with the original
approval criteria. Any retesting shall be done at no expense to the City of
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-32
Springfield or emergency services departments as required in the original
testing procedures. (as added by Ord. #05-31, Feb. 2006)
12-1108. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine under the general penalty clause of this code.
(as added by Ord. #05-31, Feb. 2006)
Change 17, January 20, 2018 12-33
CHAPTER 12
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION
12-1201. Energy Conservation Code adopted.
12-1202. Modifications.
12-1203. Available in recorder's office.
12-1201. Energy Conservation Code adopted. Pursuant to authority
granted by Tennessee Code Annotated §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506 and for the
purpose of securing the beneficial interests and purposes of public safety, health
and general welfare by regulating and governing energy efficient building
envelopes and the installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power
systems, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, as prepared
and adopted by the International Code Council, including all appendices,
addenda, and supplements thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference, in its entirety, as a part of the Springfield Municipal Code and is
hereinafter referred to as the energy conservation code. (as added by Ord.
#12-02, April 2012, and replaced by Ord. #14-18, Oct. 2014)
12-1202. Modifications. The International Energy Conservation Code,
2009 edition, adopted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby modified as
follows:
Whenever the code official is referred to in this code, it shall, for the
purposes of the energy conservation code, mean such person as the City of
Springfield shall have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the
provisions of the energy conservation code. (as added by Ord. #12-02, April
2012, and replaced by Ord. #14-18, Oct. 2014)
12-1203. Available in recorders office. Pursuant to the requirement of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502 one (1) copy of the energy conservation
code has been filed with the city recorder and is available for public use and
inspection. Said energy conservation code is adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein and shall control within the corporate limits. (as
added by Ord. #12-02, April 2012, and replaced by Ord. #14-18, Oct. 2014)
Change 18, February 20, 2018 13-1
TITLE 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER
1. HEALTH AND SANITATION.
2. JUNKYARDS.
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH AND SANITATION
SECTION
13-101. House trailers.
13-102. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc.
13-103. Stagnant water.
13-104. High grass, weeds and rubbish.
13-105. Dead animals.
13-106. Gases, dust, and particulate matter.
13-107. Health and sanitation nuisances.
13-101. House trailers. It shall be unlawful for any person to park,
locate, or occupy any house trailer or portable building unless it complies with
all plumbing, electrical, sanitary, and building provisions applicable to
stationary structures and the proposed location conforms to the zoning
provisions of the municipality and unless a permit therefor shall have been first
duly issued by the building official, as provided for in the building code. (1981
code, § 8-404)
13-102. Smoke, soot, cinders, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, dust, or gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the
health, comfort, and safety of the public or so as to cause or have a tendency to
cause injury or damage to property or business. (1981 code, § 8-405)
13-103. Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to allow any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his property
without treating it so as effectively to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. (1981
code, § 8-406)
13-104. High grass, weeds and rubbish. The owners and occupants of
real property, whether the same be occupied by structures, are hereby required
not to allow grass on such property to grow to a height that exceeds more than
twelve inches (12"); and to keep all weeds, wild bushes, overgrown shrubs, vines,
trees and landscaping; rank or noxious vegetation; and rubbish of every kind
Change 18, February 20, 2018 13-2
and character cleared and removed from such property. Rubbish shall include
automobiles remaining unmoved, inoperable and unlicensed for a period of
thirty (30) days or more. The height restriction on grass shall apply to all zoning
districts, except Agricultural Districts (AG), that permit dwellings as a principal
use in those districts.
If any owner or occupant of property within the city shall fail to cut, clear
and remove such aforementioned grass vegetation; overgrown shrubs, vines,
trees and landscaping; or rubbish, the city code enforcement officer shall serve
a notice, in writing, upon such owner or occupant requiring him to cut, clear and
remove same from said property within ten (10) days after service of such notice.
Such notice may be served personally upon the owner or his agent or tenant,
may be mailed by certified or registered mail to the owner or occupant at his last
known address, or may be posted on the property. Service of notice by any of the
foregoing methods shall constitute due notice within the meaning of this section.
If any owner or occupant, after notice as provided for herein, shall fail to cut,
clear or remove said grass, vegetation or rubbish from the property described in
said notice, within ten (10) days after service of notice, the code enforcement
department is authorized and directed to clear and remove the same and to
prepare a statement of the cost thereof and file such statement with the city
recorder for collection. This statement shall include a fee of seventy-five dollars
($75.00) for three (3) hours of staff time associated with administrative and
enforcement duties. A lien is hereby declared on such property for all costs
incurred by the code enforcement department in cutting, clearing and removing
said grass, weeds, wild bushes; overgrown shrubs, vines, trees and landscaping;
rank or noxious vegetation; and/or rubbish. The lien shall be enforced by
attachment in law or equity and the costs recovered by suit in the name and for
the use of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Springfield, Tennessee.
Upon receiving the statement of costs mentioned above, the city recorder
shall notify the owner or occupant by regular mail of the amount owed and all
such bills shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum. Any
unpaid lien after thirty (30) days after mailing said bill shall become a part of
the property tax as authorized by Tennesee Code Annotated, § 67-5-2101.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section
shall be punished by a fine under the general penalty clause of this code. (1981
Code, § 8-407, as replaced by Ord. #97-24, Nov. 1997, Ord. #02-07, June 2002,
and Ord. #17-02, March 2017)
13-105. Dead animals. Any person owning or having possession of any
dead animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury the same or
dispose of such animal in such manner as the county health officer shall direct.
(1981 code, § 8-408)
13-106. Gases, dust, and particulate matter. No emission shall be
permitted from any stack, chimney, silo, storage bin or other source of any solid
or liquid particles in concentrations exceeding 0.30 grins per cubic foot of the
conveying gas at any point. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases
Change 13, July 15, 2008 13-3
resulting from combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit and fifty (50) percent
excess air. In no case shall any emission be permitted which will cause any
damage to health, animals, vegetation, or other forms of property or which can
cause soiling at any point beyond the lot line on which the source is situated.
Particulate matter is defined as matter, other than combined water, which is
suspended in air and other gases, in a finely divided form, as a liquid or solid at
standard conditions. (1981 code, § 8-409, as replaced by Ord. #07-17, Aug. 2007)
13-107. Health and sanitation nuisances. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by him to become
or remain in a filthy condition, or permit the use or occupation of same in such
a manner as to create noxious or offensive smells and odors in connection
therewith, or to allow the accumulation or creation of unwholesome and
offensive matter or the breeding of flies, rodents, or other vermin on the
premises to the menace of the public health or the annoyance of people residing
within the vicinity.
The city departments of electricity, water and gas shall not sell or furnish
any electricity, water or gas to the owners or occupants of any premises which
have been declared a public nuisance and unfit for human habitation by the city
community development director or building inspector. (as added by
Ord. #07-17, Aug. 2007)
Change 134, Julnye 1155,, 22000180 13-4
CHAPTER 2
JUNKYARDS
SECTION
13-201. Definitions.
13-202. Junkyards.
13-203. Compliance with storm water management regulations.
13-204. Date for compliance.
13-205. Violation and penalty.
13-201. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms
shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
(1) "Automobile graveyard." Any lot, establishment or place of
business which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or
selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts.
(2) "Junk." Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
(3) "Junkyard." An establishment or place of business which is
maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for
the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard. This definition
includes scrap metal processors, car crushing sites, used auto parts yards, yards
providing temporary storage of automobile bodies or parts awaiting disposal as
a normal part of the business operation when the business will continually have
like materials located on the premises, garbage dumps and sanitary landfills.
Provided, however, a "junkyard" shall not be construed to include a recycling
center.
(4) "Recycling center." An establishment, place of business, facility or
building which is maintained, operated, or used for the storing, keeping, buying
or selling of newspaper or used food or beverage containers for the purpose of
converting such items into a usable product. (as added by Ord. #10-04, April
2010)
13-202. Junkyards. All junkyards within the corporate limits shall be
operated and maintained subject to the following regulations:
(1) All junk stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that it will not
catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that it will not
constitute a place, or places which rats, mice, or other vermin may be harbored,
reared, or propagated.
(2) All such junkyards shall be enclosed within a close fitting plank
fence (privacy fence) touching the ground on the bottom and being not less than
Change 134, Julnye 1155,, 22000180 13-5
eight feet (8') in height, such fence to be built so that it will be impossible for
stray cats and/or stray dogs to have access to such junkyards.
(3) Such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary condition
and so as not to be a menace to the public health or safety. (as added by
Ord. #10-04, April 2010)
13-203. Compliance with storm water management regulations. All
junkyards in which motor vehicles are to be kept or stored shall conform to the
requirements of Ordinance 04-25 pertaining to storm water management
regulations as it currently reads or is subsequently amended. The area upon
which motor vehicles are to be kept or stored shall be paved with hot mix
asphalt or concrete pavement and curbed to direct the flow of storm water to
appropriate treatment devices. Furthermore, the owners of said junkyards shall
provide sufficient evidence to the City of Springfield that they are properly
containing, treating and disposing of any oils, antifreezes, etc. that may be
discharged on their properties as by-products of motor vehicle storage. (as
added by Ord. #10-04, April 2010)
13-204. Date for compliance. All new junkyards must fully comply with
the provisions of this chapter before opening for business. All junkyards in
operation on the date of the final passage of the ordinance that creates this
chapter shall have a period of six (6) months from the date of final passage of the
ordinance to fully comply with the provisions of this chapter. (as added by
Ord. #10-04, April 2010)
13-205. Violation and penalty. Any person owning or operating a
junkyard in violation of the above provisions shall bring such junkyard into
compliance with this chapter within thirty (30) days upon receiving written
notice from the city. Any person failing to do so shall be guilty of a violation of
this chapter and shall be punished by a fine under the general penalty provision
of this code. Each day the violation of this chapter continues shall be considered
a separate violation. (as added by Ord. #10-04, April 2010)
14-1
1The city's zoning ordinance has not been included in this code. It is
published as a separate document, and is of record in the city recorder's office.
2Note also that the Municipal Subdivision Regulations of Springfield have
been published separately, and are of record in the city recorder's office.
3The subdivision regulation ordinance has not been included in this code.
It is published as a separate document and is of record in the city recorder's
office.
TITLE 141
ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL2
CHAPTER
1. MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION.
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION3
SECTION
14-101. Creation and membership.
14-102. Organization, powers, duties, etc.
14-103. Additional powers.
14-104. Code of ethics.
14-101. Creation and membership. Pursuant to the provisions of section
13-4-101 of the Tennessee Code Annotated there is hereby created a municipal
planning commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission. The
planning commission shall consist of nine (9) members; one (1) member shall be
nominated by each alderman to represent each ward and appointed by the
mayor, one (1) member shall be appointed by the mayor to represent the
planning district, one (1) member shall be appointed by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and the ninth member shall
be the mayor or a person at large appointed by the mayor. The commission
shall elect its chairperson from among the appointed members. All members of
the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation. The terms
of the members representing wards will run concurrently with the term of the
respective alderman. The term of mayor's position or his designated person will
run concurrently with the term of the mayor. The term of the member
representing the planning district shall be for two (2) years and will expire June
30th of every even numbered year. The term of the member from the Board of
14-2
Mayor and Aldermen shall be for two (2) years and will expire on June 30th of
every odd numbered year. Any vacancy in an appointive membership shall be
filled for the unexpired term by the mayor. (as replaced by Ord. #96-47, § 1, Oct.
1996)
14-102. Organization, powers, duties, etc. The planning commission
shall be organized and shall carry out its powers, functions, and duties in
accordance with all applicable provisions of title 13, Tennessee Code Annotated.
(1981 code, § 11-102, as replaced by Ord. #96-47, § 1, Oct. 1996)
14-103. Additional powers. Having been designated as a regional
planning commission, the municipal planning commission shall have the
additional powers granted by, and shall otherwise be governed by the provisions
of the state law relating to regional planning commissions. (1981 code, § 11-103,
as replaced by Ord. #96-47, § 1, Oct. 1996)
14-104. Code of ethics. Upon their appointment, members of the
planning commission shall receive copies of the most current edition of the
American Planning Association Ethical Principals For Planning and shall
execute their official duties in compliance with the standards of conduct
delineated therein. (as replaced by Ord. #96-47, § 1, Oct. 1996)
15-1
TITLE 151
MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. SPEED LIMITS.
3. TURNING MOVEMENTS.
4. STOPPING AND YIELDING.
5. PARKING.
6. ENFORCEMENT.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements.
15-102. Authorized emergency vehicles defined.
15-103. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-104. Following emergency vehicles.
15-105. Running over fire hoses, etc.
15-106. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc.
15-107. Reckless driving.
15-108. One-way streets.
15-109. Unlaned streets.
15-110. Laned streets.
15-111. Yellow lines.
15-112. Miscellaneous traffic-control signs, etc.
15-113. General requirements for traffic-control signs, etc.
15-114. Unauthorized traffic-control signs, etc.
15-115. Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs, etc.
15-116. School safety patrols.
15-117. Driving through funerals or other processions.
15-118. Damaging pavements.
15-119. Clinging to vehicles in motion.
15-120. Riding on outside of vehicles.
15-121. Backing vehicles.
15-122. Projections from the rear of vehicles.
15-123. Causing unnecessary noise.
1For provisions relating to obstructions and/or excavations in public
streets, alleys, sidewalks, and rights of way, see title 18 in this code.
15-2
15-124. Vehicles and operators to be licensed.
15-125. Passing.
15-126. Following too close.
15-127. Right of way at intersections.
15-128. Obstruction of operator's view or driving mechanism.
15-129. Coasting prohibited.
15-130. Duty in event of accident.
15-131. Bicycle riders, etc.
15-101. Motor vehicle requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate any motor vehicle within the corporate limits unless such vehicle is
equipped with properly operating muffler, lights, brakes, horn, and such other
equipment as is prescribed and required by chapter 9, title 55, of the Tennessee
Code Annotated. (1981 code, § 9-101)
15-102. Authorized emergency vehicles defined. Authorized emergency
vehicles shall be fire department vehicles, police vehicles, and such ambulances
and other emergency vehicles as are designated by the chief of police. (1981
code, § 9-102)
15-103. Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.1 (1) The driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, or
when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section, subject to the conditions herein stated.
(2) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may park or stand,
irrespective of the provisions of this title; proceed past a red or stop signal or
stop sign, but only after slowing down to ascertain that the intersection is clear;
exceed the maximum speed limit and disregard regulations governing direction
of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
(3) The exemptions herein granted for an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion
sounds an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle and when the vehicle
is equipped with at least one (1) lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle
need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the
vehicle.
1See section 15-401 in this code for provisions with respect to the
operation of other vehicles upon the approach of emergency vehicles.
15-3
(4) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1981 code,
§ 9-103)
15-104. Following emergency vehicles. No driver of any vehicle shall
follow any authorized emergency vehicle apparently traveling in response to an
emergency call closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive or park any vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(1981 code, § 9-104)
15-105. Running over fire hoses, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to drive over any hose lines or other equipment of the fire department except in
obedience to the direction of a fireman or policeman. (1981 code, § 9-105)
15-106. Driving on streets closed for repairs, etc. Except for necessary
access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle shall be driven upon any
street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or other lawful purpose. (1981
code, § 9-106)
15-107. Reckless driving. Irrespective of the posted speed limit, no
person, including operators of emergency vehicles, shall drive any vehicle in
willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. (1981 code,
§ 9-107)
15-108. One-way streets. On any street for one-way traffic with posted
signs indicating the authorized direction of travel at all intersections offering
access thereto, no person shall operate any vehicle except in the indicated
direction. (1981 code, § 9-109)
15-109. Unlaned streets. (1) Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient
width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the street except:
(a) When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.
(b) When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while
under construction or repair.
(c) Upon a roadway designated and signposted by the
municipality for one-way traffic.
(2) All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or
when preparing for a left turn. (1981 code, § 9-110)
15-4
15-110. Laned streets. On streets marked with traffic it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his vehicle
within the boundaries of the proper lane for his direction of travel except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
On two (2) lane and three (3) lane streets, the proper lane for travel shall
be the right hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four
(4) or more lanes, either of the right hand lanes shall be available for use except
that traffic moving at less than the normal rate of speed shall use the extreme
right hand lane. On one-way streets either lane may be lawfully used in the
absence of markings to the contrary. (1981 code, § 9-111)
15-111. Yellow lines. On streets with a yellow line placed to the right of
any lane line or center line, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing zone,
and no operator shall drive his vehicle or any part thereof across or to the left
of such yellow line except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from such
street. (1981 code, § 9-112)
15-112. Miscellaneous traffic-control signs, etc. It shall be unlawful for
any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle to violate or fail to comply with any
traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device placed or erected by the state or
the municipality unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle
willfully to violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions of any police
officer. (1981 code, § 9-113)
15-113. General requirements for traffic-control signs, etc. All
traffic-control signs, signals, markings, and devices shall conform to the latest
revision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways,1 published by the U. S. Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, and shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type
and location throughout the municipality. This section shall not be construed as
being mandatory but is merely directive. (1981 code, § 9-114)
15-114. Unauthorized traffic-control signs, etc. No person shall place,
maintain, or display upon or in view of any street, any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles
an official traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to control the movement of traffic or parking of
vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
1This manual may be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.
15-5
official traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device or any railroad sign or
signal. (1981 code, § 9-115)
15-115. Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs, etc. When a
traffic-control sign, signal, marking, or device has been placed, the presumption
shall be that it is official and that it has been lawfully placed by the proper
authority. All presently installed traffic-control signs, signals, markings, and
devices are hereby expressly authorized, ratified, approved, and made official.
(1981 code, § 9-116)
15-116. School safety patrols. All motorists and pedestrians shall obey
the directions or signals of school safety patrols when such patrols are assigned
under the authority of the chief of police and are acting in accordance with
instructions; provided, that such persons giving any order, signal, or direction
shall at the time be wearing some insignia and/or using authorized flags for
giving signals. (1981 code, § 9-117)
15-117. Driving through funerals or other processions. Except when
otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are
in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1981 code,
§ 9-118)
15-118. Damaging pavements. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated upon any street of the municipality any vehicle, motor propelled or
otherwise, which by reason of its weight or the character of its wheels, tires, or
track is likely to damage the surface or foundation of the street. In addition to
a fine, any violator shall be liable to the city for all damages done to the streets.
(1981 code, § 9-119)
15-119. Clinging to vehicles in motion. It shall be unlawful for any
person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any
other vehicle to cling to, or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving
vehicle upon any street, alley, or other public way or place. (1981 code, § 9-120)
15-120. Riding on outside of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
to ride, or for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle being operated on a
street, alley, or other public way or place to permit any person to ride on any
portion of such vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This
section shall not apply to persons engaged in the necessary discharge of lawful
duties nor to persons riding in the load-carrying space of trucks. (1981 code,
§ 9-121)
15-6
15-121. Backing vehicles. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same
unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without
interfering with other traffic. (1981 code, § 9-122)
15-122. Projections from the rear of vehicles. Whenever the load or any
projecting portion of any vehicle shall extend beyond the rear of the bed or body
thereof, the operator shall display at the end of such load or projection, in such
position as to be clearly visible from the rear of such vehicle, a red flag being not
less than twelve (12) inches square. Between one-half (½) hour after sunset and
one-half (½) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed in place of the flag a
red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least two
hundred (200) feet from the rear of such vehicle. (1981 code, § 9-123)
15-123. Causing unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful for any person
to cause unnecessary noise by unnecessarily sounding the horn, "racing" the
motor, or causing the "screeching" or "squealing" of the tires on any motor
vehicle. (1981 code, § 9-124)
15-124. Vehicles and operators to be licensed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor vehicle in violation of the "Tennessee Motor
Vehicle Title and Registration Law" or the "Uniform Motor Vehicle Operators'
and Chauffeurs' License Law." (1981 code, § 9-125)
15-125. Passing. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left
turn.
The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a street of
sufficient width for four (4) or more lanes of moving traffic when such movement
can be made in safety.
No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the street
in overtaking or passing on the right.
When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an intersection
to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction unless he can see that the way ahead is sufficiently clear and
15-7
unobstructed to enable him to make the movement in safety. (1981 code,
§ 9-126)
15-126. Following too close. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not
follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due
regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the
streets. (1981 code, § 9-127)
15-127. Right of way at intersections. The operator of a vehicle
approaching an intersection shall yield the right of way to any vehicle which has
entered that intersection.
When two vehicles enter the intersection at approximately the same time,
the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle
on the right. (1981 code, § 9-128)
15-128. Obstruction of operator's view or driving mechanism. No
operator of any vehicle shall drive the same when such vehicle is so loaded with
persons or materials as to obstruct the view of the operator or to interfere with
the operator's control over the driving mechanism, or to endanger the lives or
safety of passengers or others. (1981 code, § 9-129)
15-129. Coasting prohibited. The operator of any motor vehicle, when
traveling on a down grade on any street, shall not coast with the gears of such
vehicle in neutral. (1981 code, § 9-130)
15-130. Duty in event of accident. The operator of any vehicle involved
in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person or damage to property
shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and shall give
his name and address and the registration number of his vehicle to the person
struck or to the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with or to the owner
of any damaged property and shall render reasonable assistance to any person
injured in such accident. (1981 code, § 9-131)
15-131. Bicycle riders, etc. Every person riding or operating a bicycle,
motorcycle, or motor driven cycle shall be subject to the provisions of all traffic
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city applicable to the driver or operator
of other vehicles except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application to bicycles, motorcycles, or motor driven cycles.
No person operating or riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or motor driven cycle
shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, nor shall the operator carry any other person upon such vehicle other
than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon.
No bicycle, motorcycle, or motor driven cycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
15-8
No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle, or motor driven cycle shall
carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping both
hands upon the handlebar.
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall operate any
motorcycle or motor driven cycle while any other person is a passenger upon
said motor vehicle.
Each driver of a motorcycle or motor driven cycle and any passenger
thereon shall be required to wear on his head a crash helmet of a type approved
by the state's commissioner of safety.
Every motorcycle or motor driven cycle operated upon any public way
within the corporate limits shall be equipped with a windshield of a type
approved by the state's commissioner of safety or, in the alternative, the
operator and any passenger on any such motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall
be required to wear safety goggles of a type approved by the state's
commissioner of safety for the purpose of preventing any flying object from
striking the operator or any passenger in the eyes.
No person shall operate a bicycle in the city after sundown without an
adequate red reflector on the rear and a white light on the front.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride on any vehicle in
violation of this section, and it shall also be unlawful for any parent or guardian
knowingly to permit any minor to operate a motorcycle or motor driven cycle in
violation of this section. (1981 code, § 9-132)
15-9
CHAPTER 2
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION
15-201. In general.
15-202. At intersections.
15-203. In school zones.
15-204. In congested areas.
15-201. In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive
a motor vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of thirty
(30) miles per hour except where official signs have been posted indicating other
speed limits in which cases the posted speed limit shall apply. (1981 code,
§ 9-201)
15-202. At intersections. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour unless such person is driving on a street regulated by
traffic control signals or signs which require traffic to stop or yield on the
intersecting streets. (1981 code, § 9-202)
15-203. In school zones. Generally, pursuant to section 55-8-152,
Tennessee Code Annotated, special speed limits in school zones shall be enacted
based on an engineering investigation; shall not be less than twenty (20) miles
per hour; and shall be in effect only when proper signs are posted with a
warning flasher or flashers in operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any such special speed limit enacted and in effect in accordance with this
paragraph.
When the governing body has not established special speed limits as
provided for above, any person who shall drive at a speed exceeding twenty (20)
miles per hour when passing a school during a recess period when a warning
flasher or flashers are in operation, or during a period of forty (40) minutes
before the opening hour of a school or a period of forty (40) minutes after the
closing hour of a school, while children are actually going to or leaving school,
shall be prima facie guilty of reckless driving. (1981 code, § 9-203)
15-204. In congested areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive a motor vehicle through any congested area at a rate of speed in excess
of any posted speed limit when such speed limit has been posted by authority
of the municipality. (1981 code, § 9-204)
15-10
CHAPTER 3
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION
15-301. Generally.
15-302. Right turns.
15-303. Left turns on two-way roadways.
15-304. Left turns on other than two-way roadways.
15-305. U-turns.
15-301. Generally. No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any
turning movement which might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any
other vehicle without first ascertaining that such movement can be made in
safety and signaling his intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law.1 (1981 code, § 9-301)
15-302. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway. (1981 code, § 9-302)
15-303. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the
right of the intersection of the center lines of the two roadways. (1981 code,
§ 9-303)
15-304. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach
the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly
as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (1981 code, § 9-304)
15-305. U-turns. U-turns are prohibited. (1981 code, § 9-305)
1See section 55-8-143, Tennessee Code Annotated.
15-11
CHAPTER 4
STOPPING AND YIELDING
SECTION
15-401. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
15-402. When emerging from alleys, etc.
15-403. To prevent obstructing an intersection.
15-404. At railroad crossings.
15-405. At "stop" signs.
15-406. At "yield" signs.
15-407. At traffic-control signals generally.
15-408. At flashing traffic-control signals.
15-409. At pedestrian-control signals.
15-410. Stops to be signaled.
15-401. Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles. Upon the
immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle1 making use of audible
and/or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, the
driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position parallel to,
and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of
any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer. (1981 code, § 9-401)
15-402. When emerging from alleys, etc. The drivers of all vehicles
emerging from alleys, parking lots, driveways, or buildings shall stop such
vehicles immediately prior to driving onto any sidewalk or street. They shall not
proceed to drive onto the sidewalk or street until they can safely do so without
colliding or interfering with approaching pedestrians or vehicles. (1981 code,
§ 9-402)
15-403. To prevent obstructing an intersection. No driver shall enter any
intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of such intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating
without obstructing the passage of traffic in or on the intersecting street or
crosswalk. This provision shall be effective notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed. (1981 code, § 9-403)
15-404. At railroad crossings. Any driver of a vehicle approaching a
railroad grade crossing shall stop within not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
1See section 15-102 in this code.
15-12
nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed further while any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the approach of a railroad train.
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman signals the
approach of a railroad train.
(3) A railroad train is approaching within approximately fifteen
hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal
indicating its approach.
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing. (1981 code, § 9-404)
15-405. At "stop" signs. The driver of a vehicle facing a "stop" sign shall
bring his vehicle to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until he can proceed
through the intersection in safety. (1981 code, § 9-405)
15-406. At "yield" signs. The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right
of way to approaching vehicles before proceeding at all places where "yield"
signs have been posted. (1981 code, § 9-406)
15-407. At traffic-control signals generally. Traffic-control signals
exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored
lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, shall show the following colors
only and shall apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone, or "Go":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits such
turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Steady yellow alone, or "Caution":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the
red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
15-13
(3) Steady red alone, or "Stop":
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go"
is shown alone. Provided, however, that a right turn on a red signal shall
be permitted at all intersections within the municipality, provided that
the prospective turning car comes to a full and complete stop before
turning and that the turning car yields the right of way to pedestrians
and cross traffic traveling in accordance with their traffic signal.
However, said turn shall not endanger other traffic lawfully using said
intersection. A right turn on red shall be permitted at all intersections
those clearly marked by a "No Turns On Red" sign, which may be erected
by the municipality at intersections which the municipality decides
require no right turns on red in the interest of traffic safety.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(4) Steady red with green arrow:
(a) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but
shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and
to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway
unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal.
(5) In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made a vehicle length short of the signal.
(1981 code, § 9-407)
15-408. At flashing traffic-control signals. (1) Whenever an illuminated
flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal placed or erected
in the municipality it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(a) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked,
or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed
shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(b) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
Change 13, July 15, 2008 15-14
(2) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct
of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules set forth in section 15-404 of this code. (1981 code, § 9-408)
15-409. At pedestrian-control signals. Wherever special pedestriancontrol
signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" have been
placed or erected by the municipality, such signals shall apply as follows:
(1) Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
(2) Wait or Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway
in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety
zone while the wait signal is showing. (1981 code, § 9-409)
15-410. Stops to be signaled. No person operating a motor vehicle shall
stop such vehicle, whether in obedience to a traffic sign or signal or otherwise,
without first signaling his intention in accordance with the requirements of the
state law,1 except in an emergency. (1981 code, § 9-410)
1See section 55-8-143, Tennessee Code Annotated.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 15-15
CHAPTER 5
PARKING
SECTION
15-501. Generally.
15-502. Angle parking.
15-503. Occupancy of more than one space.
15-504. Where prohibited.
15-505. Loading zones.
15-506. Two hour parking.
15-507. Presumption with respect to illegal parking.,
15-508. Traffic committee.
15-501. Generally. No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended
on any street without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor,
removing the ignition key, and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward
the nearest curb or gutter of the street.
Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked upon a street within
this municipality shall be so parked that its right wheels are approximately
parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the right edge or curb of the street.
On one-way streets where the municipality has not placed signs prohibiting the
same, vehicles may be permitted to park on the left side of the street, and in
such cases the left wheels shall be required to be within eighteen (18) inches of
the left edge or curb of the street.
Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease, or work on any vehicle, except
to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is parked on
a public street. (1981 code, § 9-501)
15-502. Angle parking. On those streets which have been signed or
marked by the municipality for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than headed in at the angle indicated by such signs or markings.
No person shall angle park any vehicle which has a trailer attached thereto or
which has a length in excess of twenty-four (24) feet. (1981 code, § 9-502)
15-503. Occupancy of more than one space. No person shall park a
vehicle in any designated parking space so that any part of such vehicle occupies
more than one such space or protrudes beyond the official markings on the
street or curb designating such space unless the vehicle is too large to be parked
within a single designated space. (1981 code, § 9-503)
15-504. Where prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of
any sign placed or erected by the state or municipality, nor:
(1) On a sidewalk,
Change 18, February 20, 2018 15-16
(2) In front of a public or private driveway,
(3) Within an intersection or within ten feet (10') thereof,
(4) Within ten feet (10') either side of a fire hydrant,
(5) Within a pedestrian crosswalk,
(6) Within fifty feet (50') of a railroad crossing,
(7) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy-five feet (75') of the entrance,
(8) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
other traffic would be obstructed,
(9) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street,
(10) Upon any bridge,
(11) In any space marked and designated "Doctor's Parking Space"
except by the person or persons for whose use said space was established,
(12) In front of the entrance to any movie theatre between 4 P.M. and
12 midnight,
(13) Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the municipality,
(14) No person shall leave an unattended vehicle in any area designated
as a fire lane which designation shall be by the marking on the road surface of
the words "Fire Lane" and by the marking of the area of the fire lane and the
posting of signs indicating that the area is a no parking area or a fire lane area
or words on a sign to that effect. Said attended vehicles may be in the fire lane
for the purpose of loading and unloading only. The marking of the fire lane may
be under the supervision of the fire chief of the City of Springfield or of the
owner or occupant of premises adjacent to the fire lane. Fire lanes for the
purpose of this section may be designated on public streets, roads, alleys or
highways of the City of Springfield, or on the premises of any shopping center,
trailer park or any apartment house complex, or any other premises which is
generally frequented by the public at large.
The Springfield Police Department shall be the enforcing authority for the
issuance of citations for violations of this section. A person who parks a vehicle
in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
subsequent offense. Violators with three (3) or more unpaid parking tickets shall
have their vehicles immobilized by the Police Department until all of their
parking tickets are paid. Section 15-603 in reference to fines for illegal parking
shall have no application to this section. (1981 code, § 9-504; Ord. # 90-01; as
amended by Ord. # 094-15, Sept. 1994, and replaced by Ord. #16-15, Sept. 2016)
15-505. Loading zones. It is the policy of the traffic committee that
loading zones in commercially and industrially zoned areas be permitted only
when there are no alternative means of ingress and egress serving such purpose
adjacent to the property.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 15-17
Loading and unloading zones may be established and designated in front
of or beside business houses where the need exists, at a monthly charge of ten
dollars ($10.00). No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for fifteen (15) minutes for the purpose of loading or unloading
of passengers or merchandise in any place marked by the municipality as a
loading and unloading zone.
15-506. Two hour parking. A two (2) hour parking limit for all on street
parking spaces shall be in effect daily from 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. on the
following streets: Main Street from 4th Avenue to 9 th Avenue 5th Avenue W est
from Main Street to Locust Street, 7 th Avenue East from Main Street to Willow
Street, 8th Avenue East from Main Street to Willow Street, Locust Street from
5th Avenue West to 6th Avenue West, 6 th Avenue West from Main Street to
Locust Street, and on West Courthouse Square. It shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any vehicle to park or allow his vehicle to be parked in such
on street parking space for any consecutive period of time more than two (2)
hours. On street parking spaces designated for handicap parking only shall not
be subject to the two (2) hour parking limit. (as replaced by Ord. #16-15, Sept.
2016)
15-507. Presumption with respect to illegal parking. When any
unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of this chapter,
there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
is responsible for such illegal parking. (1981 code, § 9-508)
15-508. Traffic committee. The traffic committee shall consist of the city
engineer, public works director, community development director, chief of police,
electric utility director and two (2) citizens at large appointed by the mayor.
Change 18, February 20, 2018 15-18
CHAPTER 6
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION
15-601. Issuance of traffic citations.
15-602. Failure to obey citation.
15-603. Illegal parking.
15-604. Impoundment of vehicles.
15-605. Disposal of "abandoned motor vehicles."
15-606. "Rules of the Road" adopted.
15-607. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
15-601. Issuance of traffic citations. When a police officer halts a traffic
violator other than for the purpose of giving a warning, and does not take such
person into custody under arrest, he shall take the name, address, and
operator's license number of said person, the license number of the motor vehicle
involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall
issue to him a written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge
against him in the city court at a specified time. The officer, upon receiving the
written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation,
shall release such person from custody. It shall be unlawful for any alleged
violator to give false or misleading information as to his name or address. (1981
code, § 9-601)
15-602. Failure to obey citation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate his written promise to appear in court after giving said promise to an
officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the citation was originally issued. (1981 code, § 9-602)
15-603. Illegal parking. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is
found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
code, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its license number and may take
any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner
to answer for the violation within seven (7) days during the hours and at a place
specified in the citation.
The offender may, within seven (7) days, have the charge against him
disposed of by paying to the police department a fine of twenty-six dollars
($26.00) provided he waives his right to a judicial hearing. Violators with three
(3) or more unpaid parking tickets shall have their vehicles immobilized by the
police department until all of their parking tickets are paid. (Ord. # 90-06, as
replaced by Ord. #16-18, Nov. 2016)
Change 12, February 20, 2007 15-19
15-604. Impoundment of vehicles. Members of the police department are
hereby authorized, when reasonably necessary for the security of the vehicle or
to prevent obstruction of traffic, to remove from the streets and impound any
vehicle whose operator is arrested or any unattended vehicle which is parked so
as to constitute an obstruction or hazard to normal traffic. Any impounded
vehicle shall be stored until the owner or other person entitled thereto claims
it, gives satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to possession, and pays all
applicable fees and costs, or until it is otherwise lawfully disposed of. (1981
code, § 9-604, modified)
15-605. Disposal of "abandoned motor vehicles". "Abandoned motor
vehicles," as defined in section 55-16-103, Tennessee Code Annotated, shall be
impounded and disposed of by the police department in accordance with the
provisions of sections 55-16-103 through 55-16-109, Tennessee Code Annotated.
(1981 code, § 9-605)
15-606. "Rules of the Road" adopted. By the authority granted under
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-307, the City of Springfield adopts by
reference as if fully set forth in this section, the "Rules of the Road," as codified
in Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 55-8-101 through 55-8-180. Additionally, the
City of Springfield adopts Tennessee Code Annotated, §§ 55-8-181 through
55-8-193 by reference as if fully set forth in this section. (as added by
Ord. #06-19, Sept. 2006)
15-607. Compliance with financial responsibility law required.
1. Every vehicle operated within the corporate limits must be in
compliance with the financial responsibility law.
2. At the time the driver of a motor vehicle is charged with any
moving violation under Tennessee Code Annotated, title 55, chapters 8 and 10,
parts 1-5, chapter 50; any provision in this title of this municipal code; or at the
time of an accident for which notice is required under Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 55-10-106, the officer shall request evidence of financial
responsibility as required by this section. In case of an accident for which notice
is required under Tennessee Code Annotated, § 55-10-106, the officer shall
request such evidence from all drivers involved in the accident, without regard
to apparent or actual fault.
3. For the purposes of this section, "financial responsibility" means:
a. Documentation, such as the declaration page of an insurance
policy, an insurance binder, or an insurance card from an insurance
company authorized to do business in Tennessee, stating that a policy of
insurance meeting the requirements of the Tennessee Financial
Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled in Tennessee Code Annotated,
chapter 12, title 55, has been issued;
Change 12, February 20, 2007 15-20
b. A certificate, valid for one (1) year, issued by the
commissioner of safety, stating that a cash deposit or bond in the amount
required by the Tennessee Financial Responsibility Law of 1977, compiled
in Tennessee Code Annotated, chapter 12, title 55, has been paid or filed
with the commissioner, or has qualified as n self-insurer under Tennessee
Code Annotated, § 55-12-111; or
c. The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation
was owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the department of
safety or the interstate commerce commission, or was owned by the
United States, the State of Tennessee or any political subdivision thereof,
and that such motor vehicle was being operated with the owner's consent.
4. It is a civil offense to fail to provide evidence of financial
responsibility pursuant to this section. Any violation of this section is
punishable by a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00). The civil penalty
prescribed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed by
the laws of this state or by the city's municipal code of ordinances.
5. On or before the court date, the person charged with a violation of
this section may submit evidence of compliance with this section in effect at the
time of the violation. If the court is satisfied that compliance was in effect at the
time of the violation, the charge of failure to provide evidence of financial
responsibility may be dismissed. (as added by Ord. #06-20, Sept. 2006)
Change 12, February 20, 2007 16-1
See title 15 in this code for related motor vehicle and traffic regulations. 1
TITLE 16
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS, ETC.1
CHAPTER
1. MISCELLANEOUS.
2. EXCAVATIONS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY AND/OR STREETS.
3. SIDEWALKS.
4. HOUSE NUMBERS.
5. STREET NAMES.
6. PARADES.
7. SOLICITATION ROADBLOCKS.
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION
16-101. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-102. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated.
16-103. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited.
16-104. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted.
16-105. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted.
16-106. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-107. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited.
16-108. Obstruction of drainage ditches.
16-109. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc.
16-110. Operation of trains at crossings regulated.
16-111. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks.
16-112. Fires in streets, etc.
16-113. [Repealed.]
16-114. [Repealed.]
16-101. Obstructing streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. No person
shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or right of
way for the purpose of storing, selling, or exhibiting any goods, wares,
merchandise, materials, construction materials, brush, junk, leaves, etc. (1981
code, § 12-201, modified)
16-102. Trees projecting over streets, etc., regulated. It shall be unlawful
for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs of trees on his property
to project over any street or alley at a height of less than fourteen (14) feet or
over any sidewalk at a height of less than eight (8) feet. (1981 code, § 12-202)
16-2
16-103. Trees, etc., obstructing view at intersections prohibited. (1) It
shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain on his
property any tree, shrub, sign, or other obstruction which prevents persons
driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view of traffic
control signs and approaching traffic at an intersection, pursuant to Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(2) It shall be the duty of every owner or part owner of a lot or lots
fronting upon any public street to maintain and/or remove any tree, shrub or
brush outside the traveling roadway and/or back of the curb that could be
constituted as a public nuisance. (1981 code, § 12-203, modified)
16-104. Projecting signs and awnings, etc., restricted. Signs, awnings,
or other structures which project over any street or other public way shall be
erected subject to the requirements of the building code. (1981 code, § 12-204)
16-105. Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted. It shall
be unlawful for any person to place or have placed any banner or sign across or
above any public street or alley except when expressly authorized by the
governing body after a finding that no hazard will be created by such banner or
sign. (1981 code, § 12-205, modified)
16-106. Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys, or sidewalks
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property
to allow any gate or door to swing open upon or over any street, alley, or
sidewalk except when required by law. (1981 code, § 12-206)
16-107. Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw, track, or allow to fall on any
street, alley, or sidewalk any refuse, glass, tacks, mud, or other objects or
materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit or interfere
with the use of such public ways and places for their intended purposes. (1981
code, § 12-207)
16-108. Obstruction of drainage ditches. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or cause the obstruction of any drainage ditch in any public
right of way or in which water from public right of way is drained.
No culvert pipe, concrete box culverts, bridges, etc.may be attached to
existing drainage systems or installed in a public right of way or in a drainage
ditch or area in which water from public right of way is drained without a
written permit from the city engineer.
Any pipe or structure installed in violation of this section shall be
removed by city personnel. (1981 code, § 12-208, modified)
Change 12, February 20, 2007 16-3
16-109. Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean, etc. The occupants
of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep the sidewalk clean.
(1981 code, § 12-209)
16-110. Operation of trains at crossings regulated. No person shall
operate any railroad train across any street or alley without giving a warning
of its approach as required by state law; nor shall he make such crossing at a
speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour. It shall also be unlawful to
stop a railroad train so as to block or obstruct any street or alley for a period of
more than five (5) consecutive minutes. (Ord. # 84-01))
16-111. Animals and vehicles on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any
person to ride, lead, or tie any animal, or ride, push, pull, or place any vehicle
across or upon any sidewalk in such manner as unreasonably interferes with or
inconveniences pedestrians using the sidewalk. It shall also be unlawful for any
person knowingly to allow any minor under his control to violate this section.
(1981 code, § 12-212)
16-112. Fires in streets, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to set or
contribute to any fire in any public street, alley, or sidewalk. (1981 code,
§ 12-113)
16-113. [Repealed.] (as added by Ord. #02-11, Aug. 2002, as repealed by
Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
16-114. [Repealed.] (as added by Ord. #02-11, Aug. 2002, as repealed by
Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
16-4
Sections 16-201 through 16-209 in this chapter were patterned 1
substantially after the ordinance upheld by the Tennessee Supreme Court in the
1960 case of City of Paris, Tennessee v. Paris-Henry County Public Utility
District, 207 Tenn. 388, 340 S.W. 2d 885.
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY AND/OR STREETS1
SECTION
16-201. Permit required.
16-202. Applications.
16-203. Deposit or bond.
16-204. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights--temporary sidewalks.
16-205. Restoration of streets, etc.
16-206. Insurance.
16-207. Time limits.
16-208. Supervision.
16-209. Driveway construction.
16-201. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, association, or others to make any excavation in any street, alley,
public place or city right of way, or to tunnel under any street, alley, public place
or city right of way without having first obtained a permit as herein required,
and without complying with the provisions of this chapter; and it shall also be
unlawful to violate, or vary from, the terms of any such permit; provided,
however, any person maintaining pipes, lines, or other underground facilities in
or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening without a permit
when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately and
a permit cannot reasonably and practicably be obtained beforehand. The person
shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
office of the city engineer is open for business, and said permit shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun. All existing streets shall be
bored unless in the opinion of the city engineer this method is not feasible.
(1981 code, § 12-201)
16-202. Applications. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
Public Works Department, and shall state thereon the location of the intended
excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others doing the actual excavating, the name of the
person, firm, corporation, association, or others for whom the work is being done,
and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all
ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. Such application shall be
16-5
rejected or approved by the city engineer within twenty-four (24) hours of its
filing. The fee for each permit shall be $25.00. (1981 code, § 12-202)
16-203. Deposit or bond. No such permit shall be issued unless and until
the applicant therefor has deposited with the city engineer a cash deposit,
certified cashier's check or non-revocable letter of credit to the City of
Springfield. The deposit shall be a minimum of $500.00. Where the amount of
the deposit is clearly inadequate to cover the cost of restoration, the city
engineer shall increase the amount of the deposit to an amount considered by
him to be adequate to cover the said cost. From this deposit shall be deducted
the expense to the municipality of relaying the surface of the ground or
pavement, and of making the refill if the applicant fails to do so, by the
municipality or at its expense.
In lieu of a deposit the applicant may deposit with the city engineer a
surety bond in such form and amount as the city engineer shall deem adequate
to cover the costs to the municipality if the applicant fails to make proper
restoration. (1981 code, § 12-204)
16-204. Manner of excavating--barricades and lights--temporary
sidewalks. Any person, firm, corporation, association, or others making any
excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the
application and permit authorizing the work to be done. Sufficient and proper
barricades and lights shall be maintained to meet minimum requirements of
U.S. Dept. of Transportation-Federal Housing Admin., Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (DOT-MUTCD) to protect persons and property from
injury by or because of the excavation being made. If any sidewalk is blocked
by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed and provided
which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. (1981 code, § 12-205)
16-205. Restoration of streets, etc. Any person, firm, corporation,
association, or others making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street,
alley, or public place in this municipality shall restore said street, alley, or
public place as directed by the public works director or as a minimum the
following specifications: (1) All excavations shall be backfilled as directed by
public works director. In case of unreasonable delay in restoring the street,
alley, or public place, the city engineer shall give notice to the person, firm,
corporation, association, or others that unless the excavation or tunnel is
restored according to the above specifications within a specified reasonable
period of time, the municipality will do the work and charge the expense of
doing the same to such person, firm, corporation, association, or others. If
within the specified time the conditions of the above notice have not been
complied with, the work shall be done by the municipality, an accurate account
of the expense involved shall be kept, and the total cost shall be charged to the
16-6
person, firm, corporation, association, or others who made the excavation or
tunnel. (1981 code, § 12-206)
16-206. Insurance. In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond
hereinbefore required to insure that proper restoration is made, each person
applying for an excavation permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating
that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as
against claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the
performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his
subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance
shall cover collapse, explosive hazards, and underground work by equipment on
the street, and shall include protection against liability arising from completed
operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the city
engineer in accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however,
that the liability insurance for bodily injury shall not be less than $500,000 for
each person and $1,000,000 for each accident, and for property damages not less
than $50,000 for any one (1) accident, and a $100,000 aggregate. (1981 code,
§ 12-207)
16-207. Time limits. Each application for a permit shall state the length
of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the
restoration of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the backfill is
made ready for the pavement to be put on by the municipality if the
municipality restores such surface pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to
comply with this time limitation unless permission for an extension of time is
granted by the public works director. (1981 code, § 12-208)
16-208. Supervision. The public works director shall from time to time
inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street,
alley, or other public place in the municipality and see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to him at least ten (10) hours
before the work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (1981
code, § 12-209)
16-209. Driveway construction. No person, firm, corporation, association,
or others shall construct, cut, build, or maintain a driveway connecting private
property to a public street in this municipality without first obtaining a permit
from the city engineer. Such a permit will not be issued when the contemplated
driveway is to be so located or constructed as to create an unreasonable hazard
to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. If such a permit is issued, it shall specify
whether or not a drainage tile or culvert is required in the construction of the
said driveway. If a drainage tile or culvert is required, the said permit shall
specify the size of the drainage tile or culvert to be used. All drainage tiles or
culverts used shall be constructed of either concrete or metal of no less than 15"
16-7
in diameter. Driveway placement, width and design shall comply with the
Springfield Municipal Regional Zoning ordinance. Persons not complying with
aforementioned permit shall not be issued any additional permits from the city.
Driveways constructed in violation of the city code or driveway permits shall be
removed by the Public Works Department. (1981 code, § 12-210, modified)
Change 8, January 15, 2002 16-8
CHAPTER 3
SIDEWALKS
SECTION
16-301. Responsibility for construction of sidewalks.
16-302. Responsibility for maintenance.
16-303. Responsibility for correcting grade defects.
16-304. Conditions constituting a public nuisance.
16-305. Abatement of nuisances by city.
16-306. Supervision and direction of work.
16-307. Repairs and construction performed by the City of Springfield.
16-301. Responsibility for construction of sidewalks. It shall be the duty
of every owner or part owner of a lot or lots fronting upon any public street in
front of which there is no sidewalk or pavement to cause to be constructed and
kept in proper and safe repair so as not to be attended with danger of personal
injury, discomfort or inconvenience to the traveling public, a safe and proper
sidewalk or pavement along the whole front of his lot or lots in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and any and all other ordinances of Springfield,
Tennessee. (1981 code, § 12-301)
16-302. Responsibility for maintenance. It shall be the duty of every
owner of a lot or lots within the city along or in front of which a sidewalk or
pavement has been constructed to maintain such sidewalk in a proper and safe
condition so that the same is not attended with danger of personal injury,
discomfort or inconvenience to the traveling public. (1981 code, § 12-302)
16-303. Responsibility for correcting grade defects. It shall be the duty
of every owner of a lot or lots within the city along or in front of which a
sidewalk or pavement has been constructed, but in which there is an elevation
or depression causing such sidewalk to be unsafe and improper for the traveling
public and attended with danger of personal injury, discomfort or inconvenience,
to so repair or fix said elevation or depression or, if necessary, to change the
grade of his sidewalk or pavement so as to make it safe for the traveling public.
(1981 code, § 12-303)
16-304. Conditions constituting a public nuisance. The absence of a
sidewalk or pavement upon any public street or the presence of any defect or
obstruction in any existing sidewalk or pavement which makes the use thereof
by the public unsafe, improper, or attended with danger of personal injury,
discomfort or inconvenience, is hereby declared to be and to constitute a public
nuisance. The owner of the property in front of or along which such nuisance
exists is responsible therefor and the failure to abate the same or in good faith
Change 8, January 15, 2002 16-9
to commence to abate the same within five (5) days from the time notice has
been served on him, or them, by the Codes Enforcement Department shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable under the general penalty clause for this
code. The notice shall set out the character, size and kind of sidewalk to be
constructed, or if repairs are necessary, the kind and character of such repairs,
or if a change in the grade of the existing sidewalk is necessary or repairs to an
elevation or depression is necessary, what grade is to be used or in what manner
the elevation or depression is to be remedied. (1981 code, § 12-304)
16-305. Abatement of nuisances by city. When the Codes Enforcement
Department has served the notice set out in the preceding section and the owner
of said lot or lots has failed within five (5) days from the date of such service to
in good faith commence the construction, paving, repairing or grading of said
sidewalks as provided by this and other ordinances of Springfield, Tennessee,
then the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Springfield, Tennessee, may at once
proceed to repair, construct, pave or grade said sidewalks or pavements by
contract let to some suitable person on the best terms that can be made and pay
for the same. When the costs thereof to each abutting owner is ascertained by
the city recorder he shall notify him or them by registered mail as to the amount
so expended and said amount shall constitute a charge against said owner or
owners of the lot or lots respectively abutting thereon and also a lien upon said
abutting lot or lots which may be enforced by attachment in law or equity, or
recovered by suit in the name and for the use of the Aldermen of Springfield,
Tennessee, in any court of competent jurisdiction. (1981 code, § 12-305)
16-306. Supervision and direction of work. The work of laying or
constructing sidewalks or pavement and the repairing or changing of the grade
therein or thereof shall be under the supervision and direction and subject to the
control of the city engineer, as to the work and materials used. (1981 code,
§ 12-306)
16-307. Repairs and construction performed by the City of Springfield.
The City of Springfield may from time to time elect to make repairs to existing
sidewalk or construct new sidewalk, at selected locations and at its own expense,
in order to improve pedestrian safety or the general appearance and function of
city streets, or to eliminate grade defects or other public nuisances. The
performance of such work by the City of Springfield shall not relieve the owner
of a lot or lots within the city, along or in front of which a sidewalk or pavement
has been constructed, of the duty to subsequently maintain at the owner's
expense such sidewalk in a proper and safe condition in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and any and all other ordinances of Springfield,
Tennessee. (as added by Ord. #01-40, Jan. 2002)
16-10
CHAPTER 4
HOUSE NUMBERS
SECTION
16-401. Division of city.
16-402. Use of "even" and "odd" numbers.
16-403. Allocation of numbers.
16-404. Placement of numbers.
16-405. Application and enforcement.
16-401. Division of city. Fifth Avenue shall be the dividing line between
the northern and southern portions of the city. Main Street shall be the dividing
line between the eastern and western portions of the city. (1981 code, § 12-401)
16-402. Use of "even" and "odd" numbers. Even numbers shall be placed
on the north and east sides of avenues and streets and odd numbers shall be
placed on the south and west sides. (1981 code, § 12-402)
16-403. Allocation of numbers. Numbers shall begin with the 100 block
and 100 numbers shall be allotted to each block between cross streets.
Generally a separate number shall be allocated for each 25 feet or fraction
thereof of frontage.
On the east side of Main Street between Fourth Avenue and Eighth
Avenue and on the Square a separate number shall be allocated for each 12 1/2
feet or fraction thereof. (1981 code, § 12-403)
16-404. Placement of numbers. The owner of every house that is not
already numbered with an approved number shall place thereon a conspicuous
house number approved by the Community Development Office.
The owner shall remove any incorrect or irregular number. (1981 code,
§ 12-404, modified)
16-405. Application and enforcement. The Community Development
Office shall see that proper numbers are assigned and made available at cost to
property owners making application therefor and shall generally see to the
enforcement of this chapter. (1981 code, § 12-405, modified)
16-11
Ordinances vacating, closing, or changing the names of streets and/or 1
alleys are of record in the city recorder's office and are dated as follows:
Sept. 11, 1964 May 7, 1974
June 9, 1970 Aug. 8, 1978
Feb. 9, 1971 Apr. 22, 1980
CHAPTER 5
STREET NAMES
SECTION
16-501. System established.
16-501. System established. There is hereby established an official
system of street names in the City of Springfield as shown on the City
Engineer's Base Map for Computer Aided Design as produced by the City
Engineering Department.
Names of streets shall remain as designated on said map unless officially
changed by ordinance.1
No new streets shall be accepted by the city nor municipal improvements
made therein until such streets have been named. If they are extensions of
existing streets, the existing name shall be continued. If not extensions the
names recorded shall not duplicate or closely approximate street names already
assigned.
Every subdivision plat submitted to the planning commission for its
approval after the effective date of this chapter shall show the proper names of
any and all streets and these street designations shall be approved by the
planning commission before such new streets are officially named. If street
names are changed, the city engineer shall be responsible for revision and
recording of revised plats. (1981 code, § 12-501)
Change 8, January 15, 2002 16-12
CHAPTER 6
PARADES
SECTION
16-601. Short title.
16-602. Definitions.
16-603. Purposes.
16-604. Permit.
16-605. Application.
16-606. Standards for issuance.
16-607. Contents of permit.
16-608. Duties of permittee.
16-609. Revocation of permit.
16-610. Notice to city officials.
16-611. Violation and penalty.
16-601. Short title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as
the "Parade Ordinance of the City of Springfield". (Ord. # 091-17, Dec. 1991)
16-602. Definitions. The following words, for the purpose of this
ordinance, shall have the following meanings:
(1) "Parade" is any meeting, parade, demonstration, exhibition,
festival, homecoming, assembly, or other such events to be held in, upon, or
along any street, or on any other city owned outdoor public place in Springfield.
"Parade" shall not include the solicitation or collection of donations by religious,
charitable, or non-profit organizations.
(2) "City" is the City of Springfield.
(3) "Board of Mayor and Aldermen" is the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen of Springfield.
(4) "City recorder" is the city recorder of Springfield.
(5) "Chief of police" is the Chief of police of Springfield.
(6) "Parade permit" is a permit as required by this ordinance.
(7) "Person" is any person, firm, group, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind. (Ord. # 091-17, Dec. 1991,
as amended by Ord. #01-41, Jan. 2002)
16-603. Purposes. (1) The City of Springfield recognizes the constitutional
right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any subject whatsoever
and to associate with others who share similar beliefs.
(2) The city passes this ordinance to regulate the time, place, and
manner of parades.
(3) The city passes this ordinance in the interest of all its citizens,
public safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience.
(4) The City of Springfield has limited resources and passes this
ordinance so that it may properly allocate these resources among its citizens.
16-13
(5) The purpose of this ordinance is to promote order, safety, and
tranquility in the streets of the city.
(6) This ordinance is passed to help minimize traffic and business
interruption on or along city streets and public places. (Ord. # 091-17, Dec.
1991)
16-604. Permit. (1) No person shall parade unless a parade permit has
been obtained from the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Any parade held without
the proper permit shall be unlawful.
(2) This ordinance shall not apply to funeral processions and park
lands excluding the street, avenues or right of ways therein. (Ord. # 091-17,
Dec. 1991)
16-605. Application. (1) Any person seeking issuance of a parade permit
shall file an application with the city recorder on forms provided by the city
recorder. The city recorder shall place the request for a parade permit on the
agenda of the next meeting of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen for action by
it in the normal course of business.
(2) The application for a parade permit shall be filed in writing with
the city recorder not less than thirty (30) days prior to the contemplated parade
and five (5) working days prior to any regularly scheduled or called meeting of
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. No permit shall be granted sooner than one
hundred eighty (180) days prior to the contemplated parade. A copy of the
application shall be given to the chief of police who shall investigate and make
a report to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(3) The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct a parade or of the organization and its responsible
heads;
(b) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(c) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(d) The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the
termination point;
(e) The approximate number of persons who, and animals
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of
the vehicles;
(f) The hours when the parade will begin and end;
(g) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only
a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
(h) The location by streets of any assembly area(s);
16-14
(i) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble
at any assembly area(s);
(j) The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade; and
(k) If the parade is to be held on behalf of any person other than
the applicant, the authorization of that person.
(l) Whether the applicant has been convicted for the violation
of the city parade ordinance of the City of Springfield.
(4) The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall decide whether to grant
the application for a permit. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may consult
with the chief of police in making their decision.
(5) The Board of Mayor and Aldermen in cooperation with the chief of
police shall have the authority to designate the starting point, route, terminal
point, or other time, place, and manner restrictions as deemed proper in
consideration of minimum traffic interruption, public safety, health, welfare,
convenience, peace or order. (Ord. # 091-17, Dec. 1991)
16-606. Standards for issuance. (1) The Board of Mayor and Aldermen
shall issue a parade permit upon consideration of the application and other
information obtained when they find that:
(a) The conduct of the parade will not unduly interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
(b) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion or
interruption of essential or emergency municipal services;
(c) The parade is scheduled to move from its origin to its
termination expeditiously and without reasonable delay;
(d) The applicant has satisfied the bond requirement; and
(e) No other permit has been granted for the same day.
(2) A permit shall be granted to the first person properly
applying under the requirements of this ordinance.
(3) No permit shall be granted for a parade except those restricted to
the following time:
(a) No earlier than 8:00 a.m.
(b) No later than 12:00 midnight.
(c) This subsection shall not be applicable to activities directly
related to or activities sponsored by accredited public schools.
(4) No permit shall be granted to any person until the applicant has
posted in advance a two hundred fifty ($250.00) bond to cover the reasonable
expenses incurred in the clean up efforts after the parade.
(5) The city recorder shall notify the applicant within five (5) days
after the action of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen whether the permit has
been granted or denied. If the permit has been denied, the city recorder shall
set forth the reasons why the Board of Mayor and Aldermen denied the permit.
16-15
(6) In computing any period of time set out in this ordinance, no
Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays are to be computed in the time period. (Ord.
# 091-17, Dec. 1991, as amended by Ord. # 094-07, May 1994)
16-607. Contents of permit. Each parade permit shall state the
following:
(1) Assembly and disassembly time and place;
(2) Starting time;
(3) The route and the portions of the streets to be traversed that may
be occupied by the parade;
(4) Minimum speed;
(5) Maximum speed;
(6) Interval of space between parade units;
(7) The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(8) Other information as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen in
cooperation with the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of
this ordinance. (Ord. # 091-17, Dec. 1991)
16-608. Duties of permittee. (1) A permittee shall comply with all
permit application information, permit directions and conditions, and with all
applicable laws and ordinances.
(2) The permittee shall advise parade participants of such permit
requirements.
(3) The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such
activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the parade. (Ord.
# 091-17, Dec. 1991)
16-609. Revocation of permit. (1) The Board of Mayor and Aldermen or
their designee shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder prior to the parade upon the application of the standards for issuance
as herein set forth if it is found that:
(a) Applicant materially misrepresented facts or information in
the application; and/or
(b) Applicant failed to meet the standards for issuance set forth
herein.
(2) The Board of Mayor and Aldermen or their designee shall have the
authority to revoke the permit during the parade and disassemble the parade
if:
(a) A public emergency arises requiring such revocation to
protect the safety of persons or property; or
(b) Disorderly conduct, riots, lawless activity, violence, or other
breach of the peace, incited by parade participants, occurs. (Ord.
# 091-17, Dec. 1991)
16-16
16-610. Notice to city officials. Immediately upon the issuance of a
parade permit, the city recorder shall send a copy of the permit to the following:
(1) The mayor;
(2) The city manager;
(3) The city attorney;
(4) The fire chief;
(5) The ambulance authority; and
(6) The chief of police. (Ord. # 091-17, Dec. 1991)
16-611. Violation and penalty. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person to
parade without first having obtained a permit as required by this ordinance.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade in
Springfield for which a permit has not been granted.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with all
directions and conditions of the parade permit.
(4) Any person violating the provisions of any section of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
violation. (Ord. # 091-17, Dec. 1991)
Change 8, January 15, 2002 16-17
CHAPTER 7
SOLICITATION ROADBLOCKS
SECTION
16-701. Determination of exemption from IRS required.
16-702. General requirements.
16-703. Definitions.
16-704. Eligibility.
16-705. Restrictions.
16-706. Permits.
16-707. Violations.
16-701. Determination of exemption from IRS required. Solicitation
roadblocks shall be allowed on the streets of the City of Springfield only by
organizations that have received a determination of exemption from the internal
revenue service under 26 U.S.C. Subchapter 501(c) (3) or (4). (as added by
Ord. #01-42, Jan. 2002)
16-702. General requirements. The members of the organization shall
take reasonable and prudent precautions to prevent both the disruption of traffic
flow and the injuries to persons or property. (as added by Ord. #01-42, Jan.
2002)
16-703. Definitions. The following terms shall apply in the
interpretation and application of this chapter:
(1) "Solicitation roadblock" shall mean the solicitation by any person
of money on or in the right of way of any street, road, highway, or any other
public way and place generally open to and used by the public for travel in or
upon motor vehicles.
(2) "Street," "road," "highway," and public way and place shall include
the paved or unpaved surface of any such street, road, highway or public place,
the entire width of the public right-of-way extending laterally therefrom,
dividers, medians, and abutting or adjoining sidewalks or other pedestrian
pathways generally used by the public for pedestrian traffic.
(3) "Professional solicitor" means any person who, for a financial or
other consideration, solicits contributions for, or on behalf of, a charitable
organization. (as added by Ord. #01-42, Jan. 2002)
16-704. Eligibility. Charitable organizations desiring to conduct a
solicitation roadblock shall be restricted to:
(1) Charitable organizations that have their principal headquarters
and meeting place within the boundaries of Robertson County.
Change 8, January 15, 2002 16-18
(2) No professional solicitor shall solicit in the name of a charitable
organization.
(3) City of Springfield including various departments of the city. (as
added by Ord. #01-42, Jan. 2002)
16-705. Restrictions. Restrictions shall be as follows:
(1) Roadblocks shall be limited to one (1) per day and only on
Saturdays from 8:00 A.M. to 12:00 Noon.
(2) Roadblocks shall be conducted at the intersections of Locust Street
and 5 Avenue West and Main Street at Central Avenue. th
(3) Organizations shall be limited to one (1) roadblock per calendar
year.
(4) Organizations shall clean up all litter occurring as a result of the
roadblock.
(5) No one under eighteen (18) years of age may actively participate
in the roadblock. (as added by Ord. #01-42, Jan. 2002)
16-706. Permits. Every charitable organization, which intends to solicit
roadblock contributions within the City of Springfield, shall, prior to any
solicitation shall comply with the following:
(1) File a completed "roadblock application" with the city recorder's
office.
(2) The "roadblock application" must be filed a minimum of 30 days
prior to the roadblock and no sooner than 90 days before the requested date.
(3) The city recorder, with the assistance of the police chief, shall
approve or deny the application within five (5) days of request.
(4) Any applicant denied approval of an application may request, in
writing, to appear before the board of mayor and aldermen for reconsideration.
(5) A permit shall be issued by the city recorder's office and a copy
must be available at all solicitation locations. (as added by Ord. #01-42, Jan.
2002)
16-707. Violations. Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to
punishment under the general penalty provision of the City of Springfield
Municipal Code. (as added by Ord. #01-42, Jan. 2002)
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-1
TITLE 17
REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL
CHAPTER
1. REFUSE COLLECTION.
2. LITTER ABATEMENT.
CHAPTER 1
REFUSE COLLECTION1
SECTION
17-101. All premises to be kept clean.
17-102. Refuse defined.
17-103. Definitions.
17-104. Residential refuse collection.
17-105. Commercial refuse picked up residentially.
17-106. Apartments and condominiums picked up residentially.
17-107. Placement of refuse carts for collection.
17-108. Care of refuse carts.
17-109. Refuse collection for commercial units.
17-110. Refuse collection vehicles.
17-111. Disturbance of refuse carts and containers prohibited.
17-112. Hazardous waste prohibited.
17-113. Rubbish and bulky waste.
17-114. Conditions of service for rubbish and bulky waste collection.
17-115. Leaf collection service.
17-116. Sanitation rates.
17-117. Burning prohibited.
17-118. Penalties.
17-101. All premises to be kept clean. All persons within the city limits
are required to keep their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, free from
accumulations of refuse except when stored as provided in this chapter. All
owners or tenants of residential units shall be required to accept and pay for
refuse collection service as provided by the city and all owners of commercial
units shall be required to either contract for refuse collection service or accept
and pay for refuse collection service as provided by the city. (1981 code, § 8-101,
as replaced by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
1See Ord. #091-7, Aug. 1991 of record in the office of the recorder, for
pickup rates and administrative procedures covering extra pickups.
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-2
17-102. Refuse defined. Refuse shall mean and include garbage, rubbish,
and bulky waste as those terms are defined herein with the exception that dead
animals, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks, and similar materials
are expressly excluded. All refuse placed at the street for pickup must be
separated for disposal. Brush, leaves, metals, and junk must be stacked in
separate piles. (1981 code, § 8-102, as replaced by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-103. Definitions. All other definitions for the purpose of this chapter
are as follows:
(1) "Bags." Plastic sacks designed to store refuse with sufficient wall
strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total weight of
a bag and its contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds.
(2) "Bulky waste." Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing
machines, other white goods and appliances, computers, televisions, stereo
systems, furniture, mattresses and similar items.
(3) "Bundle." Trees, shrub and brush trimmings, or newspapers and
magazines neatly stacked forming an easily handled package not exceeding six
(6) feet in length or seventy-five pounds in weight.
(4) "Commercial refuse." All garbage, rubbish and bulky waste
generated by a
commercial or industrial unit, excluding hazardous waste.
(5) "Commercial refuse picked up residentially." Refuse from a
commercial unit that is placed in a residential refuse cart.
(6) "Commercial unit." Any business, commercial, industrial,
apartment, condominium, or large multi-unit residential establishment within
the city limits.
(7) "Dumpster." A metal container at least two (2) cubic yards in size,
with an attached lid, and specifically designed for use with a front-end loading
packer truck.
(8) "Garbage." All normal and usual household and institutional waste
products that are placed in approved containers for collection purposes and are
usually a mixture of putrescible, non-putrescible, combustible and incombustible
materials, such as organic wastes from food preparation and consumption,
wrapping and packaging materials, metal, glass and plastic containers and
other items.
(9) "Hazardous waste." Any chemical compound, mixture, substance
or article which is designated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or appropriate agency of the State of Tennessee as "hazardous" as that
term is defined by or pursuant to Federal, State or local laws or ordinances.
(10) "Refuse cart." A ninety (90) gallon container on wheels provided
to each sanitation customer by the City of Springfield.
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-3
(11) "Residential refuse." All garbage, rubbish, bulky waste and all
other items that may be deposited in a sanitary landfill generated by an
occupant of a residential unit, excluding hazardous waste.
(12) "Residential unit." A single-family home, mobile home, or duplex
unit billed for service individually and located on a public street. A residential
unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power
services are being supplied thereto.
(13) "Roll-off container." A large metal container, open or closed top,
that can be rolled on to the back of a truck. Sizes of roll-off containers are
generally twenty (20), thirty (30) or forty (40) cubic yards.
(14) "Rubbish." All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass
cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips,
shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and
discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp
and other products, such as are used for packaging or wrapping, crockery and
glass, floor sweepings, mineral or metallic substances. (as replaced by Ord. #05-
19, Oct. 2005)
17-104. Residential refuse collection. The city shall provide refuse carts
to all residential customers and will service residential customers once a week.
Only refuse in the cart shall be collected, with the exception that extra
household refuse generated due to holidays, visitors, parties, and similar events
and that is placed in a bag next to the cart may be picked up on an occasional
basis. Refuse placed in privately owned containers, cans and carts shall not be
collected. Additional refuse left on or around the cart on a regular basis will not
be picked up. If the practice of leaving excess waste around the refuse cart
continues, the city shall have the discretion to provide an additional refuse cart
at the residence and increase the sanitation rate accordingly. (1981 code,
§ 8-105, as replaced by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-105. Commercial refuse picked up residentially. The city shall have
the discretion to provide residential refuse collection service to a small
commercial customer. The city shall provide refuse carts to all commercial
customers picked up residentially and will service small commercial customers
picked up residentially one (1) or two (2) times per week, depending on each
small commercial customer's preference. All refuse must be placed in the refuse
cart for collection. The city shall not pick up additional refuse on or around the
refuse cart. If the practice of leaving excess waste around the refuse cart
continues, the city shall have the discretion to provide an additional cart which
must be purchased by the customer and the customer's sanitation rate will be
increased accordingly. The cost of such additional refuse cart shall be the same
price as paid by the city when purchased from the supplier. (1981 code, § 8-107,
as replaced by Ord. #05-19, Oct 2005)
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-4
17-106. Apartments and condominiums picked up residentially.
Apartments, condominiums, or any other private properties that, at the
discretion of the city, are allowed to receive refuse cart service shall comply with
the following conditions:
(1) The owner or association must execute a hold harmless agreement
with the public works department for any damage caused to street or driveway
surfaces by city sanitation trucks collecting refuse carts.
(2) The complex must have an area for sanitation vehicles to turn
around and sanitation vehicles will not be allowed to back into the complex.
(3) The city shall not provide refuse collection for rubbish, bulky waste,
brush or leaves.
(4) Back door pick-up or waiver service will not be allowed. (as
replaced by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-107. Placement of refuse carts for collection. All residential customers
and small commercial customers picked up residentially, except those approved
for special assistance due to handicap, illness or infirmity shall place their
refuse carts at curbside or at the edge of the street no later than 5:30 A.M. on
the day of collection. Where alleys are used by the city's refuse trucks, refuse
carts shall be placed on or within six (6) feet of the alley line in such a position
as not to intrude upon the traveled portion of the alley. Where streets are used
by the city's refuse trucks, refuse carts shall be placed adjacent to and back of
the ditch or street line if there is no curb. As soon as practical, after such refuse
cart has been emptied, it shall be removed by the owner or occupant to within
or to the rear of the premises and away from the street or alley until the next
scheduled time for collection. (Ord. #091-7, Aug. 1991; replaced by Ord. #98-23,
June 1998, Ord. #00-25, Dec. 2000, and Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-108. Care of refuse carts. Each owner, occupant, or other responsible
person using or occupying any residence or small commercial establishment
within the city shall be provided by the city, free of charge, one (1) wheeled
refuse cart for storage of refuse for collection by the city under the following
conditions:
(1) Each owner, occupant, or other responsible person shall be
responsible for keeping the refuse cart clean and sanitary in compliance with
health and sanitation requirements and shall keep container lids closed at all
times.
(2) No refuse shall be placed in the cart until such refuse has been
drained of all free liquids.
(3) The refuse cart must not be painted, abused, mutilated, altered or
modified in any manner.
(4) Each owner, occupant, or other responsible person shall be
responsible for replacing the refuse cart if it is damaged or destroyed by the
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-5
customer or as a result of his negligence, by the payment of the purchase price
expended by the city for the purchase of said refuse cart.
(5) The city shall replace any wheeled refuse cart that is worn out by
normal wear and tear, or if it is stolen or damaged by a person other than the
customer to whom it is assigned.
(6) The refuse cart shall not be filled to overflowing. If the overflow of
refuse for a residential customer is regular, the city shall have the discretion to
provide an additional refuse cart and increase the sanitation rate accordingly.
If the overflow of refuse for a commercial customer is regular, the city shall have
the discretion to provide an additional refuse cart which must be purchased by
the customer and the customer's sanitation rate will be increased accordingly.
The cost of such additional refuse cart shall be the same price as paid by the city
when purchased from the supplier.
(7) Any residential or small commercial customer moving to another
location within the city limits, or out of the city limits, shall be responsible for
notifying the public works department. The refuse cart shall remain at the
original assigned location.
(8) An application for an exemption may be made by any customer who
is unable to push the refuse cart to the curb due to handicap, illness or infirmity.
A doctor's statement may be required by the public works department for the
refuse cart to be serviced behind the customer's residence. (as replaced by
Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-109. Refuse collection for commercial units. All commercial units not
picked up residentially shall place all refuse in a city approved dumpster or rolloff
container provided by a private refuse collection company, and shall
maintain the dumpster or roll-off container and the surrounding area in a clean,
neat, and sanitary condition. All dumpsters and roll-off containers shall be
cleaned and disinfected on a regular basis and shall not be filled to overflowing.
All dumpsters and roll-off containers shall be located at the rear of the property
and shall be enclosed from sight in accordance with public works department
specifications. All private refuse collection companies shall have valid permits
or licenses to do business within the city. (as added by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-110. Refuse collection vehicles. The collection of refuse shall be by
means of vehicles with beds constructed of impervious materials which are
easily cleaned and so constructed that there will be no leakage of liquids
draining form the refuse onto the streets and alleys. All refuse collection
vehicles shall utilize closed beds or such coverings as will effectively prevent the
scattering of refuse over the streets or alleys. (as added by Ord. #05-19, Oct.
2005)
17-111. Disturbance of refuse carts and containers prohibited. No
unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over, or in any
Change 16, December 18, 2012 17-6
other manner disturb or use any refuse cart, dumpster, or roll-off container
belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of
public refuse carts, dumpsters, or roll-off containers for their intended purpose.
(as added by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-112. Hazardous waste prohibited. It shall be unlawful to dispose of
hazardous waste items through the city refuse collection system. Examples of
hazardous waste include, but are not limited to, asbestos, medical waste, free
liquids, paints, oils, batteries, intact drums and/or cylinders. (as added by
Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-113. Rubbish and bulky waste. In addition to the weekly refuse cart
collection service, the city will, once a month, provide extra refuse collection
service for rubbish consisting of limbs, branches, tree trimmings, brush, grass
cuttings, chips, and shavings only. All other rubbish and bulky waste shall be
collected during months designated by the city. Household garbage will not be
collected as a part of this service and must be disposed of in the weekly refuse
cart collection service. The extra refuse collection for rubbish and bulky waste
shall be limited to one load of rubbish and bulky waste per residence per month
with a maximum loading time of five (5) minutes per load. (as added by
Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #12-10, Sept. 2012)
17-114. Conditions of service for rubbish and bulky waste collection.
Rubbish and bulky waste shall be collected under the following conditions of
service:
(1) Brush, leaves, metals, other rubbish and bulky waste must be
stacked in separate piles for disposal.
(2) All loose rubbish must be placed in a bag for disposal.
(3) All newspapers and magazines not bagged shall be bundled and
tied for disposal.
(4) All grass trimmings, yard waste and leaves must be placed in a bag
for disposal.
(5) All wood and limbs must be cut in lengths not to exceed eight (8)
feet and must be stacked in piles weighing no more than seventy-five (75)
pounds.
(6) No more than three (3) bulky waste items will be disposed of per
load.
(7) Rocks, concrete, bricks, glass, dirt, tree trunks or stumps, and
similar materials shall not be collected for disposal.
(8) All rubbish and bulky waste requiring pick up must be placed at
the curb or the edge of the street or alley, and not in a manner that will block
traffic, sidewalks, drainage ditches or inlets, or present any type of traffic or
safety hazard.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 17-7
(9) Rubbish or bulky waste must not be placed at the curb or the edge
of the street or alley for a period in excess of twenty-one (21) days.
(10) This service is limited to rubbish and bulky waste generated by the
owner or occupant of the residence.
(11) All construction materials including, but not limited to, concrete,
brick, glass, lumber, sheet rock, and roofing materials shall not be collected for
disposal and must be disposed of by the resident, landlord or contractor
producing said materials.
(12) A contractor or person paid by an owner or landlord to cut brush
or limbs shall be responsible for the disposal of the material in an appropriate
manner.
(13) Rubbish or bulky waste generated by a contractor performing work
on a residential property or site will not be collected.
(14) Rubbish or bulky waste generated as a result of property clean up
due to change of tenant, eviction or bankruptcy will not be collected. (as added
by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #12-10, Sept. 2012)
17-115. Leaf collection service. The city shall provide seasonal leaf
collection during autumn. Leaf collection service shall begin on the fourth (4th)
Monday in October and shall continue until three (3) days before Christmas.
Leaf collection shall be in accordance with the following conditions of service:
(1) All leaves must be placed in bags for disposal.
(2) No other materials shall be mixed with the leaves.
(3) Bags of leaves must be placed near the curb or the edge of the
street or alley, and not in a manner that will block traffic, sidewalks, drainage
ditches or inlets, or present any type of traffic or safety hazard.
(4) After the dates stipulated, no more than three (3) bags of leaves
may be collected on each regular weekly residential refuse collection. (as added
by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-116. Sanitation rates. The monthly service charges for city refuse
collection for residential and small commercial customers shall be as follows:
(1) The residential sanitation rate shall be thirteen dollars ($13.00) per
month. The charge will include refuse cart collection service, rubbish and bulky
waste collection service, and leaf collection service.
(2) The small commercial sanitation rate for refuse cart collection
service per cart shall be eighteen dollars ($18.00) per month for one (1) pick up
per week and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for two (2) pick ups per week. This
charge includes refuse cart collection service only. (as added by Ord. #05-19,
Oct. 2005, and replaced by Ord. #07-16, June 2007, and Ord. #14-10, June 2014)
17-117. Burning prohibited. The burning of refuse within the city limits
is prohibited. (as added by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
17-8
17-118. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine under the general penalty clause of this code.
(as added by Ord. #05-19, Oct. 2005)
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-9
CHAPTER 2
LITTER ABATEMENT
SECTION
17-201. Definitions.
17-202. Litter in public places.
17-203. Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering.
17-204. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
17-205. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
17-206. Truck loads causing litter.
17-207. Construction site litter and erosion.
17-208. Litter in lakes and fountains.
17-209. Throwing or distributing handbills in public places.
17-210. Depositing handbills in uninhabited or vacant premises.
17-211. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted.
17-212. Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises, exemption.
17-213. Dropping litter from aircraft.
17-214. Posting notices prohibited.
17-215. Litter on occupied private property.
17-216. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
17-217. Litter on vacant lots.
17-218. Receptacles required at all retail food establishments to control litter.
17-219. Placement of litter receptacles at other specific locations.
17-220. Cardboard to be properly stored or disposed of.
17-221. Dogs, cats and domestic fowl.
17-222. Clearing of litter from open private property of city.
17-223. Penalties.
17-201. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
"Aircraft". Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include
helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and hot air balloons.
"Authorized private receptacle". A litter storage and collection receptacle
as required in title 17, chapter 1 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
"City". The City of Springfield.
"Commercial handbill". Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed
or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-10
(1) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
(2) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
(3) Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause
shall not apply where an admission is charged or a collection is taken up for the
purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held,
given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which
is not restricted under ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace,
safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be
deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under any
ordinance of this city; or
(4) Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributer.
"Garbage". Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
"Handbill". A commercial or noncommercial handbill.
"Litter" "Garbage" "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
"Newspaper". Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed
and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in
addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the
public.
"Noncommercial handbill". Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial
handbill or newspaper.
"Park". A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
public area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-11
"Person". Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
"Private premises". Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
"Public place". Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
"Refuse". All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, scrap
building materials, and solid market and industrial wastes.
"Rubbish". Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
"Vehicle". Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov.
1997)
17-202. Litter in public places. No person shall throw litter in or upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official state
approved landfills. No person shall deposit grass or yard clippings in the street
or in a public drainage way or drainage easement. (as added by Ord. #97-25,
§ 1, Nov. 1997)
17-203. Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or public place or upon private property.
No public receptacle shall be used for the disposal of other solid waste
accumulated in residences or places of business. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1,
Nov. 1997)
17-204. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. No person shall sweep
into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the
accumulation of litter, dirt or debris from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall
keep the sidewalk in front of their premises and all premises visible to the
public and adjacent property owners free of litter. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1,
Nov. 1997)
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-12
17-205. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. No person, while a driver
or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other
public place within the city or upon the private property of another. (as added
by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-206. Truck loads causing litter. No person shall drive or move any
truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown, leaked or
deposited upon any street, alley or public place. Nor shall any person drive or
move any vehicle or truck within the city the wheels or tires of which carry onto
or deposit into any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1,
Nov. 1997)
17-207. Construction site litter and erosion. The owner and contractor
shall contain building materials, construction debris, litter and erosion in such
a manner as to prevent it from being blown, washed, carried or deposited upon
any street, sidewalk, storm drainage way, public property or private property
of another. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-208. Litter in lakes and fountains. No person shall throw or deposit
litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, river, creek, or any other body of
water within the city. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-209. Throwing or distributing handbills in public places. No person
shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other
public place inside the city limits. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute
or sell any handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful on any sidewalk or other public place within the city for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill to
any person willing to accept it; provided further, that it shall be lawful to
securely attach a handbill to a vehicle. Nothing herein authorizes a person to
stand in the street to distribute handbills. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov.
1997)
17-210. Depositing handbills in uninhabited or vacant premises. No
person shall throw, attach to the exterior of a building without the owner's
permission, or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. For the purpose of this
chapter, "temporarily uninhabited" or "temporarily vacant" means absent from
the premises for thirty (30) or more consecutive days. (as added by Ord. #97-25,
§ 1, Nov. 1997)
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-13
17-211. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted. No
person shall throw or deposit any handbill upon any private premises if
requested by the occupant not to do so or if there is placed on such premises in
a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No
Advertisement." (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-212. Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises, exemption.
(1) Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises. No person
shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon any private premises
which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill
directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon
such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless
requested by the occupant of such premises not to do so, may place or deposit
any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill
is placed or deposited as to be reasonably secure and prevent such handbill from
being blown about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places
under ordinary weather conditions, and except that mailboxes may not be so
used when so prohibited by federal law or regulations. No person shall place on,
deposit or leave exposed in any private yard or driveway any unsolicited
newspaper, handbill or material after the carrier or occupant has made written
request that same be stopped, which request is addressed to the publisher of the
unsolicited material and which request identifies the name and address of
location of the owner or occupant who does not desire the material.
(2) Exemption for mail or newspaper. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of the mail by the United States nor to
newspapers (as defined herein), except that newspapers shall be placed on
private property in such a manner as to reasonably prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public places or
upon private property under ordinary weather conditions. (as added by Ord.
#97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-213. Dropping litter from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall
throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object.
(as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-214. Posting notices prohibited. No person shall post or affix any
notice, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the
public to any lamp post, public utility pole, tree or upon any public structure or
building except as may be authorized or required by law. (as added by Ord.
#97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-215. Litter on occupied private property. No person shall throw,
deposit or maintain litter on any occupied private property located within the
city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-14
control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or any other public place
or upon any private property. Private receptacles for refuse must be stored so
as not to be visible from the street except on the day of city refuse collection.
Not withstanding the foregoing, a private receptacle behind the home is
permissible although visible to the street behind the residence. (as added by
Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-216. Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or any
person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the
premises free of litter. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-217. Litter on vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on
any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such
person or not. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-218. Receptacles required at all retail food establishments to control
litter. (1) All retail food establishments, as hereinafter defined, shall place and
maintain on the exterior of their premises, in places easily accessible by the
public, receptacles for the deposit of paper and other litter generated by the
carrying on of such retail food business.
(2) The proprietor of each retail food establishment shall arrange for
the receptacles as required, under section (1) to be emptied into the
establishment's bulk container. The proprietor shall keep his premises as well
as adjacent public ways and adjacent properties clean and free of litter or trash
that accumulates as the result of his business operation.
(3) The number and suitability of receptacles as required under
subsection (1) for each such retail food establishment shall be determined in the
reasonable discretion of the city public works director, on the basis of the volume
of such establishment's business.
(4) The term "retail food establishment" as used herein shall mean
vendors of carry-out prepared food and drink for immediate consumption,
including without limitation so-called "fast foods" outlets, convenience stores,
delicatessens, grocery stores, bars, etc., to the extent they shall sell such food
and drink. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-219. Placement of litter receptacles at other specific locations. Litter
receptacles shall be placed in all places in respect to the service of transient
habitation, trailer parks, parks, gasoline service stations, tavern parking lots,
shopping center parking lots, grocery store parking lots, boat launching areas,
schools and other such public places in numbers appropriate to need.
It shall be the responsibility of any person owning or operating any
establishment or public place in which litter receptacles are required by this
section to procure, place and maintain such litter receptacles at their own
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-15
expense on the premises and to empty such litter receptacles into the
establishment's bulk container. (as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-220. Cardboard to be properly stored or disposed of. It shall be
unlawful to keep, place, stack, bale or store used cardboard boxes, containers or
materials on the outside of a business or commercial establishment in such a
manner as to expose such used cardboard to wind and weather conditions. All
used cardboard boxes, containers and materials that are on the outside of a
business or commercial establishment shall be placed in a dumpster, garbage
compactor or storage shed; or shall be secured in some other manner as to keep
such used cardboard from exposure to wind and weather conditions. (as added
by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-221. Dogs, cats and domestic fowl. (1) It shall be unlawful for the
owners of dogs, cats and domestic fowl and other domestic animals to fail to
dispose of the excrement, waste or refuse matter so there is odor to the
occupants of adjacent property or any health hazard to the public or inhabitants
of the subject premises. This same requirement applies to persons who
maintain or board animals for others.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain more than four (4)
dogs on a lot of record containing less than two (2) acres unless the same is a
licensed kennel or veterinary office or a special use permit is granted by the
board of zoning appeals and the premises pass the unannounced inspections by
the city codes enforcement department. However, this paragraph shall not
apply to puppies under four (4) months of age.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain more than six (6)
cats outdoors on a lot of record containing less than two (2) acres unless the
same is a licensed kennel or veterinary office. However, this paragraph shall
not apply to kittens less than two (2) months of age.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his/her dog or cat to
defecate on the sidewalk, public street, public property or private property of
another and fail to promptly remove the same. (as added by Ord. #97-25, Nov.
1997, and replaced by Ord. #05-18, Sept. 2005)
17-222. Clearing of litter from open private property of city. The code
enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of
any open or vacant private property within the city or the agent of such owner
to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous
to public health, safety and welfare.
If any owner or occupant of property within the city shall fail to clear and
remove such litter from the property, the city code enforcement officer shall
serve a notice, in writing, upon such owner or occupant requiring him to clear
and remove same from said property within ten (10) days after service of such
notice. Such notice may be served personally upon the owner or his agent or
tenant, may be mailed by certified or registered mail to the owner or occupant
Change 11, December 20, 2005 17-16
at his last known address, or may be posted on the property. Service of notice
by any of the foregoing methods shall constitute due notice within the meaning
of this section.
If any owner or occupant, after notice as provided for herein, shall fail to
clear or remove said litter from the property described in said notice, within ten
(10) days after service of notice, the code enforcement department is authorized
and directed to clear and remove the same and to prepare a statement of the
cost thereof and file such statement with the city recorder for collection. A lien
is hereby declared on such property for all costs incurred by the city in clearing
and removing said litter. The lien may be enforced by attachment in law or
equity and the costs recovered by suit in the name and for the use of the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen of Springfield, Tennessee.
Upon receiving the statement of costs mentioned above, the city recorder
shall notify the owner or occupant by regular mail of the amount owed and all
such bills shall bear interest at a rate of six percent (6%) per annum from a date
thirty (30) days after mailing said bill until the same is paid.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, in addition to the
foregoing, shall be punished by a fine under the penalty clause of this chapter.
(as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
17-223. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine under the general penalty clause of this code.
(as added by Ord. #97-25, § 1, Nov. 1997)
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-1
TITLE 18
WATER AND WASTEWATERS
CHAPTER
1. SPRINGFIELD WATER AND WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT.
2. WATER.
3. SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
4. STORM SEWER USE.
5. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
CHAPTER 1
SPRINGFIELD WATER AND WASTEWATER DEPARTMENT
SECTION
18-101. Consolidation of systems.
18-102. Collecting and accounting for revenues.
18-103. Allocation of operating expenses.
18-104. Disposition of revenue.
18-105. Wastewater and water service charges to be collected together.
18-101. Consolidation of systems. The Springfield Water system and the
Springfield Wastewater Department are hereby consolidated into one
department designated as the "Springfield Water and Wastewater Department."
(1981 code, § 13-101)
18-102. Collecting and accounting for revenues. The revenue from water
service and the revenue from wastewater service shall be collected concurrently.
The revenues from water services and the revenues from wastewater services
shall be kept in segregated accounts, and separate books kept thereon. (1981
code, § 13-102)
18-103. Allocation of operating expenses. All operating expenses of the
Springfield Water and Wastewater Department shall be equitably and
accurately allocated between the two divisions of said department, the expenses
thereof properly allocable to the water division being allocated to that division
and the expenses properly allocable to the wastewater division being allocated
to that division. (1981 code, § 13-103)
18-104. Disposition of revenue. All revenues for water services shall be
kept intact to the end that the same shall be punctually applied to the payment
and retirement of water department bonds heretofore issued and for which said
revenues have heretofore been pledged and in a like manner the revenues for
wastewater services shall be punctually applied to the payment and retirement
18-2
of wastewater department bonds heretofore issued and for which said revenues
have heretofore been pledged by separate ordinances. (1981 code, § 13-104)
18-105. Wastewater and water service charges to be collected together.
It is the declared intention that bills for water and wastewater services shall be
billed, collected and enforced together, so that when any bill has remained
unpaid and become delinquent or any installment due on tapping charges has
become delinquent the water service to the delinquent premises can be and will
be discontinued and will not be reinstated until the entire bill for both water and
wastewater service is paid in full or approved arrangement made with the city.
(1981 code, § 13-110)
18-3
CHAPTER 2
WATER
SECTION
18-201. Application and scope.
18-202. Definitions.
18-203. Obtaining service.
18-204. Application and contract for service.
18-205. Service charges for temporary service.
18-206. Connection charges; responsibility for service lines.
18-207. Water main extensions.
18-208. Construction fees.
18-209. Variances from and effect of preceding rules as to extensions.
18-210. Meters.
18-211. Meter tests.
18-212. Schedule of rates.
18-213. Multiple services through a single meter.
18-214. Billing.
18-215. Discontinuance or refusal of service.
18-216. Re-connection charge.
18-217. Termination of service by customer.
18-218. Access to customers' premises.
18-219. Inspections.
18-220. Customer's responsibility for system's property.
18-221. Customer's responsibility for violations.
18-222. Supply and resale of water.
18-223. Unauthorized use of or interference with water supply.
18-224. Limited use of unmetered private fire line.
18-225. Damages to property due to water pressure.
18-226. Liability for cutoff failures.
18-227. Restricted use of water.
18-228. Interruption of service.
18-229. Fluoridation of water.
18-201. Application and scope. These rules and regulations are a part of
all contracts for receiving water service from the municipality and shall apply
whether the service is based upon contract, agreement, signed application, or
otherwise. (1981 code, § 13-201)
18-202. Definitions. (1) "A.W.W.A." means the American Water Works
Association.
(2) "Customer" means any person, firm, or corporation who receives
water service from the municipality under either an express or implied contract.
18-4
(3) "Department" means the City of Springfield Water and Wastewater
Department.
(4) "Discount date" shall mean the date ten (10) days after the date of
a bill, except when some other date is provided by contract. The discount date
is the last date upon which water bills can be paid at net rates.
(5) "Dwelling" means any single structure, with auxiliary buildings,
occupied by one or more persons or households for residential purposes.
(6) "Household" means any person or persons living in a residential
dwelling.
(7) "Premise" means any structure or group of structures operated as
a single business or enterprise, provided, however, the term "premise" shall not
include more than one (1) dwelling.
(8) "Service line" shall consist of the pipe line extending from any
water main of the municipality to private property. Where a meter and meter
box are located on private property, the service line shall be construed to include
the pipe line extending from the municipality's water main to and including the
meter and meter box. (1981 code, § 13-202, modified)
18-203. Obtaining service. A formal application for either original or
additional service must be made and be approved by the municipality before
connection or meter installation orders will be issued and work performed.
(1981 code, § 13-203)
18-204. Application and contract for service. Each prospective customer
desiring water and/or sewer service will be required to sign a standard form of
contract before service is supplied. If, for any reason, a customer, after signing
a contract for service, does not take such service by reason of not occupying the
premises or otherwise, he shall reimburse the municipality for the expense
incurred by reason of its endeavor to furnish said service.
The receipt of a prospective customer's application for service, regardless
of whether or not accompanied by a deposit, shall not obligate the municipality
to render the service applied for. If the service applied for cannot be supplied
in accordance with the provisions of this and general practice, the liability of
the municipality to the applicant shall be limited to the return of any deposit
made by such applicant. (1981 code, § 13-204)
18-205. Service charges for temporary service. Customers requiring
temporary service shall pay all costs for connection and disconnection incidental
to the supplying and removing of service in addition to the regular charge for
water used. (1981 code, § 13-205)
18-206. Connection charges; responsibility for service lines. Connection
charges shall be made and collected in accordance with such schedule as the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen may from time to time prescribe.
18-5
When a service line is completed, the municipality shall be responsible for
the maintenance and upkeep of such service line from the main to and including
the meter and meter box, and such portion of the service line shall belong to the
municipality. The remaining portion of the service line beyond the meter box
, including the connection to the meter set, shall belong to and be the
responsibility of the customer. (1981 code, § 13-206, modified)
18-207. Water main extensions. The design, materials and construction
methods for all water main extensions shall be in accordance with the City of
Springfield's water system specifications. All water main extensions shall be in
conformance with the following policies:
(1) Main extensions of 500 feet or less to developed areas. The
provisions of this subsection shall apply only to water main extensions of 500
feet or less to areas where there is a demand for water service by the occupants
of existing houses. This subsection shall in no event be applicable to land
development projects and subdivision promotion, even though accompanied by
the erection of occasional houses within such areas.
Owners of property to be served by a proposed water main extension of
the character to which this subsection applies shall pay to the municipality the
regular charge for each connection desired immediately and shall also assume
one minimum monthly bill for each 100 feet, or fraction thereof, of said proposed
extension, the connection charge to be paid and the agreement to pay minimum
monthly bills to be signed before the work is begun. The municipality shall
require a cash deposit as security for such minimum bill agreement, in an
amount that does not exceed the estimated cost of the main extension, before
making any such requested extension. Beginning with the completion of the
water main extension, such persons shall pay water bills at least equal to the
minimum monthly water bills shall have been assumed by other persons
acceptable to the municipality at which time prorated amounts of the cash
deposit shall also be returned to the depositors.
(2) Main extensions to other areas. The provisions of this subsection
shall apply to all areas to which the preceding subsection is not applicable.
(a) Any person desiring to have a water main extended to his or
her property shall provide a written petition for the construction of the
project to the water and wastewater department. Within ten (10) days
of receipt of the petition, the water and wastewater department shall
complete a preliminary evaluation and cost estimate of the proposed
extension project and shall notify the petitioner(s) or designated
representative(s) of the results.
All proposed extension projects shall meet the following criteria:
(i) The number of petitioners per one thousand (1,000)
feet of main extension shall be equal to or greater than six (6).
(ii) The total cost does not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00)
per foot.
18-6
(iii) There is adequate line or system capacity from the
point of connection to the existing system.
(iv) The extension is judged to be operationally feasible.
(b) Should the proposed extension project not meet the criteria
set forth in subsections (2)(a)(i) or (2)(a)(ii), the board of mayor and
aldermen may, at their discretion, authorize a project if the petitioner(s)
agrees to meet any of the following additional criteria:
(i) Make an additional cost contribution at a specified
amount per petitioner.
(ii) Contribute labor, equipment, and/or material to offset
the cost.
(iii) Enter into an agreement with the water and
wastewater department to privately construct the line extension
to departmental specifications and, upon completion, dedicate the
extension to the city.
(c) After the necessary criteria have been met, the water and
wastewater department shall design and construct the line extension.
(d) Any easements or rights-of-way which must be obtained to
construct the line extension shall be furnished or paid for by the
petitioner(s).
(e) The petitioner(s) shall agree to pay the full cost of the line
extension. Upon execution of an agreement with the city, and prior to
construction, the petitioner(s) shall pay fifty percent (50%) of the
estimated project cost to the city. The balance of the project cost, plus
connection fees, shall be paid to the city by the petitioner(s) upon the
completion of construction.
(f) Any property owner, other than an original petitioner, who
subsequently applies to be served by the line extension within three (3)
years of the date that the line is placed into service, shall pay additional
tap fees, to be used to reimburse the petitioner(s), according to the
following schedule:
(i) First subsequent applicant. Thirty percent (30%) of
the original cost.
(ii) Second subsequent applicant. Twenty-five percent
(25%) of the original cost.
(iii) Third subsequent applicant. Twenty percent (20%)
of the original cost.
(g) If a subsequent property owner proposes to use the line
extension financed by the petitioner(s) for multiple connections, the
subsequent property owner shall be required to pay his or her appropriate
share of the remaining balance of the reimbursement costs described
above for each single family equivalent dwelling unit. In no event shall
the subsequent property owner pay an amount that would result in
reimbursement to the petitioners of more than seventy-five percent (75%)
18-7
of the original cost, with the exception that a subsequent property owner
having more than three equivalent single family connections shall be
required to pay additional tap fees to cover any of the remaining balance
that would provide for one hundred percent (100%) reimbursement of the
original cost of the line extension project.
(h) Additional tap fees paid to the city in accordance with
subsection (2)(f) shall be distributed to the petitioner(s) by the city. The
overall cost recovery shall be limited to seventy-five percent (75%) of the
line extension cost for individual connections or one hundred percent
(100%) of the line extension cost in situations that involve a subsequent
property owner who shall require more than three connections. (1981
code, § 13-207, as replaced by Ord. #96-36, § 1, July 1996; replaced by
Ord. #98-23, June, 1998)
18-208. Construction fees. The city may construct a water system
extension project and charge a construction fee as a condition of connection to
the water system in order to recover some or all costs related to the project. A
construction fee shall be levied under the following guidelines.
(1) The costs of system improvements shall be established by the total
costs of construction.
(2) Each specific system extension project shall have a separate cost
of construction calculated for it.
(3) The fee to connect to a city financed line extension project shall be
determined by the number of proposed equivalent single family connections
(PESFC) to be served in a development divided by the total allowed equivalent
single family connection capacity (AESFCC) of the line multiplied by the actual
construction cost of the system extension.
Fee = PESFC/AESFCC x Total Construction Costs
(4) All construction fees collected shall be deposited into an escrow
fund to pay for the actual construction cost of the water system extension
project.
(5) The actual construction cost shall include costs for engineering,
right-of-way acquisition, permits, construction and inspection and may include,
at the discretion of the board of mayor and aldermen, interest on debt service
to repay bonds or loans issued to construct the water system extension project.
(6) The construction fee is to help recover the costs for system
extension only. Should the city be required to construct a service connection, the
normal service connection fee for water service then in effect shall be charged
in addition to the construction fee.
(7) The construction fee for each completed project shall be established
by the board of mayor and aldermen by ordinance.
(8) Payment of the construction fee to the city shall be due when
connection to the city's water system is requested. (1981 code, § 13-208,
modified, as replaced by Ord. #96-36, § 1, July 1996)
18-8
18-209. Variances from and effect of preceding rules as to extensions.
Whenever the governing body is of the opinion that it is to the best interest of
the water system to construct a water main extension without requiring strict
compliance with sections 18-207 and 18-208, such extension may be constructed
upon such terms and conditions as shall be approved by the governing body.
The authority to make water main extensions under sections 18-207 and
18-208 is permissive only and nothing contained therein shall be construed as
requiring the municipality to make such extensions or to furnish service to any
person or persons. (1981 code, § 13-209, modified)
18-210. Meters. All meters shall be installed, tested, repaired, and
removed only by the municipality.
No one shall do anything which will in any way interfere with or prevent
the operation of a meter. No one shall tamper with or work on a water meter
without the written permission of the municipality. No one shall install any
pipe or other device which will cause water to pass through or around a meter
without the passage of such water being registered fully by the meter. (1981
code, § 13-210)
18-211. Meter tests. The municipality will, at its own expense, make
routine tests of meters when it considers such tests desirable.
In testing meters, the water passing through a meter will be measured
at various rates of discharge and under varying pressures. To be considered
accurate, the meter registration shall conform to the current A.W.W.A.
standards for that particular size and type of water meter.
The municipality will also make tests or inspections of its meters at the
request of the customer. However, if a test requested by a customer shows a
meter to be accurate within the limits stated above, the customer shall pay a
meter testing charge as prescribed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
If such test shows a meter not to be accurate within such limits, the cost
of such meter test shall be borne by the municipality. (1981 code, § 13-211,
modified)
18-212. Schedule of rates. All water furnished by the municipality shall
be charged for in accordance with such rate schedules as the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen may from time to time prescribe. (1981 code, § 13-212)
18-213. Multiple services through a single meter. No customer shall
supply water service to more than one dwelling or premise from a single service
line and meter without first obtaining the written permission of the
municipality.
Where the municipality allows more than one dwelling or premise to be
served through a single service line and meter, the amount of water used by all
the dwellings and premises served through a single service line and meter shall
18-9
be allocated to each separate dwelling or premise served. The water charge for
each such dwelling or premise thus served shall be computed just as if each such
dwelling or premise had received through a separately metered service the
amount of water so allocated to it, such computation to be made at the
municipality's applicable water rates schedule, including the provisions as to
minimum bills. The separate charges for each dwelling or premise served
through a single service line and meter shall then be added together, and the
sum thereof shall be billed to the customer in whose name the service is
supplied. (1981 code, § 13-213)
18-214. Billing. Bills will be rendered monthly and shall be at the
location designated by the provider. Failure to receive a bill will not release the
customer from payment obligation. Should bills not be paid by the due date
specified on the bill, the provider may at any time thereafter, upon five (5) days'
written notice to the customer, discontinue service. Bills paid after the due date
specified on the bill may be subject to additional charges. Should the due date
of bill fall on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the business day next following the
due date will be held as a day of grace for delivery of payment. Remittances
received by mail after the due date will not be subject to such additional charges
if the incoming envelope bears United States Postal Service date stamp of the
due date or any date prior thereto. If a meter fails to register properly, or if a
meter is removed to be tested or repaired, or if service is received other than
through a meter, the municipality reserves the right to render an estimated bill
based on the best information available.
18-215. Discontinuance or refusal of service by distributor. The provider
may refuse to connect or may discontinue service for the violation of any of its
rules and regulations, or for violation of any of the provisions of the schedule of
rates and charges, or of the application of the customer or contract with the
customer. The provider may discontinue service to a customer for the theft of
service or the appearance of service theft devices on the premises of the
customer. The discontinuance of service by the provider for any cause as stated
in this rule does not release the customer from his obligation to the provider for
the payment of minimum bills as specified in the application of the customer or
the contract with the customer.
18-216. Connection, reconnection, and disconnection charges. The
provider may establish and collect standard charges to cover the reasonable
average cost, including administration, of connecting or reconnecting service, or
disconnecting service as provided above. Higher charges may be established and
collected when connections and reconnections are performed after normal office
hours, or when special circumstances warrant. (1981 code, § 13-217, modified)
18-10
18-217. Termination of service by customer. Customers who have
fulfilled their contract terms and wish to discontinue service must give at least
one (1) day notice to that effect unless the contract specifies otherwise. Notice
to discontinue service prior to the expiration of a contract term will not relieve
the customer from any minimum or guaranteed payment under such contract
or applicable rate schedule.
18-218. Access to customers' premises. The municipality's identified
representatives and employees shall be granted access to all customers'
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of reading meters, for testing,
inspecting, repairing, removing, and replacing all equipment belonging to the
municipality, and for inspecting customers' plumbing and premises generally in
order to secure compliance with these rules and regulations. (1981 code,
§ 13-218)
18-219. Inspections. The municipality shall have the right, but shall not
be obligated, to inspect any installation or plumbing system before water service
is furnished or at any later time. The municipality reserves the right to refuse
service or to discontinue service to any premises not meeting standards fixed by
municipal ordinances regulating building and plumbing, or not in accordance
with any special contract, these rules and regulations, or other requirements of
the municipality.
Any failure to inspect or reject a customer's installation or plumbing
system shall not render the municipality liable or responsible for any loss or
damage which might have been avoided had such inspection or rejection been
made. (1981 code, § 13-219)
18-220. Customer's responsibility for system's property. Except as herein
elsewhere expressly provided, all meters, service connections, and other
equipment furnished by or for the municipality shall be and remain the property
of the municipality. Each customer shall provide space for and exercise proper
care to protect the property of the municipality on his premises. In the event of
loss or damage to such property arising from the neglect of a customer to care
for it properly, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the
customer. (1981 code, § 13-220)
18-221. Customer's responsibility for violations. Where the municipality
furnishes water service to a customer, such customer shall be responsible for all
violations of these rules and regulations which occur on the premises so served.
Personal participation by the customer in any such violations shall not be
necessary to impose such personal responsibility on him. (1981 code, § 13-221)
18-222. Supply and resale of water. All water shall be supplied within
the municipality's service area exclusively by the municipality, and no customer
18-11
shall, directly or indirectly, sell, sublet, assign, or otherwise dispose of the water
or any part thereof except with written permission from the municipality. (1981
code, § 13-222)
18-223. Unauthorized use of or interference with water supply. No
person shall turn on or turn off any of the municipality's stop cocks, valves,
hydrants, spigots, or fire plugs without permission or authority from the
municipality. (1981 code, § 13-223)
18-224. Limited use of unmetered private fire line. Where a private fire
line is not metered, no water shall be used from such line or from any fire
hydrant thereon, except to fight fire or except when being inspected in the
presence of an authorized agent of the municipality.
All private fire hydrants shall be sealed by the municipality, and shall be
inspected at regular intervals to see that they are in proper condition and that
no water is being used therefrom in violation of these rules and regulations.
When the seal is broken on account of fire, or for any other reason, the customer
taking such service shall immediately give the municipality a written notice of
such occurrence. (1981 code, § 13-224)
18-225. Damages to property due to water pressure. The municipality,
unless otherwise provided by state or federal law, shall not be liable to any
customer for damages caused to his plumbing or property by high pressure, low
pressure, or fluctuations in pressure in the municipality's water mains. (1981
code, § 13-225)
18-226. Liability for cutoff failures. The municipality's liability shall be
limited to the forfeiture of the right to charge a customer for water that is not
used but is received from a service line under any of the following
circumstances:
(1) After receipt of at least ten (10) days' written notice to cut off a
water service, the municipality has failed to cut off such service.
(2) The municipality has attempted to cut off a service but such service
has not been completely cut off.
(3) The municipality has completely cut off a service but subsequently
the cutoff develops a leak or is turned on again so that water enters the
customer's pipes from the municipality's main.
Except to the extent stated above, the municipality shall not be liable for
any loss or damage resulting from cutoff failures. If a customer wishes to avoid
possible damage for cutoff failures, the customer shall rely exclusively on
privately owned cutoffs and not on the municipality's cutoff. Also, the customer
(and not the municipality) shall be responsible for seeing that plumbing is
properly drained and is kept properly drained, after water service has been cut
off. (1981 code, § 13-226)
18-12
18-227. Restricted use of water. In times of emergencies or in times of
water shortage, the municipality reserves the right to restrict the purposes for
which water may be used by a customer and the amount of water which a
customer may use. (1981 code, § 13-227)
18-228. Interruption of service. The municipality will endeavor to
furnish continuous water service, but does not guarantee to the customer any
fixed pressure or continuous service. The municipality shall not be liable for any
damages for any interruption of service whatsoever.
In connection with the operation, maintenance, repair, and extension of
the municipal water system, the water supply may be shut off without notice
when necessary or desirable, and each customer must be prepared for such
emergencies. The municipality shall not be liable for any damages from such
interruption of service or for damages from the resumption of service without
notice after any such interruption. (1981 code, § 13-228)
18-229. Fluoridation of water. The Water and Wastewater Department
of Springfield, Tennessee, is hereby authorized to inject optimum amount of
fluorine into the water system of Springfield, Tennessee. (1981 code, § 13-229,
modified)
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-13
CHAPTER 3
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SECTION
18-301. Definitions.
18-302. Requirements for proper sewage disposal.
18-303. Building sewer permits and proper connections.
18-304. Prohibitions and limitations on wastewater discharges.
18-305. User compliance with wastewater discharge permit system.
18-306. Significant user discharge permit system.
18-307. Charges and fees (user charge system).
18-308. Hearing authority.
18-309. Pretreatment enforcement--procedure--complaints--administrative
orders.
18-310. Pretreatment enforcement--hearings.
18-311. Pretreatment enforcement--violations--civil penalty.
18-312. Pretreatment enforcement--assessment for noncompliance with
program permits or orders.
18-313. Additional penalties.
18-314. Sewer main extensions.
18-315. Construction fees.
18-316. Variances from and effect of preceding rules as to extensions.
18-317. Pretreatment enforcement response plan.
18-318. Fats, oils and grease management plan.
18-319. Savings clause.
18-301. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
(1) "The Act" means Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, also
known as the Clean Water Act, (33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.), and subsequent
amendments, including the Tennessee Water Quality Control Act of 1977 and
all amendments thereto.
(2) "Approval authority" shall mean the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation and the Director of the Division of Water
Resources and his/her representative(s).
(3) "Best Management Practices (BMPS)" shall mean schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
1200-4-14-.05(1)(a) and (2). BMPS also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials' storage.
(4) "BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand)" shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-14
standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade
(20" C), expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter
[mg/l]).
(5) "Building drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
(6) "Building sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain
to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
(7) "Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical standard" shall
mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA
in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act that apply to specific
category of users and that appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts
405-471, and Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.06.
(8) "Categorical industrial user" shall mean an industrial user subject
to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
(9) "City" shall mean the City of Springfield, the board of mayor and
aldermen, the city manager and other city personnel based on job description
and responsibilities.
(10) "COD" (denoting Chemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the oxidation of organic matter to carbon dioxide
and water expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter
[mg/l]).
(11) "Combined sewer" shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff
and sewage.
(12) "Compatible pollutant" shall mean such pollutants as biochemical
oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any
additional pollutants as are now and may be in the future specified and
controlled in the city's NPDES permit for its sewer treatment works where said
works have been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants.
(13) "Director" shall mean the director of the Springfield Water and
Wastewater Department.
(14) "EPA" shall mean the Environmental Protection Agency, an agency
of the United States, or, where appropriate, the term may be used as a
designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
(15) "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and
commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of food.
(16) "Grab sample" shall mean a single sample which is taken from a
waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period
of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
(17) "Incompatible pollutant" shall mean any pollutant which is not a
"compatible pollutant" as defined in this section.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-15
(18) "Indirect discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into a
POTW from any non-domestic source.
(19) "Industrial user" shall mean a source of indirect discharge.
(20) "Industrial wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes and solid wastes
resulting from industrial and manufacturing processes and/or trade and
business establishments, as distinct from sanitary wastewater.
(21) "Interference" shall mean a discharge which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or
disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use or disposal, or exceeds the design capacity of the treatment works
or the collection system.
(22) "Local limit" shall mean specific discharge limits developed and
enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in Tennessee Pretreatment
Rule 1200-4-14-.05(1)(a) and (2).
(23) "Monitoring" shall mean the measurement, continuous or
intermittent, of wastewater quality and quantity.
(24) "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit" shall mean a permit for treated wastewater discharge issued to the city
pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
(25) "National pretreatment standard" or "pretreatment standard" shall
mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to
industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established
pursuant to Tennessee Pretreatment Rule 1200-4-14-.05.
(26) "Natural outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
(27) "New source shall mean:
(a) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under section 307(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act which will be
applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
(i) The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(ii) The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(iii) The production of wastewater generating processes of
the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-16
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source should be
considered.
(b) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of parts (a)(ii) or (a)(iii) of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing processes or production equipment.
(c) Construction of a new source as defined under this
subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(i) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous
onsite construction program:
(A) Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or
(B) Significant site preparation work including
cleaning, excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
(ii) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
(28) "North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)" shall
mean a classification pursuant to the North American Industry Classification
System manual as issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of
Management and Budget, 1997, as revised in 2002 and 2012.
(29) "Pass-through" shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW into
waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
(30) "Person" shall mean any and all persons, including individuals,
firms, partnerships, associations, public or private institutions, state and federal
agencies, municipalities or political subdivisions, or officers thereof,
departments, agencies, or instrumentalities, or public or private corporations or
officers thereof, organized or existing under the laws of this or any state or
country.
(31) "pH" shall mean a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.
(32) "Pollutant" shall mean dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-17
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged
into water.
(33) "Pollution" shall mean the man-made or man-induced alteration
of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
(34) "Pretreatment facility" or "pretreatment" shall mean the reduction
of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process
changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 1200-4-14-.06(4).
Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as
equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surge or slug loadings that
might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However,
where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility
with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated
process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 1200-4-14-.06(5).
(35) "Pretreatment requirement" shall mean any substantive or
procedural requirement related to pretreatment other than a national
pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
(36) "Process wastewater" shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product,
by-product, or waste product.
(37) "Public sanitary sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by the city.
(38) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW)" shall mean a
treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned by the City
of Springfield. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a
treatment plant.
(39) "Replacement" shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
service life of the wastewater treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term
"operations and maintenance" includes replacement.
(40) "Sample collection and test procedures:"
(a) Sample collection and procedures for the analysis of
pollutants shall conform to regulations published pursuant to section
304(h) of the Clean Water Act, as amended, under which such procedures
may be required.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-18
(b) Unless otherwise noted in the permit, all pollutant
parameters shall be determined according to methods prescribed in title
40, CFR part 136 per Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(7)(c) and (e).
(41) "Sanitary sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(42) "Sanitary wastewater" shall mean liquid wastes discharged from:
the sanitary conveniences at dwellings (including apartment houses and
motels), office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions and from the noncommercial
preparation, cooking and handling of food, as distinct from
industrial wastes.
(43) "Sewage" or "wastewater" shall mean a combination of the watercarried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be
present.
(44) "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
(45) "Significant noncompliance" shall mean any user violations which
meet one (1) or more of the following criteria:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the
measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month
period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by
1200-4-14-.03(l);
(b) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the
measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month
period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard
or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by
1200-4-14-.03(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). TRC
calculations for pH are not required by this rule.
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 1200-4-14-.03 (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public);
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has
resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under subpart
(6)(a)6(ii) of this rule to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(e) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-19
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance.
(f) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules.
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(h) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include
a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(46) "Significant user" shall mean:
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this
definition, the term significant industrial user means:
(i) All industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter
I, subchapter N; and
(ii) Any other industrial user that: discharges an average
of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non contact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste
stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or is
designated as such by the POTW on the basis that the industrial
use has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement in accordance with 1200-4-14-.08(6)(f).
(b) The city may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under 1200-4-14-.06 and 40 CFR
chapter I, subchapter N is a non-significant categorical industrial user
rather than a significant categorical industrial user on a finding that the
industrial user never discharges more than one hundred (100) gallons per
day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in
the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:
(i) The industrial user, prior to the city's finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
(ii) The industrial user annually submit the certification
statement required in 1200-4-14-.12(17) together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
(iii) The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-20
(c) Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria
in part (a)(ii) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative
or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW,
and in accordance with 1200-4-14-.08(6)(f),determine that such industrial
user is not a significant industrial user.
(47) "Slug discharge" or "slug load" shall mean any discharge of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a
non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits or permit conditions. Significant industrial users are
required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility affecting
potential for a slug discharge.
(48) "Storm drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a
sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes
sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water; an NPDES
permit is required by state law and city ordinance prior to any discharge to a
storm drain or any natural outlet.
(49) "Suspended solids" shall mean the total suspended matter that is
in suspension or floating on the surface in water, sewage, or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering, expressed in terms of weight and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
(50) "Toxic pollutant" shall mean any pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of 33 U.S.C. 1317.
(51) Twenty-four (24) hours, flow-proportional composite sample" shall
mean a sample consisting of several effluent portions collected during a
twenty-four (24) hour period in which the portions of sample are proportionate
to the flow to combine to form a representative sample.
(52) "Upset" shall mean an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
(53) "Useful life" shall be the estimated period during which a
treatment works will be operated.
(54) "User" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation or group.
(55) "User charge" shall mean a charge levied on users of the
wastewater treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such
works.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-21
(56) "Wastewater treatment works" shall mean all facilities for
collecting, pumping, treating and disposal of sewage.
Scientific terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater,'' published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Ord. # 88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-302. Requirements for proper sewage disposal. (1) Disposal of human
and animal excrements. It shall be unlawful for any user to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the City of Springfield or any area under the jurisdiction of the said city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable wastes.
(2) Discharge of sewage or polluted waters. It shall be unlawful to
directly discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Springfield or in any
area under the jurisdictional of the said city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this ordinance and a valid NPDES permit issued by the
State of Tennessee.
(3) Septic tank, cesspool, privy vault, and privy construction. Except
as hereafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
(4) Private sewage disposal. The disposal of sewage by means other
than the use of the available sanitary sewage system shall be in accordance with
local, county, state, and federal law. The disposal of sewage by private disposal
systems shall be permissible only in those instances where service from the
available sanitary sewage system is not available.
(5) Requirement for toilet facilities. The owner of any house, building
or property used for human occupancy, employment, or recreation is, at his own
expense, required to install suitable toilet facilities and to connect those
facilities to a properly operated public or private sewage disposal system.
(6) Availability of public sanitary sewers. A public sanitary sewer that
is located in any street, alley, right-of-way or easement is considered to be
available to any property that abuts that street, alley, right-of-way, or easement.
This definition shall apply to any such public sanitary sewer that currently
exists and to any public sanitary sewer that may be installed in the future.
(7) Connection to available public sanitary sewer. (a) The owner of any
property that has a building with suitable toilet facilities, and where a
public sanitary sewer is available, shall connect the building's sewer
system to the public sanitary sewer if any part of the building is not more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') (in a straight line) from any part of the
public sanitary sewer, provided that:
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-22
(i) The distance provision is applicable even if the public
sanitary sewer is a low-pressure sewer. In that case, the
owner/occupant shall pay for the purchase and installation of a
low-pressure pumping system that meets the requirements of the
SWWD. Upon installation of the low-pressure pumping system,
that low-pressure pumping system shall become property of the
City of Springfield. The owner/occupant shall be responsible for
providing electrical power to the low-pressure pumping system and
the SWWD shall be responsible for operating and maintaining the
low-pressure pumping system; and
(ii) The owner/occupant of the building or the property
pays all applicable sewer tap fees, sewer connection fees and sewer
capacity fees; and
(iii) The owner or occupant pays the subsequent monthly
sewer user fee; and
(iv) The service lateral from the building to the public
sanitary sewer is connected in compliance with the applicable
plumbing code and other requirements of the City of Springfield.
(b) In any case where the public sanitary sewer is available to
a property and that property has a building (with suitable toilet facilities)
which is more than one hundred fifty feet (150') away from the public
sanitary sewer, and the owner or occupant of the property has chosen to
not connect the building sewers with the public sanitary sewer, the owner
or occupant is required to pay the appropriate monthly sewer user fee as
if the building was actually connected to the public sanitary sewer.
(c) When either the Robertson County Health Department of an
appropriate State of Tennessee agency, or the director determines that
the operation of a private sewage disposal system poses a potential or
actual threat to public health or to the environment and if that private
sewer system is located on property to which a public sanitary sewer is
available, the owner or occupant of the property, as appropriate, will be
notified by the director that the owner or occupant shall be required to
connect the building sewer to the public sanitary sewer and to
discontinue to operate the private sewage disposal system. The
notification by the director shall be in writing, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and shall specify that the connection to the public
sanitary sewer shall be accomplished in a time frame that is not to exceed
ninety (90) calendar days.
(d) Any property inside the city limits of Springfield, which is
to be subdivided into two (2) or more parcels, and to which public sanitary
sewer is available to any portion of that property, shall, at the property
owner's or developer's expense and in compliance with all appropriate
City of Springfield sewer construction practices, be provided with
sanitary sewer facilities to all parts of the property. This provision
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-23
applies if the sewers consist of any combination of gravity sewers and/or
a grinder pump system. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov.
2013, and amended by Ord. #13-28, Feb. 2014)
18-303. Building sewer permits and proper connections. (1) Sewer
connections. No unauthorized user shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the general manager.
(2) Plumbing permit required. Certain types of work, as specified by
the City of Springfield plumbing code, which involve the installation or
modification of a building sewer system shall require the owner or owner's agent
to obtain a plumbing permit from the city prior to the commencement of the
work. The owner or owner's agent shall make application for a plumbing permit
on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications, or any other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the director.
(3) Cost of sewer connection. All costs and expenses incidental to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(4) Users per connection. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the
rear of another or any interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
(5) Use of existing sewer connection. Old building sewers may be used
in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
test by the water/wastewater utilities director or representative, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(6) Design consideration for building sewers. The size, slope,
alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the
trench, shall all conform to the following requirements:
(a) The minimum size of a building sewer shall be four inches
(4").
(b) The minimum depth of a building sewer shall be eighteen
inches (18").
(c) At every ninety (90) turn of the sewer line, a manhole is
required.
(d) Four inch (4") building sewers shall be laid on a grade
greater than one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot. Larger building sewers shall
be laid on a grade that will produce a velocity when flowing full of at least
two feet (2.0') per second.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-24
(e) Slope and alignment of all building sewers shall be neat and
regular.
(f) Buildings sewers shall be constructed only of:
(i) Concrete or clay sewer pipe using rubber or neoprene
compression joints of approved type;
(ii) Cast iron soil pipe with compression joints (no lead
joints);
(iii) Polyvinyl chloride pipe with solvent welded or with
rubber compression joints of approved type; or
(iv) Such other materials of equal or superior quality as
may be approved by the director. Under no circumstances will
leaded or cement mortar joints be acceptable.
(g) A cleanout shall be located five feet (5') outside of the
building, one (1) as it taps onto the utility lateral and one (1) at each
change of direction of the building sewer which is greater than forty-five
degrees (45"). Additional cleanouts shall be placed not more than seventyfive
feet (75') apart in horizontal building sewers of four inch (4") nominal
diameter and not more than one hundred feet (100') apart for larger
pipes. Cleanouts shall be extended to or above the finished-grade level
directly above the place where the cleanout is installed. Alternatively, if
the owner desires, the cap of the cleanout can be lower than the finished
grade, but only if it is enclosed in a box that is approved by the director.
A "Y" (wye) and one-eighth (1/8) bend shall be used for the cleanout base.
If the owner so desires, he can use a "double sweep" cleanout. Cleanouts
shall not be smaller than four inches (4") on a four inch (4") pipe.
(h) Connections of building sewers to the public sewer system
shall be made at the appropriate existing wye or tee branch using
compression type couplings or collar type rubber joint with corrosion
resisting or stainless steel bands. Where existing wye or tee branches are
not available, connections of building services shall be made by either
removing a length of pipe and replacing it with a wye or tee fitting or
installing a tee-saddle or tee-insert of a type approved by the director or
representative. All such connections shall be made gastight and
water-tight. On all new connections to the public sanitary sewer, a
"double sweep" cleanout shall be installed on the service lateral at the
property line. The owner shall extend the building sewer to this cleanout.
(i) The building sewer may be brought into the building below
the basement floor when gravity flow from the building to the sanitary
sewer is at a grade of one hundred eighteen inch (118") per foot or more
if possible. In cases where basement or floor levels are lower than the
ground elevation at the point of connection to the sewer, adequate
precautions by installation of check valves or other backflow prevention
devices to protect against flooding shall be provided by the owner. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-25
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the
expense of the owner.
(j) The methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe,
jointing, testing, backfilling the trench, or other activities in the
construction of a building sewer which have not been described above
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the city or to the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and Water Environment
Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice No. 9. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director or
representative before installation.
(k) An installed building sewer shall be gas tight and water
tight.
(7) Maintenance of building sewer. Each individual property owner or
user of the POTW shall be entirely responsible for the maintenance of the
building sewer located on private property. This maintenance will include repair
or replacement of the service line as deemed necessary by the director to meet
specifications of the city.
(8) Illegal connections. No user shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, building sump pumps,
or other sources of uncontaminated surface runoff or groundwater to building
sewer or building which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
(9) Design considerations for connecting building and public sewers.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the A.S.T.M. and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections
shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation.
(10) Inspection of building sewers. The applicant for the building sewer
permit shall notify the director or his representative when the building is ready
for inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the director or his representative, the
plumbing inspector for the City of Springfield, Tennessee.
(11) Excavation. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord.
# 88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013, and amended by Ord. #14-05,
June 2014)
18-304. Prohibitions and limitations on wastewater discharges.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-26
(1) Wastes excluded from discharge into the public sanitary system.
All industrial users shall be subject to "National Pretreatment Standards:
prohibited discharges" as detailed in federal regulation 40 CFR, part 403.5. In
addition, no user shall discharge or allow to be discharged into the sewerage
work any of the following materials:
(a) Unpolluted waters. This includes uncontaminated storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage
shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Division of Water
Resources, Department of Environment and Conservation, State of
Tennessee. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Division of Water Resources, Department
of Environment and Conservation, State of Tennessee, to a storm sewer,
or natural outlet with NPDES permit required.
(b) Solid or viscous waters. Solid or viscous substances which
will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or otherwise
interfere with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment system.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, uncomminuted
garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, cannery wastes, bones,
hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, bulk solids, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper,
wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, painting residues, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, and similar substances.
(c) Explosive mixtures. Liquids, solids, or gases which by reason
of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious
in any other way to the sewage works or to the operation of the system.
At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter,
at the point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than five percent
(5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive
limit (L.E.L.) of the meter. Controlled materials include, but are not
limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
(d) Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been
ground or comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
(e) Corrosive wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the wastewater treatment works. All wastes discharged
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-27
to the public sanitary sewer system must have a pH value in the range
of five (5) to nine (9) standard units. Prohibited materials, include, but
are not limited to, acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride
compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic
products.
(f) Oils and grease. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax,
grease, or oil, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100)
mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty-two (32") and one hundred fifty degrees
(150") Fahrenheit (0" and 65" C).
(g) Noxious materials. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or
gases, which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or may be
sufficient to prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.
(h) Discolored materials. Wastes with objectionable color such
as dye waste and any other wastes which cause or may cause a change in
the color of the receiving stream.
(i) Toxic substances. Any toxic substances in amounts
exceeding standards promulgated by the Administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to section 307(a) of the
Act, and chemical elements or compounds, phenols, or any other
substances which are not susceptible to treatment or which may interfere
with the biological processes or efficiency of the treatment system, or that
will pass through the system.
(j) Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration that they do not comply with regulations or
orders issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use
and which will or may cause damage or hazards to the sewerage facilities
or personnel operating the system.
(k) High temperature wastes. Any liquid or vapor having a
temperature higher than one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104" F),
forty degrees Centigrade (40" C).
(l) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the
POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140" F) or
sixty degrees Centigrade (60" C) using the test methods specified in
federal regulation 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited substances include, but are
not limited to, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through.
(m) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-28
(n) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(o) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
(p) Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
(2) Limitation on wastewater discharges. No person shall discharge or
convey, or permit, or allow to be discharged or conveyed to a public sewer any
wastewater containing pollutants of such character or quantity that will:
(a) Require unusual attention or expense to handle at the
wastewater treatment facilities.
(b) Constitute a hazard to human or animal life, or to the
stream or water course receiving the treatment plant effluent. The
industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in
writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 1200-1-11, per
Tennessee Rule 1200-4-14-.12(16).
(c) Violate national pretreatment standards as promulgated by
the EPA with appropriate effective dates.
(d) Cause the treatment plant to experience problems with unit
operations, sludge handling and disposal options or compliance with its
NPDES permit limitations. Concentrations shall not exceed any
applicable categorical standards, any local limits or cause the headworks
loading at the POTW to exceed the current protection criteria for the
POTW influent as detailed in Table I "Protection Criteria for POTW
Influent," as follows:
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-29
TABLE I
PROTECTION CRITERIA FOR WWTP INFLUENT
Incompatible Pollutants
Parameter
Limiting Influent
Concentration (mg/l
arsenic 0.1
barium 0.1
cadmium 0.0147
chromium, trivalent 0.163
chromium, hexavalent 0.87
chromium, total 0.250
copper 0.188
cyanide 0.017
lead 0.050
mercury 0.00043
methylene chloride 0.096
nickel 0.250
pesticides BDL*
phenols 0.455
silver 0.029
zinc 0.290
*BDL = below detectable limits
(e) Additional constituents shall be added as needed to protect
the treatment works.
(f) Dilution of any wastewater discharge for the purpose of
satisfying these requirements shall be considered a violation of this
chapter.
(g) "Slugs" as defined in § 18-301, shall be avoided and must be
reported.
(h) Wastewater discharges which substantially differ in nature
or constituents from the user's average discharge shall be prohibited
unless prior approval is obtained, in writing, from the industrial
pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov.
2013)
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-30
18-305. User compliance with wastewater discharge permit system.
(1) Regulatory actions. Disposal into the sewer system by any person
is unlawful except in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant
to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (FWPCAA) as amended, and
any more stringent state and local standards. If any waters or wastes are
discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sanitary sewers, and
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 18-304 or
the criteria established by the federal government on discharge of toxic and
hazardous materials or violates the treatment facilities protection criteria and
which in the judgment of the industrial pretreatment coordinator and/or the
Division of Water Resources, Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall:
(a) Require a "significant user discharge permit" as described
in § 18-306 of this chapter.
(b) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater; this includes the
right to disconnect the user's connection with the public sanitary sewer
system in § 18-309(2).
(c) Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant
modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances
in conformity with this chapter.
(d) Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or flow
equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate objectionable
characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate these
rules and regulations.
(e) Require grease, oil, and sand interceptors (separation
facilities) when, in the opinion of the industrial pretreatment coordinator,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of
a type and capacity approved by the director and meet all requirements
detailed in the city's "Fats, Oils and Grease Management Program."
(f) Require the person making, causing or allowing the
discharge to pay an additional cost or expense incurred by the city for
handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system, and
the cost of discovering any violations specifically including laboratory
fees.
(g) Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be
desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter.
(2) Right of entry. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of
these rules and regulations, the director and/or industrial pretreatment
coordinator or representatives of the Tennessee Department of Environment
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-31
and Conservation and/or EPA, upon the presentation of credentials, may be
permitted to enter upon any property or premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of:
(a) Copying any records required to be kept under provisions of
this chapter;
(b) Inspecting any monitoring equipment or method; and
(c) Sampling any discharge of wastewater to the treatment
works.
The director, and/or industrial pretreatment coordinator or either's
representative may enter upon the property at any hour under emergency
circumstances.
(3) Personal injury. While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in this chapter, the industrial pretreatment coordinator
or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by community employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions.
(4) Protection from accidental discharge. Each user shall provide
protection from accident discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the industrial pretreatment
coordinator for review, and shall be approved by him before construction of the
facility, except as provided in the "significant user discharge permit." Review
and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user
from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(5) Reporting of accidental discharge. All categorical and
non-categorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all
discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings,
as defined by 1200-4-14-.05(2). If for any reason a facility does not or is unable
to comply with any prohibition or limitations in this ordinance or the user's
permit, the facility will immediately notify the industrial pretreatment
coordinator and/or the operator on duty at the wastewater treatment plant so
that corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system. In addition,
a written report addressed to the industrial pretreatment coordinator detailing
the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and
characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future
discharges shall be filed by the responsible facility within five (5) days of the
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-32
occurrence of the noncomplying discharge. Permanent notices shall be posted by
users informing employees of the duty to report and the person to whom
accidental discharges should be reported.
(6) Baseline monitoring reporting requirements for industrial uses.
Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or within one hundred eighty (180) days after the final
administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under
1200-4-14-.06(1)(d), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such
categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled
to discharge to a POTW shall be required to submit to the city a baseline
monitoring report which contains the information listed in subsections (6)(a)
through (g) of this section. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of
discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to
submit to city a baseline monitoring report which contains the information listed
in subsections (6)(a) through (e) of this section. New sources shall also be
required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the
source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources
shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (6)(d) and (e) of
this section:
(a) Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and
address of the facility including the name of the operators and owners.
(b) Permits. The users shall submit a list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.
(c) Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief
description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard
industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial
user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which
indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(d) Flow measurement. The user shall submit information
showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons
per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
(i) Regulated process streams; and
(ii) Other streams as necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula of 1200-4-14.06(5). (See subsection
(6)(e)(iv) of this section.) The city may allow for verifiable
estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility
considerations.
(e) Measurements of pollutants. (i) The user shall identify the
pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process;
(ii) In addition, the user shall submit the results of
sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or
mass, where required by the standard or city) of regulated
pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-33
maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required)
shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with
a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative,
the user shall submit documentation as required by the city or the
applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard;
(iii) The user shall take a minimum of one (1)
representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply
with the requirements of this section;
(iv) Samples should be taken immediately downstream
from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists.
If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater
prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 1200-4-14-.06(5) in order to evaluate compliance
with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with
1200-4-14-.06(5) this adjusted limit along with supporting data
should be submitted to the city.
(v) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in federal regulation 40
CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR part 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the administrator determines that
the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate
for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by
the administrator.
(vi) The city may allow the submission of a baseline
monitoring report which utilizes only historical data, so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial pretreatment measures.
(vii) The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the
time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and
shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of
normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
(f) Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user (as defined in subsection (12) of this
rule) and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-34
whether additional Operation and Maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements; and
(g) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not
be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard:
(i) Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment
standard has been modified by a removal allowance
(1200-4-14-.07), the combined waste stream formula (1200-4-14-
.06(5)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance
(1200-4-14-.13) at the time the user submits the report required by
subsection (2) of this rule, the information required by
subparagraphs (f) and (g) of this paragraph shall pertain to the
modified limits.
(ii) If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified
by a removal allowance (1200-4-14-.07), the combined waste
stream formula (1200-4-14-.06(5)) and/or a fundamentally different
factors variance (1200-4-14-.13) after the user submits the report
required by subsection (2) of this rule, any necessary amendments
to the information requested by subsections (f) and (g) of this
section shall be submitted by the user to the city within sixty (60)
days after the modified limit is approved.
(7) Reporting of self-monitoring. (a) Monitoring results obtained by
significant industrial users shall be summarized and reported on
business letterhead to the city two (2) times per year. Reports are due on
the 15th of March and September.
(b) The report shall indicate the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the effluent for which sampling and analysis were
performed during the calendar period preceding the submission of each
report, including maximum and average daily flows.
(c) If the permittee monitors any pollutant more frequently
than required by their permit, using test procedures prescribed in 40 CFR
136 or amendments thereto, or otherwise approved by EPA or as specified
in their permit, the results of such monitoring shall be included in any
calculations of actual daily maximum or monthly average pollutant
discharge and results shall be reported to the city. Such increased
sampling shall be indicated in the semiannual report.
(d) Each report shall include a statement of certification and
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user as
defined in 40 CFR 403.12(6)(i).
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-35
(8) Reporting of changed conditions. All industrial users shall
promptly notify the city's industrial pretreatment coordinator in advance of any
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge,
including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial
user has submitted initial notification under 1200-4-14-.12(16).
(9) Sampling violations. If sampling performed by an industrial user
indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours
of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty
(30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the city has performed
the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the city must perform
the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and
requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. Re-sampling is not required if:
(a) The city performs sampling at the industrial user at a
frequency of at least once per month; or
(b) The city performs sampling at the user between the time
when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or
the city receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by
Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-306. Significant user discharge permit system. (1) Wastewater
discharge permits required. All significant users (as defined in § 18-301)
proposing to connect to or discharge into any part of the public sanitary sewer
system must first obtain a discharge permit. All existing major users connected
to or discharging to any part of the city public sanitary sewer system must
obtain a wastewater discharge permit at the expiration of its prior permit. The
director has final authority on who qualifies as a "significant user."
(2) Permit application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the industrial pretreatment coordinator an
acceptable application. The user shall submit the following information:
Note: The industrial pretreatment coordinator may, on a case-by-case basis,
either require additional information or delete certain requirements at his
discretion based on the overall operation of the city system.
(a) Name, address, and NAICS number of applicant;
(b) Volume of wastewater to be discharged;
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but
not limited to, those set forth in § 18-304 and Table I of this chapter, as
determined in accordance with the current edition of "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater";
(d) Location of discharge point(s), accompanied with appropriate
plans and specifications;
(e) Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-36
(f) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation;
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials and types of materials which are or
could be discharged; a complete inventory list of all chemicals; copies of
all material safety data sheets;
(h) Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of
production;
(i) Complete description of pretreatment or flow equalization
facilities;
(j) Other information that may be defined by the industrial
pretreatment coordinator for reasonable evaluation of the permit
application;
(k) The receipt by the city of a prospective customer's
application for significant user discharge permit shall not obligate the
city to render the wastewater collection and treatment service. If the
service applied for cannot be supplied in accordance with this chapter or
the city's rules and regulations and general practice, the application shall
be rejected and there shall be no liability of the city to the applicant for
such service.
(l) In addition, the following EPA policy concerning
"confidentiality" shall apply (40 CFR 403.14): "(a) EPA authorities. In
accordance with 40 CFR part 2, any information submitted to EPA
pursuant to these regulations may be claimed as confidential by the
submitter. Any such claim must be asserted at the time of submission in
the manner prescribed on the application form or instructions, or, in the
case of other submissions, by stamping the words "confidential business
information" on each page containing such information. If no claim is
made at the time of submission, EPA may make the information available
to the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information
will be treated in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR part 2 (public
information); (b) Effluent data. Information and data provided to the
control authority pursuant to this part which is effluent data shall be
available to the public without restriction; (c) State or POTW. All other
information which is submitted to the state or POTW shall be available
to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR 2.302."
(m) Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to
all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and
fees established by the city. The conditions of wastewater discharge
permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance with this regulation.
(3) Permit conditions will include the following:
(a) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-37
(b) Effluent limits including best management practices, based
on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, state and local law.
(c) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for
flow regulators and equalizations;
(d) Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling
facilities, and specifications for monitoring programs; the location of
facilities and type of facilities to be approved by the industrial
pretreatment coordinator.
(e) The reports required by § 18-305(6) must be based upon data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during
the period covered by the report, which data are representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period. The city shall require
that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance
by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols,
oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other
pollutants, twenty-four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained
through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the city. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling
is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the
discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using
protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR 136
and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during
a twenty-four (24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil
and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite
samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures
as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the
city, as appropriate.
(f) Requirements for maintaining and submitting discharge
reports and plant records relating to wastewater discharges; users subject
to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make
available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices. Records shall
include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the
name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-38
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or
the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the director.
(g) Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates, or other
appropriate conditions when pollutants subject to limitations and
prohibitions are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge;
(h) Compliance schedules;
(i) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time
for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local
law.
(j) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
director to be necessary.
(k) Other conditions to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(4) Duration of permits. (a) A permit shall be valid for not more than
five (5) years unless processing changes are made that, as determined by
the industrial pretreatment coordinator, alter the wastewater
constituents and characteristics significantly. The industrial
pretreatment coordinator shall be notified of any planned significant
process changes in order to make such determinations. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the industrial
pretreatment coordinator during the term of the permit as limitations or
requirements are modified or other just cause exists.
(b) The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his
permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any
changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance. The discharge permit will be evaluated by the
industrial pretreatment coordinator ninety (90) days prior to the
expiration date. The industrial user shall apply for a new permit with
said application to be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
of any existing permit.
(5) Transfer a permit. A significant user discharge permit is issued to
a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new
changed operation.
(6) Cause for enforcement action. Violations subjecting a user to
possible revocation of his permit or enforcement action include but are not
limited to the following:
(a) Failure to apply for permit;
(b) Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-39
(c) Obtaining a permit by misrepresenting or failing to disclose
fully all relevant facts;
(d) Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(e) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(f) Violation of terms and conditions of the permit.
(7) Compliance schedules. The city shall have the authority to issue
and enforce compliance schedules setting dates and times in which an industrial
user shall come into compliance with the terms set forth in the industrial user
permit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(l)(iv) and 403.12(c).
(8) Public participation. The city shall publish at least annually, in a
newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within
the jurisdiction served by the city, a list of the industrial users which, at any
time during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant
noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial uses (or any other
industrial user that violates subsections (c), (d), or (h) of this section) and shall
mean:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the
measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six
(6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits.
(b) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month
period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement including instantaneous limits multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease; and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, along or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment, or has
resulted in the director's exercise of emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
(e) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-40
wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(f) Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(h) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include
a violation of best management practices, which the director determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(9) Permit appeal procedure. A significant user shall have the right to
appeal all items established in the discharge permit. The procedure shall be as
follows:
(a) A written notice signed by the person in charge of the
significant user seeking an appeal hearing, shall be delivered by
registered mail to the director. The notice should outline the permit
provisions which the user wishes to appeal. Within thirty (30) days a
hearing shall be conducted before the hearing authority (§ 18-308(1)) and
all grievances alleged by the user shall be discussed, and appropriate
decisions rendered. Exemptions or variances of the protection criteria
established for the city system shall not be granted during this appeal
procedure unless such variance cannot cause the city to violate its
NPDES permit. Said variance, if granted is only effective during
pendency of said appeal.
(b) Nothing in this section shall affect a person's right to
appeals provided by state law. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13,
Nov. 2013)
18-307. Charges and fees (user charge system). (1) Purpose of charges
and fees. A schedule of charges and fees shall be adopted by the City of
Springfield which will enable it to comply with the revenue requirements of
section 204 of the Clean Water Act. Charges and fees shall be determined in a
manner consistent with regulations of the federal grant program to ensure that
sufficient revenues are collected to defray the cost of operating and maintaining
adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems. Specific charges and
fees shall be adopted by a separate ordinance; this section describes the
procedure to be used in calculating the charges and fees. Additional charges and
fees to recover funds for capital outlay, bond service costs, and capital
improvements may be assessed by the City of Springfield. These charges and
fees shall be recovered through the user classification established below.
(2) Classification of user. All users shall be classified by the
water/wastewater utilities manager either by assigning each one to a "user
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-41
classification" category according to the principal activity conducted on the
user's premises, by individual user analyzation, or by a combination thereof. The
purpose of such collective and/or individual classification is to facilitate the
regulations of wastewater discharge based on wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(3) Types of charges and sewer fees. The charges and fees as
established in treatment works schedule of charges and fees, may include, but
not limited to:
(a) User classification charges;
(b) Fees for monitoring requested by user;
(c) Fees for permit applications;
(d) Appeal fees;
(e) Charges and fees based on wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(f) Fees for use of garbage grinders;
(g) Fees for holding tank wastes.
(4) Basis of determination of charges. Charges and fees may be based
upon a minimum basic charge for each premise, computed on the basis of
"normal wastewater" from a domestic premise with the following characteristics:
BOD 300 milligrams per liter
COD 600 milligrams per liter
TKN 60 milligrams per liter
ammonia-N 30 milligrams per liter
suspended solids 300 milligrams per liter
fats, oil and grease 100 milligrams per liter
The charges and fees for all classifications of users other than the
domestic premise shall be based upon the relative difference between the
average wastewater constituents and characteristics of that classification as
related to those of a domestic premise.
The charges and fees established for permit users shall be based upon the
measured or estimated constituents and characteristics of the wastewater
discharge of that user which may include, but not be limited to, BOD, TSS,
ammonia as N, TKN, chlorine demand, and volume.
(5) User charges. Each user shall be levied a charge for payment of
bonded indebtedness of the treatment system and for that user's proportionate
share of the operations and maintenance costs of the system. A surcharge will
be levied against those users with wastewater that exceeds the strength of
"normal wastewater."
The user charge will be computed from a base charge plus a surcharge.
The base charge will be the user's proportionate share of the costs of Operations
and Maintenance (O&M) including replacement for handling its periodic volume
of "normal wastewater."
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-42
(a) Operation and maintenance user charges. Each user's share
of operation and maintenance costs will be computed by the following
formula:
Cu= Ct X (Vu)
Vt
Where: Cu = User's charge for O&M per unit of time
Ct = Total O&M cost per unit of time
Vt = Total volume contribution from all users per unit of
time
Vu = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time
Operation and maintenance charges may be established on a
percentage of water use charge only in the event that water use charges
are based on a constant cost per unit of consumption.
(b) Surcharges. The surcharges will be the user's proportionate
share of the O&M costs for handling its periodic volume of wastewater
which exceeds the strength of BOD, suspended solids, and/or other
elements in "normal wastewater" as defined by subsection (4). The
amount of the surcharge shall be determined by the following formula:
Cs = [(Bc X B) + (Sc X S) + (Pc X P)] Vu
Where: Cs = Surcharge for wastewater exceeding the strength of
"normal wastewater" expressed in dollars per billing
period.
Bc = O&M cost for treatment of a unit of BOD expressed
in dollars per pound.
B = Concentration of BOD from a user above the base
level of 2.50 lbs/1,000 gallons expressed in pounds per
1,000 gallons.
Sc = O&M costs for treatment of a unit of suspended solids
expressed in dollars per pound.
S = Concentration of suspended solids from a user above
the base level of 2.50 lbs/1,000 gallons expressed in
pounds per 1,000 gallons.
Pc = O&M cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant
which the publicly owned treatment works is
committed to treat by virtue of an NPDES permit or
other regulatory requirement expressed in dollars per
pound.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-43
P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above
base level. Base levels for pollutants subject to
surcharges will be established by the director.
Vu = Volume contribution of a user per billing period
(expressed in thousands of gallons).
The values of parameters used to determine user charges may vary
from time to time. Therefore, the director is authorized to modify any
parameter or value as often as necessary. Review of all parameters and
values shall be undertaken whenever necessary; but in no case less
frequently than annually.
(6) Notification. Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges
which are attributable to wastewater treatment services.
(7) Biennial review of operation and maintenance charges. The City
of Springfield shall review not less often than every two (2) years the
wastewater contribution of users and user classes, the total costs of operation
and maintenance of the treatment works and its approved user charge system.
The city shall review the charges for users or user classes to accomplish the
following:
(a) Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users and user classes as required herein; and
(b) Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and
maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance
(including replacement) of the treatment works.
(8) Appeal procedure. A user shall have the right to appeal any and all
charges and fees assessed against them. The procedure shall be as follows:
A written notice, signed by the user seeking an appeal hearing,
shall be delivered by registered mail to the director, outlining the fees
and charges which the user wishes to appeal. Within thirty (30) days a
hearing shall be conducted before the hearing authority (§ 18-308(1)) and
all grievances alleged by the user shall be discussed and appropriate
decisions rendered.
Nothing in this section shall affect a person's right to appeals provided by
state law.
(9) Wastewater characteristics. The wastewater characteristics of each
significant user shall be determined by monitoring or, where monitoring is not
feasible, wastewater characteristics may be estimated using historical records,
data from similar users, etc. After initiation of the charges and fee system,
significant users shall be monitored on a regular basis, not less often than
annually. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-308. Hearing authority. A hearing authority shall be comprised of
three (3) members consisting of the mayor or his/her board appointee, the city
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-44
manager, and the city attorney; a quorum shall be defined as two (2) persons
present. A hearing held before the hearing authority shall be held pursuant to
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 69-3-101, et seq., and in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-309. Pretreatment enforcement--procedure--complaints--
administrative orders. (1) Whenever the industrial pretreatment coordinator has
reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this chapter, of any valid
industrial user discharge permit, or orders of the hearing authority issued
pursuant thereto has occurred, is occurring, or is about to occur, the industrial
pretreatment coordinator may cause a written complaint to be served upon the
alleged violator or violators.
The complaint shall specify the provision or provisions of the chapter,
permit, or order alleged to be violated or about to be violated, the facts alleged
to constitute a violation thereof, may order that necessary corrective action be
taken within a reasonable time to be prescribed in such order, and shall inform
the violators of the opportunity for a hearing before the hearing authority.
Any such order shall become final and not subject to review unless the
person or persons named therein request by written petition a hearing before
the hearing authority, no later than thirty (30) days after the date such order
is served; provided, however, that the hearing authority may review such final
order on the same grounds upon which a court of the state may review default
judgments.
(2) Whenever the industrial pretreatment coordinator finds that an
emergency exists imperatively requiring immediate action to protect the public
health, safety or welfare, the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, a public
water supply, or the facilities of the publicly owned treatment works of the city,
the director may without prior notice, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as the director
deems necessary to meet the emergency including the right to discontinue water
and sewer service.
If the violator fails to respond or is unable to respond to the director's
order, the director may take such emergency action as he deems necessary, or
contract with a qualified person or persons to carry out the emergency
measures. The director may assess the person or persons responsible for the
emergency condition for actual costs incurred by the city in meeting the
emergency.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, any notice, complaint, order or
other instrument issued by or under authority of this part may be served on any
person affected thereby personally, by the industrial pretreatment coordinator
or any person designated by him, or such services as may be made in accordance
with Tennessee statutes authorizing service of process in civil action. Proof of
service shall be filed in the office of the director.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-45
Whenever feasible, a pre-termination notice and hearing will be provided
to the affected party or parties and in emergency situation as expedited posttermination
hearing shall be provided per § 18-310(1)(i). (Ord. #88-15, as
replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-310. Pretreatment enforcement--hearings. (1) Any hearing or
rehearing brought before the hearing authority shall be conducted in accordance
with the following:
(a) Upon receipt of a written petition from the alleged violator
pursuant to this section, the director shall give the petitioner thirty (30)
days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing, but in no case
shall such hearing be held more than sixty (60) days from the receipt of
the written petition, unless the director and the petitioner agree to a
postponement.
(b) The hearing herein provided may be conducted by the
hearing authority at a regular or special meeting. A quorum of the local
hearing authority must be present at the regular or special meeting in
order to conduct the hearing herein provided.
(c) A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall
be taken and filed with the hearing authority, together with the findings
of fact and conclusions of law made pursuant to this subsection. The
transcript so recorded shall be made available to the petitioner or any
party to a hearing upon payment of a charge set by the director to cover
the costs of preparation.
(d) In connection with the hearing, the chairman shall issue
subpoenas in response to any reasonable request by any party to the
hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing.
(e) Any member of the hearing authority may administer oaths
and examine witnesses.
(f) Any party including the director or his representative may
examine witnesses.
(g) On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing, the
hearing authority shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and
enter such decisions and orders as in its opinion will best further the
purposes of the pretreatment program and ordinance and shall give
written notice of such decisions and orders to the alleged violator. The
order issued under this subsection shall be issued no later than thirty
(30) days following the close of the hearing by the person or persons
designated by the chairman.
(h) The decision of the hearing authority shall become final and
binding on all parties unless appealed to the courts as provided in
subsection (2).
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-46
(i) Any person to whom an emergency order is directed
pursuant to § 18-309 shall comply therewith immediately but on petition
to the hearing authority shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible,
but in no case shall such hearing be held later than three (3) days from
the receipt of such petition by the hearing authority.
(2) An appeal may be taken from any final order or other final
determination of the hearing authority by any party, including the city, who is
or may be adversely affected thereby, to the chancery court of Robertson County
pursuant to the common law writ of certiorari set out in Tennessee Code
Annotated, § 27-8-101, within sixty (60) days from the date of such order or
determination is made. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-311. Pretreatment enforcement--violations--civil penalty. (1) Any
person including, but not limited to, industrial users, who does any of the
following acts or omission shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation, per day for each day during which
the act or omission continues or occurs:
(a) Violates an effluent standard or limitation imposed by
ordinance.
(b) Violates the terms or conditions of a permit issued pursuant
to the ordinance.
(c) Fails to complete a filing requirement of the ordinance.
(d) Fails to allow or perform an entry inspection, monitoring or
reporting requirement of the ordinance.
(e) Fails to pay user or cost recovery charges imposed.
(f) Violates a final determination or order of the hearing
authority or the industrial pretreatment coordinator.
(2) Any civil penalty shall be assessed in the following manner:
(a) The director may issue an assessment against any person or
industrial user responsible for the violation. If such an assessment is
levied, a citation and supporting documentation shall be forwarded to the
city manager immediately.
(b) Any person or industrial user against whom assessment has
been issued may secure a review of such assessment by filing with the
city manager a written petition setting forth the grounds and reasons for
his objections and asking for a hearing in the matter involved before the
hearing authority and if a petition for review of the assessment is not
filled within thirty (30) days after the date the assessment is served, the
violator shall be deemed to have consented to the assessment and it shall
become final.
(c) Whenever any assessment has become final because of a
person's failure to appeal the director's assessment, the attorney for the
City of Springfield may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and
seek execution of such judgment and the court, in such proceedings, shall
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-47
treat a failure to appeal such assessment as a confession of judgment in
the amount of the assessment.
(d) In assessing the civil penalty the director shall consider the
following factors:
(i) Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a
substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
(ii) Damages to the pretreatment agency, including
compensation for the damage or destruction of the facilities of the
publicly owned treatment works, and also including any penalties,
costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the pretreatment agency as
the result of the illegal activity, as well as the expenses involved
in enforcing this section and the costs involved in rectifying any
damages;
(iii) Cause of the discharge or violations;
(iv) The severity of the discharge and its effect upon the
facilities of the publicly owned treatment works and upon the
quality of the receiving stream;
(v) Effectiveness of action taken by the violator to cease
the violation;
(vi) The technical and economic reasonableness of
reducing or eliminating the discharge;
(vii) The economic benefit gained by the violator;
(viii) Potential for harm from the discharge or violation;
(ix) The seriousness and extent of the violation;
(x) Good faith efforts to comply;
(xi) The degree of cooperation/non-cooperation;
(xii) Actual knowledge of the violation or degree of
negligence/willfulness;
(xiii) History of compliance or non-compliance;
(xiv) Ability to pay;
(xv) Other unique factors specific to the violator or case
(including strength of case and competing policy concerns).
After consideration of the above factors, the pre-treatment
response plan as outlined in § 18-314 shall be used as a guide for the
assessment of penalties and/or any enforcement actions.
(e) The attorney for the city may institute proceedings for
assessment in the chancery court of the county in which all or part of the
pollution or violation occurred, in the name of the city upon request by
the director.
(3) The hearing authority may establish by regulation a schedule of
the amount of civil penalty which can be assessed by the director for certain
specific violations of categories of violations.
Any civil penalty assessed to a violator pursuant to this section may be
in addition to any civil penalty assessed by the State of Tennessee for violation
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-48
of § 69-3-115(a)(1)(F). Provided, however, the sum of penalties imposed by this
section and by section § 69-3-115(a) shall not exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) per day for each day during which the act or omission continues or
occurs.
(a) A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit (or a general
permit), or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment to the maximum extent
allowable by state law.
(b) A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine and/or
imprisonment to the maximum extent allowable by state law. This
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal
injury or property damage available under state law.
(c) A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to
this chapter, individual wastewater discharge permit, (or general permit),
or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of the maximum fine
allowable under state law per violation, per day, and/or imprisonment to
the maximum extent allowable by state law.
(d) In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished
by the maximum fine allowable under state law per conviction, per day,
and/or imprisonment to the maximum extent allowable by state law.
(Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-312. Pretreatment enforcement--assessment for noncompliance with
program permits or orders. (1) The director may assess the liability of any
polluter or violator for damages to the pretreatment agency resulting from any
person's or significant user's pollution or violation, failure, or neglect in
complying with any permits or orders issued pursuant to the provisions of the
pretreatment program.
(2) If an appeal from such assessment is not made to the hearing
authority by the polluter or violator within thirty (30) days of notification of
such assessment, he shall be deemed to have consented to such assessment and
it shall become final.
(3) Damages may include any expenses incurred in investigating and
enforcing the chapter in removing, correcting, and terminating any pollution,
and also compensation for any actual damages caused by pollution or violation.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-49
(4) Whenever any assessment has become final because of a person's
failure to appear within the time provided, the attorney for the City of
Springfield may apply to the appropriate court for a judgment and seek
execution on such judgment. (Ord. #88-15, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov.
2013)
18-313. Additional penalties. (1) The director shall have the authority to
discontinue water and sewer service to those users that persistently violate any
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the city by
reason of such violation.
(3) No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewerage works. All violators
will be subject to civil and criminal prosecution. (Ord. # 88-15, as replaced by
Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-314. Sewer main extensions. All sewer main extensions shall be in
conformance with the following policies:
(1) Main extensions to developed areas. The provisions of this
subsection shall apply only to sewer main extensions of five hundred feet (500')
or less to areas where there is a demand for sewer service by the occupants of
existing houses. This subsection shall in no event be applicable to land
development projects and subdivision promotion, even though accompanied by
the erection of occasional houses within such areas.
Owners of property to be served by a proposed sewer main extension of
the character to which this subsection applies shall pay to the municipality the
regular charge for each connection desired immediately and shall also assume
one (1) minimum monthly bill for each one hundred feet (100'), or fraction
thereof, of said proposed extension, the connection charge to be paid and the
agreement to pay minimum monthly bills to be signed before the work is begun.
The municipality shall require a cash deposit as security for such minimum bill
agreement, in an amount that does not exceed the estimated cost of the main
extension, before making any such requested extension. Beginning with the
completion of the sewer main extension, such persons shall pay sewer bills at
least equal to the minimum monthly charges agreed upon, until the obligation
for the payment of such minimum monthly sewer bills shall have been assumed
by other persons acceptable to the municipality at which time pro rata amounts
of the cash deposit shall also be returned to the depositors.
(2) Main extensions to other areas. The provisions of this subsection
shall apply to all areas to which the preceding subsection is not applicable.
Customers desiring sewer main extensions pursuant to this subsection must pay
all of the cost of making such extensions.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-50
For installations under this or the preceding subsection, design,
materials, and construction method shall be in accordance with the
department's water system and sewer system specifications. All such lines shall
be installed by the builder or developer. By special agreement, main extensions
may be installed by municipal forces or by forces working under the direct
supervision of the municipality.
Upon completion of such extensions and their approval by the
municipality, such sewer mains shall become the property of the municipality.
The persons paying the cost of constructing such mains shall execute any
written instruments requested by the municipality to provide evidence of the
municipality's title to such mains. In consideration of such mains being
transferred to it, the municipality shall incorporate such mains as an integral
part of the municipal sewer system and shall furnish sewer therefrom in
accordance with these rules and regulations, subject always to such limitations
as may exist because of the size and elevation of said mains. (as added by Ord.
#96-35, July 1996, and replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-315. Construction fees. The city may construct a sewer system
extension project and charge a construction fee as a condition of connection to
the sewer system in order to recover some or all costs related to the project. A
construction fee shall be levied under the following guidelines:
(1) The costs of system improvements shall be established by the total
costs of construction.
(2) Each specific system extension project shall have a separate cost
of construction calculated for it.
(3) The fee to connect to a city-financed line extension project shall be
determined by the number of Proposed Equivalent Single Family Connections
(PESFC) to be served in a development divided by the Total Allowed Equivalent
Single Family Construction Capacity (AESFCC) of the line multiplied by the
actual construction cost of the system extension.
Fee = PESFC/AESFCC x total construction costs
(4) All construction fees collected shall be deposited into an escrow
fund to pay for the actual construction cost of the sewer system extension
project.
(5) The actual construction cost shall include costs for engineering,
right-of-way acquisition, permits, construction and inspection and may include,
at the discretion of the board of mayor and aldermen, interest on debt service
to repay bonds or loans issued to construct the sewer system extension project.
(6) The construction fee is to help recover the costs for system
extension only. Should the city be required to construct a service connection, the
normal service construction fee for sewer service then in effect shall be charged
in addition to the construction fee.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-51
(7) The construction fee for each completed project shall be established
by the board of mayor and aldermen by ordinance.
(8) Payment of the construction fee to the city shall be due when
connection to the city's sewer system is requested. (as added by Ord. #96-35,
July 1996, and replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-316. Variances from and effect of preceding rules as to extensions.
Whenever the governing body is of the opinion that it is in the best interest of
the sewer system to construct a sewer main extension without requiring strict
compliance with §§ 18-314 and 18-315, such extension may be constructed upon
such terms and conditions as shall be approved by the governing body.
The authority to make sewer main extensions under §§ 18-314 and 18-315
is permissive only and nothing contained therein shall be construed as requiring
the municipality to make such extensions or to furnish service to any person or
persons. (as added by Ord. #96-35, July 1996, as replaced by Ord. #13-13, Nov.
2013)
18-317. Pretreatment enforcement response plan. Under state and
federal statutes, the City of Springfield must establish an Enforcement
Response Plan (ERP) approved by the Tennessee Department of Environment
and Conservation.
The ERP outlines the steps to be taken to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. All enforcement actions will be taken in accordance to the provisions
set forth in the plan.
Upon approval of the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation, the ERP shall be enforceable under this section of this chapter.
(as added by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-318. Fats, oils and grease management plan. The City of Springfield
pretreatment program is required by the Environmental Protection Agency and
the State of Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation to develop
a Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG) management program and a FOG Enforcement
Response Plan (ERP). The FOG management plan provides protection for the
city's wastewater collection and treatment systems. The objective of the FOG
management plan includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Minimize introduction of fats, oils and grease into the collection
system;
(2) Development and implementation of a discharge permit system for
FOG-generating Food Service Establishments (FSEs);
(3) Provide effective means of interception of FOG through proven
effective FOG interceptors and FOG recovery units;
(4) Provide FOG generator with best management practices that can
be used to minimize the introduction of FOG into the public sanitary sewer
system;
Change 17, January 20, 2015 18-52
(5) Provide FSEs with information on the various types of fog removal
devices;
(6) Provide for regular inspections of FSE FOG removal devices;
(7) Educate FSE personnel about the need to minimize FOG from
entering the public sanitary sewer system;
(8) Utilize a manifest system to track the removal and disposal of FOG
that is removed from FSEs; and
(9) Take appropriate enforcement action against non-complying FSEs.
Noncompliance with this FOG program will result in enforcement actions
as outlined in the City of Springfield FOG ERP.
Upon approval of the FOG management program by the Tennessee
Department of Environment and Conservation, the director shall begin
implementation of the various appropriate provisions of the FOG management
program and the FOG ERP. (as added by Ord. #13-13, Nov. 2013)
18-319. Savings clause. If any provisions, paragraph, word, section or
article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and articles shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (as added by Ord. #13-13,
Nov. 2013)
18-53
CHAPTER 4
STORM SEWER USE
SECTION
18-401. Definitions.
18-402. Requirements for proper storm drain disposal.
18-403. Storm sewer permits and proper connections.
18-404. Limitations.
18-405. User compliance.
18-406. Permits.
18-407. Enforcement procedure and penalties
8-401. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
(1) "The Act" or "Acts" means Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendment of 1972 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and subsequent amendments to
the Water Quality Control Act of 1977 (T.C.A. 69-3-101 et seq.).
(2) "Building drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
(3) "Building sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain
to the public sewer or other place of disposal .
(4) "City" shall mean the City of Springfield or Board of Mayor and
Aldermen.
(5) "City judge" means that person appointed by the Springfield City
Board of Mayor and Aldermen to constitute City Court and to try all persons
charged with violation of the ordinances of the city.
(6) "Director" shall mean the Director of Public Works of the City of
Springfield, his authorized deputy agent or representative.
(7) "Industrial wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes resulting from
industrial and manufacturing processes and/or trade and business
establishments, as distinct from sanitary wastewater.
(8) "Natural outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
(9) "Owner" shall mean the title owner to real property except in those
cases where the Springfield Industrial Development Corporation is the title
owner; in those cases Owner shall mean the Lessee or occupant of the premises.
(10) "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership,
firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or the legal representatives,
18-54
agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the
singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
(11) "Pollution" means such alteration of the physical, chemical,
biological, bacteriological, or radiological properties of the waters of this state
including but not limited to changes in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or
odor of the waters:
(a) As will result or will likely result in harm, potential harm
or detriment of the public health, safety, or welfare;
(b) As will result or will likely result in harm, potential harm
or detriment to the health of animals, birds, fish, or aquatic life;
(c) As will render or will likely render the waters substantially
less useful for domestic, municipal, industrial, agricultural, recreational,
or other reasonable uses; or
(d) As will leave or will likely leave the waters in such condition
as to violate any standards of water quality established by the Water
Quality Control Board of the State of Tennessee, the Federal Government
or the Director.
(12) "Sanitary sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(13) "Sanitary wastewater" shall mean liquid wastes discharges from:
the sanitary conveniences at dwellings (including apartment houses and
motels), office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions and from the
non-commercial preparation, cooking and handling of food, as distinct from
industrial wastes.
(14) "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
(15) "Shall" is mandatory; "May" is permissive.
(16) "Storm drain" (sometime termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer
which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
(17) "User" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation or group.
Scientific terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Ord. # 87-04, modified)
18-402. Requirements for proper storm drain disposal. (1) Discharge of
sewage or polluted waters. It shall be unlawful to directly discharge to any
natural outlet within the City of Springfield or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. # 87-04)
18-55
18-403. Storm sewer permits and proper connections (1) Storm sewer
connections. No unauthorized user shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any storm drain or appurtenances thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director.
(2) Building storm drain permits. The owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. Their permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director. A permit and inspection
fee of ten ($10.00) dollars shall be paid to the city at the time the application is
filed. A permit shall be issued only after meeting all applicable City Ordinance,
state statutes and regulations and federal statutes and regulations.
(3) Cost of storm drain connection and/or disconnection. All costs and
expense incidental to the reinstallation, installation or connection or
disconnection to the storm drain shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned.
(4) Use of existing storm drain connection. Storm drain connections
may be used only when they are found, on examination and test by the Director,
to meet all requirements of this ordinance.
(5) Illegal connections. No user shall continue to use connections to
storm drains after being notified by the Director or his authorized deputy or
representative to cease using these connections due to the introduction of
polluting substances into the storm drains.
(6) Inspection. The applicant for the storm drain permit shall notify
the Director to inspect the premises prior to the connection to the storm drain.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director or his
representative.
(7) Excavation.. All excavations shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. # 87-04,
modified)
18-404. Limitations. (1) Unpolluted waters. Uncontaminated storm
water, ground water, roof runoff, and subsurface drainage, may be discharged
into storm drains. Unpolluted non-contact cooling water may also be discharged
into storm drains with proper city and state permits.
(2) Other waters or substances. All other waters or substances may
not be discharged into the storm drain or to a natural outlet. (Ord. # 88-15)
18-405. User compliance. (1) Regulatory actions. Discharge into the
storm drain by a person is unlawful except in compliance with the federal
standards and state standards promulgated pursuant to the acts. If any waters
or other substances are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the storm
18-56
drains, and are polluted as defined herein or as determined by the federal, state
or Director or his representative to have a deleterious effect upon the storm
drain system or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Director may:
(a) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater; this includes the
right to disconnect the users connection with sewer system, ref. section
18-308 (2).
(b) Require a discharger to demonstrate that inplant
modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances
in conformity with this chapter.
(c) Require the person making, causing or allowing the
discharge to pay any cost or expense incurred by the city for cleaning up
effect of introduction of pollutants into storm drain system.
(d) Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be
desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter.
(2) Right of entry. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of
these rules and regulations, the Director, or his authorized representative, upon
the presentation of credentials, may enter upon any property or premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of (1) copying any records required to be kept
under provisions of this chapter, (2) inspecting any monitoring equipment or
method, and (3) sampling any discharge. The superintendent may enter upon
the property at any hour under emergency circumstances. EPA and/or State
Health Department representatives may also enter upon properties or
premises but only when accompanied by the Director.
(3) Personal injury. While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in this chapter, the superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
(4) Protection from accidental discharge. Each user shall provide
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or
operator's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
superintendent for review, and shall be approved by him or his representative.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve
the user from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
18-57
(5) Reporting of accidental discharge. An immediate verbal
notification must be made of any accidental discharge with said notification to
be made to the superintendent or the pretreatment coordinator. In addition a
written report addressed to the superintendent detailing the date, time and
cause of any accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the
discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges shall be filed
by the responsible facility within five (5) days of the occurrence of the
noncomplying discharge. (Ord. # 88-15, modified)
18-406. Permits. (1) Permit application. Users seeking a permit shall
complete and file with the Director an acceptable application. In support of this
application, the user shall submit the following information:
(Note: The Director may, on a case by case basis, either require additional
information or delete certain requirements at his discretion).
(a) Name, address, and SIC number of applicant;
(b) Volume of wastewater to be discharged;
(c) Location of discharge point(s), accompanied with appropriate
sketches;
(d) Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
(e) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details;
(f) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials and types of materials which are, or
could be discharged;
(g) Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of
production;
(h) Complete description of pretreatment;
(i) Other information that may be defined by the Director for
reasonable evaluation of the permit application.
(2) Duration of permits. A permit shall be valid for four (4) years
unless processing changes are made that, as determined by the city, alter the
wastewater constituents and characteristics significantly. The city shall be
notified of any planned significant process changes in order to make such
determinations. The discharge permit will be evaluated by the city ninety (90)
days prior to the expiration date and will be modified as required. Industry will
be given a sixty (60) day notice to respond to any proposed changes or they
should write the city ninety (90) days prior if they wish to initiate any
modifications. If neither the city nor industry request a change, the Permit
expiration date will automatically be extended four (4) additional years .
(3) Transfer of a permit. Permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new
changed operation.
18-58
(4) Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following
conditions of his permit or of this chapter, or of applicable State and Federal
regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked. Violations subjecting a user
to possible revocation of his permit include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
(b) Obtaining a permit by representing or failing to disclose
fully all relevant facts;
(c) Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(e) Violation of terms and conditions of the permit.
(5) Permit appeal procedure. An industry shall have the right to
appeal all items established in the Discharge Permit. The procedure shall be as
follows:
A written notice signed by the person in charge seeking an
appeal hearing, shall be delivered by registered mail to the
Director outlining the permit provisions which the user
wishes to appeal. The Director shall then have thirty (30)
days from the time of receipt of the notice to notify the
Springfield Board of Mayor and Aldermen that an appeal
hearing will be held. A hearing shall then be conducted and
all grievances alleged by the user shall be discussed, and
appropriate decisions rendered by the Director. Any
decisions which in the judgment of the user are
inappropriate may be appealed to the Springfield Board of
Mayor and Aldermen by filing a written notice with said
Board within fourteen (14) days after completion of the first
hearing. Exemptions or variances of the protection criteria
established for the system shall not be granted during this
appeal procedure.
Nothing in this section shall affect a person's right to appeals provided by
State Law. (Ord. # 87-04, modified)
18-407. Enforcement procedures and penalties. (1) Violations. Any user
found to have violated or to be violating any provision, limitation or requirement
of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit which may be immediately
if deemed necessary by the Director or his representative but not to exceed
thirty (30) days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all such
violations.
18-59
(2) Penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the
city or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, and the order, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall
be fined not less than fifty & no/100 dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day
in which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may
recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the persons found to
have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued
hereunder.
The Director shall have the authority to discontinue service to those users
that persistently violate any requirements of this chapter.
(3) Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any
false statements, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
this chapter, or Wastewater Discharge Permit, or who falsifies, tampers with,
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this chapter, shall, upon conviction be punished as provided by State Law.
(4) Expenses incurred. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
incurred by the city by reason of such violation.
(5) Protection from damage. No unauthorized person shall
maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the
storm drain works. All violators will be subject to civil and criminal prosecution.
(Ord. # 87-04, modified)
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-60
CHAPTER 5
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION
18-501. Application and scope.
18-502. Definitions.
18-503. Compliance with state regulations.
18-504. User requirements.
18-505. Plumbing permit required.
18-506. Public and private water systems.
18-507. Power and authority of inspectors.
18-508. Schedule of compliance.
18-509. Use of public water supply.
18-510. Corrections of violations.
18-511. Required protection devices.
18-512. Non-potable water supplies.
18-513. Enforcement and penalties.
18-501. Application and scope. An ordinance regulating the construction
and maintenance of cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, and
inter-connections affecting the city's potable water supply and any other water
supply.
18-502. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
(1) "Air gap" shall mean a vertical, physical separation between a
water supply and the overflow rim of a non-pressurized receiving vessel. An
approved air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply
line, but no less than two inches (2").
(2) "Approved" shall mean that the device or method is acceptable by
the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation and the director
as meeting specifications suitable for the intended purpose.
(3) "Atmospheric vacuum breaker" shall mean a device which prevents
back-siphonage by creating an atomospheric vent when there is either a
negative pressure or sub-atmospheric pressure in the water system.
(4) "Auxiliary intake" shall mean any water supply, on or available to
a premise, other than that directly supplied by the public water system, and any
piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source
other than normally used.
(5) "Backflow" shall mean the reversal of the intended flow direction
of water in a piping system.
(6) "Back-siphonage" shall mean the flow of water or other liquids,
mixtures or substances into a potable water system from any source other than
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-61
its intended source, caused by a reduction of pressure in the potable water
system.
(7) "By-pass" shall mean any system of piping or other arrangement
whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a backflow
prevention device.
(8) "City" shall mean the City of Springfield.
(9) "City manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City of
Springfield or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
(10) "Cross-connection" shall mean any physical connection whereby the
public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, directly
or indirectly, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building
or buildings, in such a manner that flow of water into the public water supply
is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective
check or back-pressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
devices through which or because of which, backflow could occur are considered
to be cross-connected.
(11) "Director" shall mean the Director of the Springfield Water and
Wastewater Department and/or his authorized deputy agent, or representative.
(12) "Double check valve assembly" shall mean an assembly of two
independently operating spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut-off
valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for
testing each check valve.
(13) "Double check valve detector assembly" shall mean an assembly of
two independently operating spring loaded check valves with a water meter
(protected by another check valve or reduced pressure backflow prevention
device, depending upon degree of hazard) connected across the check valves, and
with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus
properly located test cocks for testing each part of the assembly.
(14) "Fire protection systems." (a) Class 1 shall be those with direct
connections from the public water mains only; no pumps, tanks, or
reservoirs; no physical connections for other supplies; no antifreeze or
other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to
atmosphere, dry well, or other safe outlets.
(b) Class 2 shall be the same as Class 1 except that booster
pumps may be installed in the connections from the public water mains.
(c) Class 3 shall be those with a direct connection from the
public water mains and having storage tanks filled from the public water
system, with the water maintained in potable condition.
(d) Class 4 shall be those with a direct connection from the
public water mains and having an auxiliary water supply dedicated to
fire protection and available to the premises.
(e) Class 5 shall be those with a direct connection from the
public water mains and interconnected with auxiliary supplies, such as
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-62
pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to contamination, or from
rivers, ponds, wells, or industrial water systems; or where antifreeze or
other additives are used.
(f) Class 6 shall be those with combined industrial and fire
protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or
without gravity storage or pump suction tanks.
(15) "Inter-connection" shall mean any system of piping or other
arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may
contain sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable or imparting
contamination to the public water supply.
(16) "Person" shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial,
including any individual firm or association, and any municipal or private
corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or
country.
(17) "Pressure vacuum breaker" shall mean an assembly consisting of
a device containing one or two independently operating spring loaded check
valves and independently operating spring loaded or air inlet valve located on
the discharge side of the check valve(s), with tightly closing shut-off valves on
each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks for testing of the
check valves and relief valves.
(18) "Public water supply" shall mean the waterworks system
furnishing water to the City of Springfield and all portions of Robertson County
serviced by the Springfield Water System for general use and which supply is
recognized and the public water supply by the Tennessee Department of
Environment and Conservation.
(19) "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device" shall
mean an assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check
valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between
the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check
valves plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the
relief valves.
(20) "TDEC" shall mean the Tennessee Department of Environment and
Conservation, Division of Water Supply.
(21) "SWWD" shall mean the Springfield Department of Water and
Wastewater.
(22) "Shall" is mandatory; "May" is permissive.
(23) "User" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation, or group. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-503. Compliance with state regulations. SWWD shall comply with
§ 68-221-701 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, as well as the rules and
regulations for public water supplies, legally adopted in accordance with this
code, which pertain to cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, and
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-63
inter-connections, and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these
undesirable water uses. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-504. User requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause
a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection to be made; or
allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever unless the construction and
operation of same have been approved by TDEC, and the operation of such
cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or inter-connection is at all times
under the direct supervision of the director.
If an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city's water
service connection to the user's premises, or at points within the premises, to
protect the potable water supply, the director shall compel the installation and
maintenance of said device at the user's expense.
For new installations, SWWD shall inspect the site and/or review plans
in order to determine the type of backflow prevention device, if any, that will be
required, and notify the user in writing of the required device. All required
devices must be installed and operational prior to the installation of water
service.
For existing premises, SWWD shall perform evaluations and inspections
and shall require corrections of violations in accordance with this chapter. (as
added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-505. Plumbing permit required. No installation, alteration, or change
shall be made of any backflow prevention device connected to the public water
supply for water supply, fire protection, or any other purpose without first
securing a suitable plumbing permit from the city. A copy of such permit shall
be displayed in a conspicuous place at the job site at all times from time of
issuance until final inspection. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-506. Public and private water systems. Any person whose premises
are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the
same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an
uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein
is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the director a statement of
the non-existence of unapproved or unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary
intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections. Such statement shall also contain an
agreement that no cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or interconnection
will be permitted upon the premises. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug.
2002)
18-507. Power and authority of inspectors. It shall be the duty of SWWD
to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water
supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed
possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential
Change 13, July 15, 2008 18-64
health hazards involved shall be as established by the director and as approved
by TDEC.
The director and other duly authorized representatives of SWWD shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a
connection to the Springfield Public Water Supply for the purpose of inspecting
the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections, auxiliary intakes,
by-passes, or inter-connections. On request, the owner, tenant, or occupant of
any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The
refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed
evidence of the presence of cross-connections. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug.
2002)
18-508. Schedule of compliance. Any person who now has crossconnections,
auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. After a thorough investigation of
existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work,
the amount of time shall be designated by the director.
The failure to correct conditions threatening the safety of the public water
system as prohibited by this chapter and the Tennessee Code Annotated,
§ 53-2004, within a reasonable time and within the time limits set by SWWD,
shall be grounds for denial of water service. If proper protection has not been
provided after a reasonable time, SWWD shall give the customer legal
notification that water service is to be discontinued, and physically separate the
public water supply from the customers on-site piping system in such a manner
the two systems cannot again be connected by an unauthorized person. Where
cross-connections, inter-connections, auxiliary intakes, or by-passes are found
that constitutes an extreme hazard of immediate concern of contaminating the
public water system, the director shall require that immediate corrective action
be taken to eliminate the threat to the public water system. Immediate steps
shall be taken to disconnect the public water supply from the on-site piping
system unless the imminent hazard(s) is(are) corrected immediately. (as added
by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-509. Use of public water supply. Where the nature of use of the water
supplied a premises by SWWD is such that it is deemed:
(1) Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation;
(2) That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not
willing to demonstrate to SWWD that the water use and protective features of
the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the
water supply;
(3) That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such
that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing;
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-65
(4) There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted,
altered, or disconnected.
SWWD shall require the use of an approved protective device on the
service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may
originate in the user's premises is contained therein. The protection devices
shall be a reduced pressure backflow preventer with the following exception.
The fire sprinkler system can be protected with the use of a double detector
check valve assembly in accordance with State of Tennessee regulations. The
method of installation of all protective devices shall be approved by the director
prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by TDEC. The
installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises.
Personnel of SWWD shall have the right to inspect and test the device or
devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary by the director or his
designated representative.
Water service shall not be disrupted to the device without the knowledge
of the occupant of the premises. Where the use of water is critical to the
continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property, or equipment,
duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water
service to text or repair the protective device or devices. Where only one unit is
installed and the continuance of service is critical, the director or his
representative shall notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to
discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to text
and/or repair the device. The water system shall require the occupant of the
premises to make all repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of such repairs
shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be
made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the director.
If necessary, water service shall be discontinued (following legal
notification) for failure to maintain backflow prevention devices in proper
working order. Likewise, the removal, bypassing, or altering of the protective
device(s) or the installation thereof so as to render the devices ineffective shall
constitute grounds for discontinuance of water service. Water service to such
premises shall not be restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated
such conditions or defects to the satisfaction of the director and/or his
representative of SWWD. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-510. Corrections of violations. (1) Any user found to have
cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses, or interconnections in violations
with the provisions of this chapter shall be allowed a reasonable time within
which to comply with the provisions of this chapter. After a thorough
investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to
complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by the director, but
in no case shall exceed 90 days.
(2) Where cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or
interconnections are found to constitute an extreme and immediate hazard of
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-66
immediate concern of contaminating the public water system, the director shall
require the immediate corrective action be taken to eliminate the threat to the
public water system.
(3) Expeditious steps shall be taken to disconnect the public water
system from the on-site piping system unless the imminent hazard is corrected
immediately, subject to the right of a due process hearing timely request. The
disconnection may be prior to the disconnection if the commensurate risk to
public health and safety warrants.
(4) The failure to correct conditions threatening the safety of the public
water system as outlined in the ordinance and § 68-221-771 of the Tennessee
Code Annotated within the time limits set forth by SWWD, shall be grounds for
denial of water service. If proper protection has not been provided after a
reasonable time, the director shall give the user legal notification that water
service is to be discontinued, and cause the physical separation between the
public water system and the user's on-site piping system in such a manner that
the two systems cannot again be connected by an unauthorized person, subject
to the right of due process hearing upon a timely request. The due process
hearing may follow disconnection when the risk of public health and safety
warrant disconnection prior to a process hearing. (as added by Ord. #02-10,
Aug. 2002)
18-511. Required protection devices. (1) Where the nature of use of the
water supplied a premise by the public water system is such that it is deemed:
(a) Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation;
(b) The owner and/or occupant of the premise cannot or will not
demonstrate that the water use and protective features of the plumbing
are such as to pose o threat to the safety and potability of the water;
(c) The nature or mode of operation within a premise are such
that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing;
(d) The nature of the premises is such that the use of the
structure may change to a use wherein backflow prevention is required;
(e) There is a likelihood that protective devices may be
subverted, altered, or disconnected; or
(f) The plumbing from a private well (or other source) enters
the building served by the public water supply, then the director shall
require the use of an approved protective device on the service line
serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may originate
in the customer's premises is contained therein, then a protective device
shall be employed.
(2) The protective device shall be of the type approved by TDEC and
the director as to manufacture, model, size, and application. The method of
installation of backflow prevention devices shall be approved by the director
prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by TDEC and
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-67
with the installation criteria set forth below. The installation shall be at the
expense of the owner or occupant of the premises.
(3) Applications requiring backflow prevention devices include, but are
not limited to, service and/or fire flow connections for the facilities listed on
Appendix A.1
(4) Fire protection systems. (a) Class 1, Class 2 and Class 3 fire
protection systems generally shall require a double check valve detector
assembly, except a reduced pressure backflow prevention device shall be
required where:
(i) Underground fire sprinkler pipelines are parallel to
and within ten feet horizontally of pipelines carrying sewage or
significantly toxic products;
(ii) Premises have unusually complex piping systems;
(iii) Pumpers connecting to the system have corrosion
inhibitors or other chemicals added to the tanks of fire trucks.
(b) Class 4, Class 5 and Class 6 fire protection systems
generally shall require a reduced pressure backflow prevention device.
(c) Wherever fire sprinkler system piping is not constructed
from an approved potable water material, or chemicals such as liquid
foam concentrates are used, a reduced pressure backflow prevention
device shall be required.
(5) Plumbing for commercial and institutional buildings where
backflow prevention devices are not immediately required shall be designed to
accommodate such devices in conformance with standards for such devices,
including drains, should such devices be required in the future.
(6) The director may require internal and/or additional backflow
prevention devices wherein it is deemed necessary to protect water supplies
within the premises.
(7) Installation criteria. Minimum acceptable criteria for the
installation of reduced pressure zone type backflow prevention devices, double
check valve assemblies, pressure vacuum breakers, or other devices requiring
regular inspection and testing shall include the following:
(a) All required devices must be installed by a person certified
by TDEC, or its successor. Evidence of current certification at the time
of installation shall be required.
(b) All devices shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions, and the installer shall posses all
test cocks and fittings required for testing the device. All fittings shall
permit direct connection to the department's test device.
(c) The entire device, including test cocks and valves, shall be
easily accessible for testing and repair.
1Appendix A to Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002 is of record in the recorder's office.
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-68
(d) Reduced pressure backflow prevention devices shall be
located a minimum of twelve inches (12") plus the nominal diameter of
the device above the floor surface. The maximum height above the floor
surface shall be sixty inches (60").
(e) Clearance of device from wall surfaces or other obstructions
shall be a minimum of six inches (6").
(f) Devices in new construction shall be installed inside the
occupied building in a heated mechanical room. The device location in
existing structures shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, with
preference given to indoor installations.
(g) Devices shall be protected from freezing, vandalism,
mechanical abuse, and from any corrosive, sticky, greasy, abrasive, or
other damaging environment.
(h) Devices shall be positioned where discharge from relief ports
is piped to an approved drain which will not create undesirable
conditions.
(i) An approved air-gap shall separate the relief port from any
drainage system.
(j) An approved strainer, fitted with a test cock, shall be
installed immediately upstream of the backflow device or shut-off valve
before the strainer.
(k) Devices shall be located in an area from submergence or
flood potential.
(l) A gravity drainage system is required on all installations.
Generally, below ground installations will not be permitted. On certain
slopes, where installations below ground may be permitted, a single or
multiple gravity drain system may be used provided that the single drain
line is at least four (4) times the area of the relief port, or that multiple
drain lines are at least 2 and one-half (2½) times the area of the relief
port.
(m) Fire hydrant drains shall not be connected to the sewer, nor
shall fire hydrant drains be installed in such a manner that
backsiphonage or backflow through the drain may occur.
(n) Where jockey (low volume-high pressure) pumps are utilized
to maintain elevated pressure, as in fire protection system, the discharge
of the pump must be on the downstream side of any check valve or
backflow prevention device. Where the supply for the jockey pump is
taken from the upstream side of the check valve or backflow prevention
device, an assembly of the same type as required on the main line shall
be installed on the supply line.
(o) High volume/high pressure fire pumps shall be equipped
with a suction limiting control to modulate the pump if the suction
pressure approaches ten pounds per square inch gauge (10 psig). Ideally,
such pumps should draw from an in-house reservoir fed by several supply
Change 9, February 18, 2003 18-69
lines. If any of the supply lines have a source other than the public water
supply, all supply lines must have air-gap discharges into the reservoir.
(as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-512. Non-potable water supplies. The potable water supply made
available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected
from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could
be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the
potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
WATER UNSAFE
FOR DRINKING
Minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters one-inch high located
on a contrasting background. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
18-513. Enforcement and penalties. The requirements contained herein
shall apply to all premises served by SWWD, whether located inside or outside
the corporate limits, and are hereby made a part of the conditions required to
be met for SWWD to provide water services to any premises. Such action, being
essential for the protection of water distribution system against the entrance of
contamination which may render the water unsafe healthwise, or otherwise
undesirable, shall be enforced rigidly without regard to location of the premises,
whether inside or outside the corporate limits.
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100), and each day of continued violation after conviction shall
constitute a separate offense.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall become liable to
the city for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the city by reason of such
violation. (as added by Ord. #02-10, Aug. 2002)
Change 10, December 21, 2004 19-1
TITLE 19
ELECTRICITY AND GAS
CHAPTER
1. ELECTRICAL CODE.
2. ELECTRICITY.
3. GAS CODE.
4. GAS SERVICE GENERALLY.
5. CONDITIONS OF SERVICE POLICY MANUAL.
CHAPTER 1
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION
19-101. Electrical code adopted.
19-102. Appeals.
19-103. Violations and penalties.
19-104. Permit required for doing electrical work.
19-105. Enforcement.
19-106. Fees.
19-107. Conditions of service manual.
19-108. Available in recorder's office.
19-101. Electrical code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by
sections 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, Tennessee Code Annotated, and for the
purpose of providing practical minimum standards for the safeguarding of
persons and of buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use
of electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling, or for other purposes, the
current edition of the National Electrical Code,1 adopted by the State of
Tennessee, as prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter
referred to as the electrical code. (1981 code, § 4-301, modified, as replaced by
Ord. #96-10, § 1, Feb. 1996)
19-102. Appeals. The owner of a building, structure, service system or
his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the State Electrical
Inspector through the appeals process established by the State of Tennessee.
An appeal of a decision of the city's electrical inspector shall be to the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals as established in title 2, Boards & Commissions, Etc.,
1Copies of this code may be purchased from the National Fire Protection
Association, 470 Atlantic Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02210.
19-2
of the Springfield Municipal Code. (1981 code, § 4-302, as replaced by Ord.
#96-10, § 1, Feb. 1996)
19-103. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or agent
who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by
state or local laws. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of
any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued, and upon conviction
of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as
provided by state and local laws. (1981 code, § 4-303, as replaced by Ord.
#96-10, § 1, Feb. 1996)
19-104. Permit required for doing electrical work. No electrical work
shall be done within this municipality until a permit therefor has been issued
by the electrical inspector. The term electrical work shall not be deemed to
include minor repairs that do not involve the installation of new wire, conduits,
machinery, apparatus, or other electrical devices generally requiring the
services of an electrician. (1981 code, § 4-304, as replaced by Ord. #96-10, § 1,
Feb. 1996)
19-105. Enforcement. The electrical inspector shall be such person as the
City of Springfield shall appoint or designate. It shall be his duty to enforce
compliance with this chapter and the electrical code herein adopted by
reference. He is authorized and directed to make such inspections of electrical
equipment and wiring, etc., as are necessary to insure compliance with the
applicable regulations, and may enter any premises or building at any
reasonable time for the purpose of discharging his duties. He is authorized to
refuse or discontinue electrical service to any person or place not complying with
this chapter and/or the electrical code. (1981 code, § 4-305, as replaced by Ord.
#96-10, § 1, Feb. 1996)
19-106. Fees. The electrical inspector shall collect the same fees as are
authorized in § 68-102-143, Tennessee Code Annotated, for electrical inspections
by deputy inspectors of the state fire marshal. (1981 code, § 4-306, as replaced
by Ord. #96-10, § 1, Feb. 1996)
19-107. Conditions of service manual. In the event of a conflict between
the provisions of the electrical code and the requirements set forth in the City
of Springfield Conditions of Service Manual, the Conditions of Service Manual
shall control. (As added by Ord. #96-10, § 1, Feb. 1996)
19-108. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirements of
section 6-54-502 of the Tennessee Code Annotated, one (1) copy of the electrical
19-3
code has been filed with the city recorder and is available for public use and
inspection. Said electrical code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length herein and shall control within the corporate limits and shall control
over property, structures, appliances, and service systems outside the corporate
city limits which are connected to the City of Springfield Electric System. (As
added by Ord. #96-10, § 1, Feb. 1996)
19-4
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICITY
SECTION
19-201. Application for service.
19-202. Deposit.
19-203. Point of delivery
19-204. Customer's wiring--standards.
19-205. Inspections.
19-206. Underground service lines.
19-207. Customer's responsibility for distributor's property.
19-208. Right of access.
19-209. Billing.
19-210. Discontinuance of service by distributor.
19-211. Connection, reconnection, and disconnection charges.
19-212. Termination of contract by customer.
19-213. Service charges for temporary service.
19-214. Interruption of service.
19-215. Shortage of electricity.
19-216. Voltage fluctuations caused by customer.
19-217. Additional load.
19-218. Standby and resale service.
19-219. Notice of trouble.
19-220. Non-standard service.
19-221. Meter tests.
19-222. Relocation of outdoor lighting facilities.
19-223. Billing adjusted to standard periods.
19-224. Heat pump program.
19-225. Scope.
19-226. Revisions.
19-227. Conflict.
19-228. Rates.
19-201. Application for service. Each prospective customer desiring
electric service shall be required to sign an application for service or contract
before service is supplied by the provider. (1981 code, § 13-401, modified)
19-202. Deposit. A deposit or suitable guarantee approximately equal to
twice the average monthly bill may be required of any customer before electric
service is supplied. The provider may at its option return the deposit to the
customer after one year. Upon termination of service, the deposit may be
applied by the distributor against unpaid bills of the customer, and if any
19-5
balance remains after such application is made, said balance shall be refunded
to the customer. (1981 code, § 13-402)
19-203. Point of delivery. The point of delivery is the point, as designated
by the distributor, on customer's premises where current is to be delivered to the
building or premises. All wiring and equipment beyond this point of delivery
shall be provided and maintained by the customer at no expense the distributor.
(1) Point of attachment. The customer shall provide a suitable point
of attachment for distributor's facilities in accordance with distributor's
requirements and/or the electrical code. Points of attachment must be of
sufficient strength to withstand the following tensions:
SERVICE SIZE/TYPE MINIMUM TENSION REQUIREMENTS
60-100 AMP 1PH O/H 40 LBS
101-225 AMP 1PH O/H 40 LBS
101-225 AMP 3PH O/H 286 LBS
226-600 AMP 1PH O/H 1060 LBS
226-600 AMP 3PH O/H 1414 LBS
601-1000 AMP 1PH O/H 1228 LBS
601-1000 AMP 3PH O/H 1700 LBS
1001-1300 AMP 3PH O/H 2550 LBS
1301-1600 AMP 3PH O/H 3400 LBS
1601-2000 AMP 3PH O/H 4250 LBS
Distributor will make connections at an approved weatherhead, provided
the ground wire is provided within one (1) foot of the point of attachment.
(2) Mobile homes. Unless allowed by code, all mobile homes and
buildings subject to relocation shall require a pole to be set for distributor's point
of attachment. Such pole shall be owned by customer, and can be installed by
either party according to distributors specifications. The pole must be in good
condition, shall be set no less than (five) feet in good ground and shall be
properly tamped. The pole shall extend no less than twenty (20) feet above final
grade. Weatherheads shall be located two (2) feet from the top of the pole.
(3) Meter bases. Where a meter base is appropriate, it shall be
provided by distributor and no substitutions shall be used. (1981 code, § 13-403,
as amended by Ord. #96-16, § 1, April 1996)
19-204. Customer's wiring--standards. All wiring of the customer must
conform to the distributor's requirements and accepted modern standards, as
exemplified by the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code and the
National Electrical Code. (1981 code, § 13-404)
19-6
19-205. Inspections. The distributor shall have the right, but shall not
be obligated, to inspect any installation before electricity is introduced or at any
time later, and reserves the right to reject any wiring or appliances not in
accordance with the distributor's standards; but such inspection or failure to
inspect or reject shall not render the distributor liable or responsible for any loss
or damage resulting from defects in the installation, wiring, or appliances, or
from a violation of the distributor's rules, or from accidents which may occur
upon the customer's premises. (1981 code, § 13-405)
19-206. Underground service lines. Customers desiring underground
service lines from the distributor's overhead system must bear the excess cost
incident thereto. Specifications and terms for such construction will be
furnished by the distributor on request. (1981 code, § 13-406)
19-207. Customer's responsibility for distributor's property. All meters,
service connections, and other equipment furnished by the distributor shall be,
and remain, the property of the distributor. The customer shall provide a space
for and exercise proper care to protect the property of the distributor on his
premises, and, in the event of loss or damage to the distributor's property
arising from the neglect of the customer to care for same, the cost of the
necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the customer. (1981 code,
§ 13-407)
19-208. Right of access. The distributor's identified employees shall have
access to the customer's premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of
reading meters and testing, repairing, removing, or exchanging any or all
equipment belonging to the distributor. (1981 code, § 13-408)
19-209. Billing. Bills will be rendered monthly and shall be at the
location designated by the provider. Failure to receive a bill will not release the
customer from payment obligation. Should bills not be paid by the due date
specified on the bill, the provider may at any time thereafter, upon five (5) days'
written notice to the customer, discontinue service. Bills paid after the due date
specified on the bill may be subject to additional charges. Should the due date
of bill fall on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the business day next following the
due date will be held as a day of grace for delivery of payment. Remittances
received by mail after the due date will not be subject to such additional charges
if the incoming envelope bears United States Postal Service date stamp of the
due date or any date prior thereto. If a meter fails to register properly, or if a
meter is removed to be tested or repaired, or if service is received other than
through a meter, the municipality reserves the right to render an estimated bill
based on the best information available.
19-7
19-210. Discontinuance of service by provider. The provider may refuse
to connect or may discontinue service for the violation of any of its rules and
regulations, or for violation of any of the provisions of the schedule of rates and
charges, or of the application of the customer or contract with the customer. The
provider may discontinue service to a customer for the theft of current or the
appearance of current theft devices on the premises of the customer. The
discontinuance of service by the provider for any cause as stated in this rule
does not release the customer from his obligation to the provider for the
payment of minimum bills as specified in the application of the customer or the
contract with the customer. (1981 code, § 13-410, modified)
19-211. Connection, reconnection, and disconnection charges. Provider
may establish and collect standard charges to cover the reasonable average cost,
including administration, of connecting or reconnecting service, or disconnecting
service as provided above. Higher charges may be established and collected
when connections and reconnections are performed after normal office hours, or
when special circumstances warrant. (1981 code, § 13-411, modified)
19-212. Termination of contract by customer. Customers who have
fulfilled their contract terms and wish to discontinue service must give at least
one (1) day's written notice to that effect, unless the contract specifies otherwise.
Notice to discontinue service prior to the expiration of a contract term will not
relieve the customer from any minimum or guaranteed payment under any
contract or rate. (1981 code, § 13-412, modified)
19-213. Service charges for temporary services. Customers requiring
electric service on a temporary basis may be required by the provider to pay all
costs for connection and disconnection incidental to the supplying and removing
of service. This rule applies to circuses, carnivals, fairs, temporary construction,
and the like. (1981 code, § 13-413, modified)
19-214. Interruption of service. The provider will use reasonable
diligence in supplying service, but shall not be liable for breach of contract in the
event of, or for loss, injury or damage to persons or property resulting from,
interruptions in service, excessive or inadequate voltage, single phasing, or
otherwise unsatisfactory service, whether or not caused by negligence. (1981
code, § 13-414, modified)
19-215. Shortage of electricity. In the event of an emergency or other
condition causing a shortage in the amount of electricity for the provider to meet
the demand on its system, the provider may, by an allocation method deemed
equitable by the provider, fix the amount of electricity to be made available for
use by a customer and/or may otherwise restrict the time during which the
customer may make use of electricity and the uses which the customer may
19-8
make of electricity. If such actions become necessary, the customer may request
a variance because of unusual circumstances including matters adversely
affecting the public health, safety and welfare. If a customer fails to comply
with such allocation or restriction, the provider may take such remedial actions
as it deems appropriate under the circumstances including temporarily
disconnecting electric service and charging additional amounts because of the
excess use of electricity. The provisions of the section entitled "Interruption of
Service" of this schedule of rules and regulations are applicable to any such
allocation or restriction. (1981 code, § 13-415)
19-216. Voltage fluctuations caused by customer. Electric service must
not be used in such a manner as to cause unusual fluctuations or disturbances
to the distributor's system. The distributor may require a customer, at his own
expense, to install suitable apparatus which will reasonably limit such
fluctuations. (1981 code, § 13-416)
19-217. Additional load. The service connection, transformers, meters,
and equipment supplied by the distributor for each customer have a definite
capacity, and no addition to the equipment or load connected thereto will be
allowed except by consent of the distributor. Failure to give notice of additions
or changes in load, and to obtain the distributor's consent for same, shall render
the customer liable for any damage to any of the distributor's lines or equipment
caused by the additional or changed installation. (1981 code, § 13-417)
19-218. Standby and resale service. All purchased electric service (other
than emergency or standby service) used on the premises of a customer shall be
supplied exclusively by the distributor, and the customer shall not, directly or
indirectly, sell, sublet, assign, or otherwise dispose of the electric service or any
part thereof. (1981 code, § 13-418)
19-219. Notice of trouble. The customer shall notify the immediately
should the service be unsatisfactory for any reason, or should there be any
defects, trouble, or accidents affecting the supply of electricity. Such notices, if
verbal, should be confirmed in writing. (1981 code, § 13-419)
19-220. Non-standard service. The customer shall pay the cost of any
special installation necessary to meet his peculiar requirements for service at
other than standard voltages, or for the supply of closer voltage regulation than
required by standard practice. (1981 code, § 13-420)
19-221. Meter tests. The distributor will, at its own expense, make
periodical tests and inspections of its meters in order to maintain a high
standard of accuracy. The distributor will make additional tests or inspections
of its meters at the request of the customer. If tests made at the customer's
19-9
request show that the meter is accurate within two percent (2%), slow or fast,
no adjustment will be made in the customer's bill, and the distributor's standard
testing charge will be paid by the customer. In case the test shows the meter to
be in excess of two percent (2%), fast or slow, an adjustment shall be made in
the customer's bill over a period of not over thirty (30) days prior to the date of
such test, and the cost of making the test shall be borne by the distributor.
(1981 code, § 13-421)
19-222. Relocation of outdoor lighting facilities. The distributor shall, at
the request of the customer, relocate or change existing distributor-owned
equipment. The customer shall reimburse the distributor for such changes at
actual cost including appropriate overheads. (1981 code, § 13-422)
19-223. Billing adjusted to standard periods. The demand charges and
the blocks in the energy charges set forth in the rate schedules are based on
billing periods of approximately one month. In the case of the first billing of new
accounts (temporary service, cotton gins, and other seasonal customers
excepted) and final billings of all accounts (temporary service excepted) where
the period covered by the billing involved fractions of a month, the demand
charges and the blocks of the energy charge will be adjusted to a basis
proportionate with the period of time during which service is extended. (1981
code, § 13-423)
19-224. Heat pump program. Customers of the distributor receiving
service under the residential rate schedules and who are considering converting
the heat and cooling system in their homes to an electric heat pump are eligible
to participate in the home insulation program being conducted by the distributor
and TVA. If the home energy survey for such customers indicates home
weatherization measures such as storm window, insulated doors, caulking and
weatherstripping of doors and windows and installation of attic insulation are
cost effective, and if a heat pump is installed, the distributor will, as part of
providing electric service to residential customers, arrange to make available
funds provided by TVA to accomplish said measures at customers' dwelling.
Participants will be required to enter into a standard form agreement under
which the funds furnished to accomplish said measures will be repaid to the
distributor in a lump sum payment, or by monthly payments at an appropriate
interest rate, extending up to ten years. The monthly repayment amount due
for this service will be included as part of the electric bill rendered by the
distributor, to which bills the provisions of the section entitled "Billing" of this
schedule or rules and regulations are applicable; provided, however, that said
monthly amount shall not be subject to additional charges for past-due payment.
(As renumbered by Ord. #96-16, § 2, April 1996)
19-10
19-225. Scope. This schedule of rules and regulations is a part of all
contracts for receiving electric service from the distributor, and applies to all
service received from the distributor, whether the service is based upon contract
agreement, signed application, or otherwise. A copy of this schedule, together
with a copy of the distributor's schedule of rates and charges, shall be kept open
to inspection at the offices of the distributor. (1981 code, § 13-426, as
renumbered by Ord. #96-16, § 2, April 1996)
19-226. Revisions. These rules and regulations may be revised,
amended, supplemented, or otherwise changed from time to time, without
notice. Such changes, when effective, shall have the same force as the present
rules and regulations. (1981 code, § 13-427, as renumbered by Ord. #96-16, § 2,
April 1996)
19-227. Conflict. In case of a conflict between any provision of any rate
schedule and the schedule of rules and regulations, the rate schedule shall
apply. (1981 code, § 13-428, as renumbered by Ord. #96-16, § 2, April 1996)
19-228. Rates. The city shall make and collect charges for electrical
service in accordance with such rate schedules as the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen shall from time to time prescribe. (1981 code, § 13-429, as
renumbered by Ord. #96-16, § 2, April 1996)
Change 17, January 20, 2015 19-11
CHAPTER 3
GAS CODE
SECTION
19-301. Gas code adopted.
19-302. Modifications.
19-303. Available in recorder's office.
19-304. Conditions of service manual.
19-305. Permit fees.
19-306. Discontinuance of utilities.
19-301. Gas code adopted. Pursuant to authority granted by Tennessee
Code Annotated, §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-506, and for the purpose of securing
the beneficial interests and purposes of public safety, health and general welfare
through the regulation of the installation and maintenance of all gas systems
and gas-fired appliances, the International Fuel Gas Code,1 2012 edition, as
prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, including all
appendices, addenda, and supplements thereto, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference, in its entirety, as a part of the Springfield Municipal
Code and is hereinafter referred to as the gas code. (Ord. #092-16, Sept. 1992,
as replaced by Ord. #96-08, Feb. 1996, Ord. #01-04, March 2001, Ord. #06-28,
Dec. 2006, Ord. #09-02, April 2009, and Ord. #14-20, Oct. 2014)
19-302. Modifications. The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition,
adopted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby modified as follows:
(1) Whenever the "code official" is referred to in this code, it shall, for
the purposes of the gas code, mean such person as the City of Springfield shall
have appointed or designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the gas
code.
(2) All permit fees and scales for calculating permit fees shall be
established by the board of mayor and aldermen by separate ordinance.
(3) Section 109 entitled "Means of Appeal" is rescinded in its entirety
and shall be substituted by the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals
as established in title 2, chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(4) Subsection 108.4 entitled "Violation penalties" is rescinded in its
entirety and shall be substituted by a new subsection 108.4 to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect,
install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction
1Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Change 17, January 20, 2015 19-12
documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each person shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or
continued. (Ord. #092-16, Sept. 1992, as replaced by Ord. #96-08, Feb.
1996, Ord. #01-04, March 2001, Ord. #06-28, Dec. 2006, Ord. #09-02,
April 2009, and Ord. #14-20, Oct. 2014)
19-303. Available in recorder's office. Pursuant to the requirement of
Tennessee Code Annotated, § 6-54-502, one (1) copy of the gas code has been
filed with the city recorder and is available for public use and inspection. Said
gas code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and
shall control within the corporate limits and shall control over property,
structures, appliances, and service systems outside the corporate city limits
which are connected to the City of Springfield Gas System. (Ord. #092-16, Sept.
1992, as replaced by Ord. #96-08, Feb. 1996, Ord. #06-28, Dec. 2006,
Ord. #09-02, April 2009, and Ord. #14-20, Oct. 2014)
19-304. Conditions of service manual. In the event of a conflict between
the provisions of the gas code and the requirements set forth in the City of
Springfield Conditions of Service Manual, the Conditions of Service Manual
shall control. (Ord. #092-16, Sept. 1992, as replaced by Ord. #96-08, Feb. 1996,
Ord. #06-28, Dec. 2006, Ord. #09-02, April 2009, and Ord. #14-20, Oct. 2014)
19-305. Permit fees. All fee schedules pertaining to gas line construction,
alteration, repair, removal, connection, and so forth shall be established by the
board of mayor and aldermen by ordinance. (Ord. #092-16, Sept. 1992, as
replaced by Ord. #96-08, Feb. 1996, Ord. #06-28, Dec. 2006, Ord. #09-02, April
2009, and Ord. #14-20, Oct. 2014)
19-306. Discontinuance of utilities. In addition to other penalties, the
building official of the city may order the discontinuance of utility services to
any building in violation of this chapter. This may be done only when the owner
of the building has been given at least ten (10) days notice by certified mail of
the violation, and has failed to make substantial progress toward correcting the
violations. (Ord. #092-16, Sept. 1992, as replaced by Ord. #96-08, Feb. 1996,
Ord. #06-28, Dec. 2006, Ord. #09-02, April 2009, and Ord. #14-20, Oct. 2014)
Change 12, February 20, 2007 19-13
CHAPTER 4
GAS SERVICE GENERALLY
SECTION
19-401. Main extensions.
19-402. Tap fees.
19-403. Service charges.
19-404. Rates.
19-405. Billing.
19-406. Discontinuance or refusal of service.
19-407. Connection, reconnection and disconnection charges.
19-408. Termination of contract by customer.
19-409. Interruption of service.
19-401. Main extensions. Main extensions may be made at customer
request within the service area, if economically feasible. (1981 code, § 13-501,
modified)
19-402. Tap fees. Gas meters shall be set at the building and a tap fee
shall be charged and collected in accordance with such schedule as may be
prescribed or authorized by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. (1981 code,
§ 13-502)
19-403. Service charges. Each time a gas service is cut on or cut off at
the customer's request or for nonpayment of a bill there shall be collected from
the customer a service charge as prescribed or authorized by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen. (1981 code, § 13-504)
19-404. Rates. The city shall make and collect charges for gas service in
accordance with such rate schedules as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
from time to time prescribe. (1981 code, § 13-505, modified)
19-405. Billing. Bills will be rendered monthly and shall be at the
location designated by the provider. Failure to receive a bill will not release the
customer from payment obligation. Should bills not be paid by the due date
specified on the bill, the provider may at any time thereafter, upon five (5) days'
written notice to the customer, discontinue service. Bills paid after the due date
specified on the bill may be subject to additional charges. Should the due date
of bill fall on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the business day next following the
due date will be held as a day of grace for delivery of payment. Remittances
received by mail after the due date will not be subject to such additional charges
if the incoming envelope bears United States Postal Service date stamp of the
due date or any date prior thereto. If a meter fails to register properly, or if a
Change 12, February 20, 2007 19-14
meter is removed to be tested or repaired, or if service is received other than
through a meter, the municipality reserves the right to render an estimated bill
based on the best information available. (1981 code, § 13-506, modified)
19-406. Discontinuance or refusal of service. The provider may refuse to
connect or may discontinue service for the violation of any of its rules and
regulations, or for violation of any of the provisions of the schedule of rates and
charges, or of the application of the customer or contract with the customer. The
provider may discontinue service to a customer for the theft of service or the
appearance of service theft devices on the premises of the customer. The
discontinuance of service by the provider for any cause as stated in this rule
does not release the customer from his obligation to the provider for the
payment of minimum bills as specified in the application of the customer or the
contract with the customer.
19-407. Connection, reconnection and disconnection charges. The
provider may establish and collect standard charges to cover the reasonable
average cost, including administration, of connecting or reconnecting service, or
disconnecting service as provided above. Higher charges may be established and
collected when connections and reconnections are performed after normal office
hours, or when special circumstances warrant.
19-408. Termination of contract by customer. Customers who have
fulfilled their contract terms and wish to discontinue service must give at least
one (1) day notice to that effect, unless the contract specifies otherwise. Notice
to discontinue service prior to the expiration of a contract term will not relieve
the customer from any minimum or guaranteed payment under any contract or
rate.
19-409. Interruption of service. The provider will use reasonable
diligence in supplying service, but shall not be liable for breach of contract in the
event of, or for loss, injury or damage to persons or property resulting from,
interruptions in service, excessive or inadequate pressure, or otherwise
unsatisfactory service, whether or not caused by negligence.
Change 12, February 20, 2007 20-1
TITLE 20
MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER
1. PARK AND GREENWAY RULES AND REGULATIONS.
2. TEMPORARY FOOD VENDOR REGULATIONS.
CHAPTER 1
PARKS AND GREENWAY RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION
20-101. Rules shall be posted in parks.
20-102. In general.
20-103. Exceptions.
20-104. Prohibited activities.
20-105. Permits required.
20-106. Regulated uses
20-107. Park and greenway hours.
20-108. Regulation of vehicles in parks.
20-109. Animals and vehicles on greenway hike and bike trial.
20-101. Rules shall be posted in parks. Rules and regulations pertaining
to the use and operation of parks and the section of the greenway hike and bike
trial extending between Garner Street Park and J. Travis Price Park shall be
posted in each park and greenway trailhead and are presumed to be known and
understood by all park users. (Ord. # 091-11, Nov. 1991, as replaced by
Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
20-102. In general. The enforcement of rules and regulations contained
in this chapter shall apply as follows:
(1) To anyone performing an act in direct violation of a rule or
regulation including anyone who causes, solicits, conspires or in any way aids
in the violation of a rule or regulation.
(2) To anyone who allows or otherwise fails to curtail actions of a
minor which violate a rule or regulation.
(3) To anyone in a supervisory capacity over a group of people that
enter park or greenway premises with or without proper approval and to any
and all actions of a group which violate park and greenway rules and
regulations. (Ord. # 091-11, Nov. 1991, as replaced by Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
20-103. Exceptions. Exceptions to the rules and regulations contained
in this chapter are as follows.
Change 12, February 20, 2007 20-2
(1) Any act regulated by these rules may be performed under a permit
obtained from the parks board or the director of parks and recreation.
(2) Those activities or uses which are specifically prohibited by the
rules and regulations may be allowed by obtaining a permit from the parks
board only in those situations whereby the parks board has determined an
obvious or beneficial community purpose in allowing the activity. (Ord. #
091-11, Nov. 1991, as replaced by Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
20-104. Prohibited activities. The following activities are prohibited:
(1) Vandalism of any park or greenway structures or grounds;
(2) Littering, including placing household garbage in park or greenway
receptacles;
(3) Sound truck advertising;
(4) Disorderly conduct;
(5) Use of fireworks or firearms;
(6) The injury, harassment, or feeding of animals;
(7) Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages;
(8) Possession of illegal drugs;
(9) Walking of pit bulls or other aggressive dogs;
(10) Deposit of pet feces; and
(11) Parking or riding of bicycles in spectator or bleacher areas during
games or practice, All bicycles shall be parked in designated areas. (Ord.
# 091-11, Nov. 1991, as replaced by Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
20-105. Permits required. Permits shall be obtained to reserve park or
greenway facilities, use of a park or greenway for any prohibited use, or when
otherwise required by this chapter. (Ord. # 091-11, Nov. 1991, as replaced by
Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
20-106. Regulated uses. The following uses are subject to permit or other
restrictions:
(1) No golf is permitted, except in designated areas.
(2) Placing posters and signs is prohibited except by permit.
(3) Selling of any merchandise is prohibited except by permit
(4) Building of fires is prohibited except in grills or by permit.
(5) Fishing is permitted except where prohibited by signs.
(6) Swimming is prohibited except where permitted by signs.
(7) Skating and skateboarding is prohibited unless permitted by signs.
(8) Pets must be on a leash of a length and sufficient strength to keep
them under control and to keep them from interfering with the activities of
persons and animals belonging to other persons. Any pet found at-large may be
seized and impounded. (Ord. # 091-11, Nov. 1991, as replaced by Ord. #06-30,
2006)
Change 12, February 20, 2007 20-3
20-107. Park and greenway hours. Park hours are from 7:30 A.M. to
10:00 P.M. from March 1 through October 31 and 7:30 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. from
November 1 though February 28. No person shall be allowed to remain in a park
more than thirty (30) minutes after an event finishes if it is after park closing
time. Exceptions shall be by permit. Persons are allowed to enter parks between
sunrise and 7:30 A.M. by permit or by parking outside the park and entering on
foot. The greenway shall be open from dawn to dusk year-round. (as added by
Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
20-108. Regulation of vehicles in parks. The following regulations shall
apply to any vehicle use within city parks:
(1) Regulatory signs must be observed unless directed otherwise by a
police officer or park employee.
(2) The speed limit within all parks is fifteen (15) miles per hour.
(3) Reckless driving is prohibited.
(4) Motorized vehicles are confined to the mads and parking areas.
They are not to be driven on any turf or trails, unless directed to do so by a
police officer or park employee. No vehicles of any kind, including bicycles, are
to be driven on baseball, softball, soccer, and football fields or in bleacher areas
or spectator areas.
(5) Only licensed drivers are to operate motorized vehicles inside
parks. Driving lessons are prohibited.
(6) The maintenance of vehicles, such as changing oil, is prohibited.
(as added by Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
20-109. Animals and vehicles on greenway hike and bike trial. It shall
be unlawful for any person to ride an animal or to ride, push, pull or place any
vehicle across or upon the designated greenway hike and bike trail. As used in
this section, vehicles shall also include, but shall not be limited to, any gasoline
or electric powered vehicles such as all terrain vehicles (ATVs), motorized
bicycles, motorcycles, golf carts and go-carts. Parks and recreation department,
police, fire, ambulance and emergency vehicles, as well as other authorized
government vehicles, are exempt from the provisions of this section when used
in the execution of official duties. Wheelchairs and similar single person
apparatuses designed and used specifically to assist disabled persons are also
exempt from the provisions of this section. (as added by Ord. #06-30, Dec. 2006)
Change 12, February 20, 2007 20-4
CHAPTER 2
TEMPORARY FOOD VENDOR REGULATIONS
SECTION
20-201. Temporary food vendors not allowed to operate at a fixed or
permanent location.
20-202. Permit fees and exemptions.
20-201. Temporary food vendors not allowed to operate at a fixed or
permanent location. Food vendors operating in portable trailers, lunch wagons
or other vehicles shall not be allowed to provide service at a fixed or permanent
location within the city. Such facilities shall obtain a temporary use permit from
the community development department for up to seven (7) days to provide
service at a fixed location for special events or other funcitons. The days of
operation of such a facility shall be limited to seven days total for any calender
year. Such facilities shall meet the health and safety standards of the City of
Springfield and the Robertson County Health Department. (as added by Ord.
#04-28, Dec. 2004, and replaced by Ord. #06-16, Sept. 2006)
20-202. Permit fees and exemptions. Activities sponsored by the City of
Springfield, Robertson County Fair Board, school, church, civic organizations
operating for periods of less than seven (7) days are exempt from these
regulations. There shall be a$25 fee for the permit, which shall be prominently
displayed on the vehicle or structure during the time of operation. (as added by
Ord. #04-28, Dec. 2004)

ORDINANCE 18-03
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 11-SOlA THROUGH SECTION 11-510 TO READ AS SET FORTH IN
"EXHIBIT A" A TT ACHED
Whereas, T.C.A. Sections 13-7-201through13-7-210 delegate the responsib ility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry; and
Whereas, the City of Springfield Planning Commission bas reviewed this proposed ordinance
amendment on March I, 2018 and recommends its passage;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Mayor and Aldem1en of
Springfield, Tennessee as fo llows:
Section 1. The City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance Chapter 5 entitled Residential District
Regulations for the City of Springfield is hereby amended by deleting the existing Sections 11-
501 A through 11 -510 and replacing with new Sections 11-502 through 11-512; to read as set
forth in "Exhibit A" attached;
Section 2. All ordinances, resolutions and policies in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded to
the extent of the conflict only.
Passed on I st reading: March 20, 2018
Passed on 2"d reading: April 17, 2018
Passed on 3rd reading: May I 0, 201 8
,r ~ S~cOc-
Aru;='schneider, Mayor
Attest:
~ J{. {!;,wlrit
Lisa H. Crockett, City Recorder
ORDINANCE 18-03
EXHIBIT A
Amendment 1- Chapter 5 entitled Residential District Regulations. Delete Sections 11-50 I A
through 11-510 Residential District Regulations and replace with Sections 11-502 through 11-
512 to read as follows:
11-502. Standards for New Duplex and Multi Family Units and
Conversions in Residential Areas.
(a) Duplexes are allowed provided a site plan is prepared
and approved by the Planning Commission.
(b) A concrete or paved drive shall be provided and two
paved or concrete parking spaced for each dwelling
unit. Parking shall be located in the side or rear yard
only. There shall be no parking in the front yard. All
parking or the units shall be provided on site, there
shall be no street parking.
(c) Drainage shall be checked to see if the Storm Water
Pollut ion requirements apply. Detention sha ll be
provided if necessitated by slope or increased runoff
due to impermeable surface area.
(d) Each dwelling unit sha ll have a separate meter for all
utilities.
(e) The minimum lot frontage for a duplex sha ll be one and
one ha lf times the lot frontage for the dist rict or 100
feet, whichever is greater. Buildings shall face t he
street and not be stacked behind each other.
(f) Al l multi family developments sha ll be required to
prepare a site plan in accordance with Section 11-1303
of t his Zoning Ordinance.
11-503. A-Agricultural District. These district s are designed to provide permissible areas for the
growing of crops, animal husbandry, dairying, forestry and other similar activities, which generally occur
and characterize rural rather than urban areas. These districts are designed, furthermore, to provide for
very low-density residential development where public sanitary service is least practical. In addition,
these districts may include areas and lands not suited by reason of soil, geologic, topographic, or other
limitations for development. These districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and major
recreational faci lities, which require large land areas and are appropriately located away from intense
urban development.
A. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
Within the A-Agricultural Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following activities, as
described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residential Activities
Dwelling One-Family Detached
Dwelling Two-Family Detached
Community Facility Activities
Essential Service
Agricultural, Resource Production, and Extractive
Activities
Plant and Forest Nurseries
Crop and Animal Raising
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Living quarters of persons regularly employed on the
premises:
Private barns, stables, sheds, and other farm
buildings.
Private garages and parking areas
Outdoor recreation facilities exclusively for
the use of the residents.
Signs in compliance with the regulations set
forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8.
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title.
Accessory uses or structures customarily
incidental to the above permitted use.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Section 11-1306 of
Chapter 13:
Community Facility Activities
Administrative
Community Assembly
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Extensive Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Fa cilities
Community Activities
Animal Care and Veterinarian Services
Group Assembly
Agricultural Resource Production and Extractive
Activities
Mining and Quarrying
D. Prohibited Uses
Any uses or structures not of a nature specifically permitted herein by right, by accessory use or by
conditional use.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone lot or
portion of a zone lot including all new development, enlargements, extensions, or conversions;
provided, however, that all barns, sheds, si los, or other buildings used exclusively for agricultural
purposes shall be exempt from these regulations.
Maximum lot coverage by all buildings 10 percent
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
General provisions applicable to all residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street intersections, adjustments for lot area
remainder, and exceptions to these provisions are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Yard Regulations
The basic yard regulations below apply to all zone lots within A Di stricts, except as provided in Chapter
8, Section 11-805.
Minimum front yard 50 feet
Minimum side yard 25 feet
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum lot area 2 acres
Minimum lot width at the 100 feet
11-504. R40 low Density Residential Districts. These districts are designed to provide suitable areas
for low density residential development characterized by an open appearance. The residential
development will consist of single-family detached dwellings and accessory structures. These districts
also include community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the residents of
these districts, or which are benefited by an open residential environment without creating
objectionable or undesirable influences upon residential developments. Further, it is the intent of this
Title that these districts be located so that the provision of appropriate urban services will be physically
and economically facilitated and so that provision is made for the orderly expansion and maintenance of
urban residential development within the urban area. It is the express purpose of this Title to exclude
from these districts all buildings and other structures and uses having commercial characteristics
whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations
specifically provided for in these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not having such
characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this Title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the R40 Low Density Residential Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Maps, the following
activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residential Activities
Dwelling One-Family Detached
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation facilities exclusively for use
of the residents;
Signs complying with applicable regulations set
forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupat ions as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title;
Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Sect ion 11-1306 of
Chapter 13.
Community Facilities
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Fa cil ities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or conditional use is prohibited in the R40 Low Density
Residential District.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone lot or
portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargements, extensions or conversions located
in any R40 District.
Minimum lot area 40,000 square feet
Maximum lot coverage by all buildings 20 percent
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit 40,000 square feet.
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
General provisions applicable to all residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibit ed at street intersections, adjustments for lot area
remainder, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic ya rd regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within R40 Districts, except as
provided in Chapter 8, Sections 11-803 an 11-804.
Minimum front yard 40 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet
Minimum rear yard
Minimum lot width at the street
and at front setback
30 feet
100 feet
11-505. R20 Low Density Residential Districts. These districts are designed to provide suitable areas
for low density residential development characterized by an open appearance. Generally, the
residential development will consist of single-family detached dwellings and accessory structures. These
districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically the
residents of these districts, or which are benefited by an open residential environment without creating
objectionable or undesirable influences upon residential developments. Further it is the intent of this
Title that these districts be located so that the provision of appropriate urban services will be physically
and economically facilitated and so that provision is made for the orderly expansion and maintenance of
urban residential development within the urban area. It is the express purpose of this Title to exclude
from these districts all buildings and other structures and uses having commercial characteristics
whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations
specifically provided for in these regulations for these districts sha ll be considered as not having such
characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this Title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the R20 Low Density Residential Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Maps, the following
activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residential Activities
Dwelling One-Family Detached
Dwelling Two-Family Detached
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas;
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation facilities exclusively for use
of the residents;
Signs complying with applicable regulations set
Forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of th is Title;
Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Section 11-1306 of
Chapter 13.
Residential Activities
Community Facilities
Administrative
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Persona l and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or condit ional use is prohibited in the R20 Low Density
Residential District.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone lot or
portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargement s, extensions or conversions located
in any R20 District.
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet
Maximum lot coverage
by all buildings 20 percent
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit 20,000 square feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
Genera l provisions applicable to all residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street intersections, adjustments for lot area
remainder, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic yard regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within R20 Districts, except as
provided in Chapter 8, Sections 11-803 and 11-804.
Minimum front yard 40 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum lot width at the street
and at front setback 75 feet
11-506. RS20 Low Density Residential Single Family Districts. These districts are designed to provide
suitable areas for low density residential development characterized by an open appearance. Generally,
the residential development will consist of si ngle-family detached dwellings and accessory structures.
These districts also include community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which serve specifically
the residents of these districts, or which are benefited by an open residential environment without
creating objectionable or undesirable influences upon residential developments. Further it is the intent
of this Title that these districts be located so that the provision of appropriate urban services will be
physically and economically facilitated and so that provision is made for the orderly expansion and
maintenance of urban residential development within the urban area. It is the express purpose of this
Title to exclude from these di stricts all buildings and other structures and uses having commercial
characteristics whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home
occupations specifically provided for in these regulations for these districts shall be considered as not
having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this Title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the RS20 Low Density Residential Single Family Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Maps,
the following activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residential Activities
Dwelling One-Family Detached
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas;
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation facilities exclusively for use
of the residents;
Signs complying with applicable regulations set
forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title;
Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Section 11-1306 of
Chapter 13.
' Community Facilities
Administrative
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or conditional use is prohibited in the RS20 Low Density
Residential Single Family District.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone lot or
portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargements, extensions or conversions located
in any RS20 District.
Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet
Maximum lot coverage
by all buildings 20 percent
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit 20,000 square feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
General provisions applicable to all residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required ya rds, obstructions prohibited at street intersections, adjustments for lot area
remainder, except ions to these provisions and other reg ulations are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic yard regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within RS20 Districts, except as
provided in Chapter 8, Sections 11-803 an 11-804.
Minimum front yard 40 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum lot width at the street
and at front setback 75 feet
11-507. R15 Medium Density Residential Districts. This class of districts is designed to provide suitable
areas for medium density residential development where sufficient urban services and facilities are
provided or where the extension of such servi ces can be physica lly and economically fa ci litated prior to
development. Only single-family residences are permitted by right. Many other t ypes of residential
uses may also be allowed conditionally. This class of dist rict is intended also to permit community
fac il ity and public utility instal lations which are necessary to service and t o serve specifica lly the
residents of t hese dist rict s, or which inst allations are benefit ed by and compatible with a residential
environment. It is the cl ass of dist rict all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial
characteristics and not planned as an integra l part of a total residential development, whether operated
for profit or ot herwise, except that co ndit ional uses and home occupations specifically provided for in
these reg ul ations for this class of distr ict shall be considered as not having such characteristics if t hey
otherwise conform to the provisions of this title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the R15 Medium Density Residential Districts as showing on t he Official Zoning Map, the
following activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitt ed:
Residential Activities
Dwelling One-Family Det ached
Duplexes
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation facilit ies exclusively for use
of t he residents;
Signs complying with applicable regu lations set
forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title;
Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Section 11-1306 of
Chapter 13.
Community Facilities
Administrative
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilit ies
Religious Facilities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or conditional use is prohibited in the R15 Medium
Density Residential Dist ricts.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone lot or
portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargements, extensions or conversions located
in any R15 District.
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Maximum lot coverage
by all buildings 30 percent
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit 15,000 square feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
General provisions applicable to all residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street intersections, adjustments for lot area
remainder, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic yard regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within R15 Districts, except as
provided in Chapter 8, Sections 11-803 and 11-804.
Minimum front yard 35 feet
Minimum side yards 10 feet, with 5 additional feet for
each additional story.
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum lot width at the street
line and at setback line 75 feet
11-508. RSlS M edium Density Residential Single Family Districts. This class of districts is designed to
provide suitable areas for medium density residential development where sufficient urban services and
facilities are provided or where the extension of such services can be physically and economically
facilitated prior to development. Only single-family residences are permitted by right. Many other
types of residential uses may also be allowed conditionally. This class of district is intended also to
permit community faci lity and public utility installations which are necessary to service and to serve
specifically the residents of these districts, or which installations are benefited by and compatible with a
residential environment. It is the class of district all buildings or other structures and uses having
commercial characteristics and not planned as an integral part of a total residential development,
whether operated for profit or otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations
specifical ly provided for in these regulations for this cl ass of district shall be considered as not having
such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the RSlS Medium Density Residential Districts as showing on the Official Zoning Map, the
following activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residentia l Activit ies
Dwelling One-Family Detached
Community Facil ity Activities
Essential Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation faci lities exclusively for use
of the residents;
Signs complying with applicable regulations set
forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title;
Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The fo llowing activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Section 11-1306 of
Chapter 13.
Community Facilities
Administrative
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or conditional use is prohibited in the RS15 Medium
Density Residential Districts.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to bu ildings or other structures located on any zone lot or
portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargements, extensions or conversions located
in any RS15 District.
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Maximum lot coverage
by all buildings 30 percent
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit 15,000 square feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
General provisions applicable to all residential districts concerning visibility at intersections, permitted
obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street intersections, adjustments for lot area
remainder, exceptions to these provisions and other regulations are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic yard regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within RS15 Districts, except as
provided in Chapter 8, Sections 11-803 and 11-804.
Minimum front yard 35 feet
Minimum side yards 10 feet, with 5 additional feet for
each additional story.
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum lot width at the street
line and at setback line 75 feet
11-509. RlO Medium Density Residential Districts. This class of districts is designed to provide suitable
areas for medium density residential development where sufficient urban services and facilities are
provided or where the extension of such services can be physically and economically facilitated prior to
development. All types of residential activities are permitted. It is the intent of this district to not
restrict in number the dwelling units contained in a building provided there is sufficient area of zone lot
and open space on such lot relative to the number of dwelling units thereon. This class of district is
intended also to permit community facility and public utility insta llations which are necessary to service
and to serve specifically the residents of these districts, or which installations are benefited by and
compatible with a residential environment. It is the express purpose of this Title to exclude from this
class of district all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics and not
planned as an integra l part of a total residential development, whether operat ed for profit or otherwise,
except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided for in these
regulations for this class of district shall be cons idered as not having such characteristics if they
otherwise conform to the provisions of this Title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the RlO Medium Density Residential Districts as showing on the Official Zoning Map, the
following activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residential Activities
Dwelling One-Family Detached
Dwelling Two-Family Detached
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation facilities exclusively for use
of the residents;
Signs complying with applicable regulations set
forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title;
Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Section
11-1306 of Chapter 13.
Residential Activities
Dwelling Multi-Family
Community Facilities
Administrative
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Fa cilities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or conditional use is prohibited in the RlO
Medium Density Residential Districts.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone
lot or portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargements, extensions or
conversions located in any RlO District.
Minimum lot area
Maximum lot coverage
by all buildings
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit
Maximum Building Height
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
10,000 square feet
40 percent
10,000 square feet
35 feet
General provisions applica ble to all residential districts concerning visibility at
intersections, permitted obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, adjustments for lot area remainder, exceptions to these provisions and
other regulations are contained in Chapter 8 of t his Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic yard regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within RlO
Districts, except as provided in Chapter 8, Sections 11-803 an 11-804.
Minimum front yard 30 feet
Minimum side yards 10 feet, with 5
additional feet for each additional story.
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum lot width at the street
line and at setback line 60 feet
11-510. RS10 Medium Density Residential Single Family Districts. This class of districts is designed to
provide suitable areas for medium density residential development where sufficient urban services and
facilities are provided or where the extension of such services can be physica lly and economically
facil itated prior to development. Only si ngle-family residential activities are permitted. This class of
district is intended also to permit community faci lity and public utility installations which are necessary
to se rvice and to se rve specifically the residents of these districts, or which installations are benefited by
and compatible with a residential environment. It is the express purpose of this Tit le to exclude from
this class of district all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial charact eristics and not
planned as an integral part of a total residential development, whether operated for profit or otherwise,
except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided for in these regulations for this
class of district sha ll be considered as not having such characteristics if they otherwise conform to the
provisions of this Title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the RS10 Medium Density Residential Single Family Districts as showing on the Official
Zoning Map, the following activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residential Activities
Dwelling One-Family Detached
Community Facility Activities
Essential Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation facilities exclusively for use
of the residents;
Signs complying with applicable regulations set
forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title;
Accessory uses or structures customar ily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted on ly as conditional uses in accordance with Section
11-1306 of Chapter 13.
Community Facilities
Administrative
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or conditional use is prohibited in the RSlO
Medium Density Residential Single Family Districts.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone
lot or portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargements, extensions or
conversions located in any RSlO District.
Minimum lot area
Maximum lot coverage
by all buildings
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit
Maximum Building Height
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
10,000 square feet
40 percent
10,000 square feet
35 feet
General provisions applicable to all res idential districts concerning visibility at
intersections, permitted obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, adjustments for lot area remainder, exceptions to these provisions and
other regulations are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic yard regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within RSlO
Districts, except as provided in Cha pter 8, Sections 11-803 and 11-804.
Minimum front yard 30 feet
Minimum side yards 10 feet, with 5
additional feet for each additional story.
Minimum rear yard 30 feet
Minimum lot width at the street
line and at setback line 60 feet
11-511. R7 High Density Residential Districts. This cl ass of district is designed to provide suitable areas
for high-density development where sufficient urban facilities are available or where such fac ilities will
be available prior to development. All types of res idential activities are permitted. It is the intent of this
district to not restrict in number the dwelling units contained in a building provided there is sufficient
area of zone lot and open space on such lot re lative to t he number of dwelling units thereon. This class
of district is intended also to permit community facility and public utility installations which are
necessary to service specifically the residents of this district, or which installations are benefited by and
compatible with a re sidential environment. It is the express purpose of this Title to exclude from this
cla ss of district all buildings or other structures and uses having commercial characteristics and not
planned as an integral part of a total residential development, whether operated for profit or otherwise,
except that conditional uses and home occupations specifically provided for in these regulations for t his
class of district shall be considered as not having such characterist ics if they otherwise conform to the
provisions of this Title.
A. Principal Permitted Uses and Structures
Within the R7 High Density Residentia l Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
fo llowing activities as described in Chapter 3 are permitted:
Residential Activities
Dwelling On e-Fami ly Detached
Dwelling Two-Family Detached
Dwelling Attached
Community Facility Activities
Essentia l Services
B. Permitted Accessory Uses
Private garages and parking areas
Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other
outdoor recreation facilities exclusively for use
of the residents;
Signs complying with applicable regulations set forth in Section 11-808 of Chapter 8;
Home occupations as defined and subject to the
provisions of this Title;
Accessory uses or structures customarily incidental
to the above permitted uses.
C. Conditional Uses
The following activities may be permitted only as conditional uses in accordance with Section
11-1306 of Chapter 13. (This section amended by Ordinance 01-14, eliminating mobile home as a
conditional use in R7.}
Residential Activities
Mobile Home Park
Semi-Permanent
Community Facilities
Administrative
Community Education
Cultural and Recreation Services
Intermediate Impact
Personal and Group Care Facilities
Religious Facilities
D. Prohibited Uses
Any use not allowed by right, by accessory use, or conditional use is prohibited in the R7
Districts.
E. Bulk Regulations
The bulk regulations appearing below apply to buildings or other structures located on any zone
lot or portion of a zone lot, including all new developments, enlargements, extensions or
conversions located in any R7 District.
Minimum lot area
Maximum lot coverage
by all buildings
Minimum development area
per dwelling unit
7,000 square feet
40 percent
7,000 square feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
F. Yard Requirements
(1) General Provisions
General provisions applicable to all residential districts concerning visibility at
intersections, permitted obstructions in required yards, obstructions prohibited at street
intersections, adjustments for lot area remainder, exceptions to these provisions and
other regulations are contained in Chapter 8 of this Title.
(2) Basic Provisions
The basic yard regulations appearing below apply to all zone lots located within R7
Districts, except as provided in Chapter 8, Sections 11-803 and 11-804.
Minimum front yard
Minimum side yard
Minimum rear yard
Minimum lot width at the
street and at setback line
25 feet
8 feet, 5 feet each additional story
15 feet
50 feet
11-512. MH Mobile Home Residential Districts (This Section included as amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance under Ordinance 96-33, Creating Mobile Home Districts and Distinguishing Mobile Home
Subdivision and Mobile Home Parks). {Ordinance 10-09 Amended Section 11-510 Entitled "MH, Mobile
Homes Residential Regulations"
Purpose and Intent: It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to provide adequate space within the
Springfield Planning Region for the use of land for mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. No
mobile home hereinafter shal l be placed on any lot within the Springfield Planning Region that does not
conform to the minimum standards as set forth in this ordinance except when the following conditions
are proven to exist: 1). Vacant site/pads in existing mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions may
be rep laced with another mobile home; 2). Individual mobile homes may be placed on a lot located in
the Agricultural Districts, provided the lot consists of a minimum of four (4) acres and has a minimum of
one hundred feet of frontage on a public right-of-way or a permanent easement of at least fifty (SO) feet
in width as prescribed in the Springfield Subdivision Regulations;
INSPECTIONS: The State has exclusive jurisdiction over the insta llation of manufactured homes. Any city,
county and consolidated government resolutions, ordinances, regulations and code requirements on the
installation of manufactured homes are preempted by State law.
A.MH-1 District. Mobile Home Subdivisions - This section shall designate a district for mobile home
developments characterized by larger lots and in general, more stringent development standards than
traditional mobile home parks. Ownership of property in this district is usually divided among several
indivi duals who own the land upon which a mobile home or other dwelling is located. Procedures for
development of mobile home subdivisions shall be t hose prescribed by the Subdivision Regulations of
Springfield, Tennessee and in conformance with the following provisions:
1.Permitted Uses. The following lists the permitted uses allowed in the MH-1 District:
A. Mobile homes
B. Modular homes
C. Manufactured homes (includ ing single family homes, and double wide mobile homes)
D. Accessory buildings to dwelling units
E. Recreation, service or utility buildings used in common by the residents of the vicinity
F. Public or private utilities
G. Parks and open spaces
H. Governmental uses
I. Office buildings for management, maintenance, or security of the development
J. Community assembly structures and/or areas
2. Space Requirements. The following space requirements shal l apply to all mobile home
subdivis ions.
A. Required Area for Development: Minimum of three (3) acres.
B. Required Lot Areas per Dwelling Unit: Minimum 7,000 square feet for each lot
served by public sewer and minimum 15,000 square feet for each lot served by
septic systems.
C. Minimum Individual Lot Width: seventy-five {75) feet.
D. Minimum Setbacks: Front yard= 20 feet, Rear yard= 20 feet, Side Yard= 15 feet.
E. Common Recreation and/or Open Space
Requirements:
A minimum of 200 square feet for each individual lot shall be set aside for common
space or recreation to be utilized by the lot owners/tenants of each mobile home
subdivision. Such common area shall be duly shown on t he subdivision plat to be
recorded. A means of maintenance agreements or upkeep of the recreation/open
space shall be provided by the developer of the mobile home subdivision prior to
est abl ishment of the district.
F. Accessory Structures may be permitted in the rear or side yard of a lot, provided
that they shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from the principal
structure and shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from the rear or side
property line. Accessory structures in the MH-1 District shall be limited to those
used solely for storage and use of personal equipment and/or utilitarian devices.
3. Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses within the
MH-1 District with approval by the Springfield Board of Zoning Appeals.
A. Child care permitted in th is Ordinance as Day Care Centers and Home Day Care
Facilities.
B. Neighborhood-oriented retail and/or service commercial uses designed to
accommodate the residents within the MH-1 District. However, these uses shall only
apply in mobile home enclosed structure, and may not exceed 2,500 square feet in gross
floor area.
C. Single family residential structures
4. Off-Street Parking. Each mobile home lot in a mobile home subdivision shall provide
adequate space to be designed for at least (2) vehicles to be parked off of a public or private
right-of-way.
S. Streets. All streets in a mobile home subdivision shall be built and classified according to the
standards established for public streets in the Springfield Subdivision Regulations.
6. Sidewalks and Pedestrian Areas. At least one side of all interior streets and drives, public or
private, shall be adjoined by a sidewalk of at least five (S) feet in width, running parallel to
the interior street to the edge of the public right-of-way that provides access to the mobile
home subdivision. In cases where the mobile home subdivision adjoins more than one
street, only those streets classified as collectors or arteria ls in the Major Street and Road
Plan, adopted by the Planning Commission, shall be required to have sidewalks connecting
them to the interior of the mobile home subdivision.
7. Other Provisions Pertaining to Mobile Home Subdivisions:
No lot owner shall occupy or use his lot, or permit the same or any part thereof to be
occupied or used for any purpose other than as a private single family residence.
No mobile home unit shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with the natural
drainage of the area.
No lot shall be resubdivided without following the expressed rules as outlined in the
Springfield Subdivision Regulations.
All mobile homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation in this district.
All mobile home subdivisions shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in the
Subdivision Regulations for the provision of all utilities.
All new mobile home subdivisions shall be opaquely screened on all exterior perimeter
boundary lines with evergreen landscaping and/or manmade earthen berms or
fencing. In the event that earthen berms are utilized they shall be a minimum of six
(6) feet in height. This provision shall not apply at street intersects in such a manner
to cause a sight visibility problem.
B. MH-2 District. Mobile Home Parks. The MH-2 District provides for the orderly development
of mobile home parks within the Springfield Planning Region. Mobile home parks allow for the
leasing of space upon a singular tract of land to more than one dwelling unit. Mobile home parks
typically allow for the placement of mobile homes within an area that is generally more
confined than that of a mobile home subdivision. Procedures for development of mobile home
parks shall be in conformance with the following provisions:
1.Permitted uses. The following is a list of the
permitted uses allowed in the MH-2 District:
A. Mobile homes
B. Modular homes
C. Manufacturing housing (including single family homes, and doublewide
mobile homes)
D. Accessory buildings to dwelling units
E. Recreation, se rvice or utility buildings used in common by the residents
of the vicinity
F. Public or private utilities
G. Parks and open space
H. Governmental uses
I. Office buildings for the management, maintenance, and security of the
mobile home park
J. Community assembly structures and/or areas
2. Space requirements. The following space requirements shall apply to all mobile
home parks.
A. Required Area for Development: All mobile
home parks shall consist of at least three
(3) acres in size and may vary according to
the proposed density. All units shall be served by public sewer. In all cases, a
minimum of ten (10) dwelling units is
required for the designation of the MH-2
District.
B. Required Lot Areas per Dwelling Unit:
Minimum 5,000 square feet. 
C. Minimum Lot Width: A
At least one hundred (100) feet of
frontage on a public street right-of-way. Sa id right-of-way must be
classified as either a collector or arterial street according to the Major
Street and Road Plan as adopted by the Springfield Planning
Commission.
D. Minimum Setbacks: Mobile homes must be
Situated within a mobile home park in such a fashion that there is a
twenty-five (25) foot clearance between each mobile home. No mobile
home shall be situated within twenty-five (25) feet of a public or private
street located within or outside of the mobile home park. Mobile homes
parked end-to-end may be situated fifteen (15) feet apart. Each mobile
home park sha ll maintain a minimum twenty-five (25) foot perimeter
buffer, free of any building, mobile home or accessory structure, with
the exception of any requ ired screening, berms, fencing, or landscaping.
E. Common Recreation and/ or Open Space Requirements: A minimum of
200 square feet for each individual lot shall be set aside for common
space or recreation to be utilized by the tenants of each mobile home
park. Such common area shall be duly shown on the site plan of the
mobile home park as required. A means of maintenance agreements or
upkeep of the recreation/open space shall be provided by the
developer, owner, or operator of t he mobile home park prior to
establishment of the district. The perimeter buffer shall not be
considered as area to be used for this purpose.
F. Accessory Structures may be permitted within mobile home parks in the
rear or side yard of a dwelling unit, provided that they shall be located
no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the perimeter boundary of the
park and at least ten (10) feet from any mobile home or other structure
within the park. Accessory structures in the H-2 District shall be limited
to those used solely for storage and use of personal equipment and/or
utilitarian devices; or for storage of equipment necessary for the
maintenance and operation of the mobile home park.
G. All mobile home parks shall provide a minimum fifty (SO) foot easement
for public utilities and other service or emergency equipment to access
the development.
3. Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses within
the MH-2 District with approval by the Springfield Board
of Zoning Appeals.
A. Child care as permitted in this Ordinance
as Day Care Centers and Home Day Care
Facilities.
B. Neighborhood-oriented retail and/or service
Commercial uses designed to accommodate the
residents within the MH- 2 District.
However, these uses shall only apply in
mobile home parks consisting of more than
twenty-five (25) dwelling units, shal l be
located wholly within an enclosed
structure, and may not exceed 2,500 square feet in gross floor area.
C. Single family residential structures.
4. Off-Street Parking. Each designated plot for a
dwelling unit in a mobile home park shall
provide adequate space to be designated for at
least two (2) vehicles to be parked off the
public or private right -of-way or driveway.
5. Streets. All public streets in a mobile home
park shall be built and classified according
to the standards established for public
streets in the Springfield Subdivision
Regulations. All private streets shall be
built at least twenty (20) feet in width and
allow sufficient area for essential and
emergency vehicles to access all areas of t he
park and to turn around on dead end streets.
Situations requiring dead-end streets shall
provide a cul-de-sac to be paved at a minimum
radius of forty (40) feet.
6.Sidewalks and Pedestrian Areas. Walkways of not less than (3) three feet in width
shall be provided from mobile home spaces to the pavement edge on the interior
streets. At least one side of all interior streets and drives, public or private, shall be
adjoined by a sidewalk of at least five (5) feet in width, running parallel to the interior
streets, to the edge of the public right-of-way that provides access to the mobile
home park. In cases where t he mobile park adjoins more than one street, on ly those
streets classified s collectors or arterials shall be required to have sidewalks
connecting them to the interior or the mobile home park.
7. Other Provisions Pertaining to Mobile Home Parks:
A. All developers of proposed mobile home parks be required to submit a site plan
of the proposed configuration of the park for approval by the Springfield
Planning Commission. The site plan shal l be prepared by a licensed surveyor or
engineer certified to practice in the State of Tennessee. All site plans shall
address the general lay out of the proposal, existing and proposed contours,
street design, utility connection and/or relocation, proposed means of
sa nitation removal and other pertinent information as required in the
Springfield Zoning Ordinance or by the Planning Commission.
B. No mobile home unit shall be placed in such a manner as to interfere with the
natural drainage of the area.
C. Skirting shall be constructed within thirty {30) days after placement of a mobile
home unit in a mobile home park. Skirting shall be of a nature that fully
encompasses the area between the base floor of the dwelling unit and the
ground.
D. Mobile home parks shall be opaquely screened on all exterior perimeter
boundary lines with evergreen landscaping and/or manmade earthen berms or
fencing. In the event that earthen berms are utilized they shall be a minimum of
four (4) feet in height. This provision shall not apply at street intersections in a
manner that could cause a sight visibility problem.
E. All mobile home units shall be served by public water and sewer util ities.
F. All mobile home sites shall be equipped with a minimum of two electrical
outlets, one 110 volts and one 220 volts.
G. All interior streets and/or drives shall be provided by the developers with street
lighting so as to safely illuminate all pedestrian and vehicular travel ways.
H. All mobile home units shall be securely anchored according to t he minimum
standards set forth by the International Code Council.
I. The Planning Commission may attach special conditions and safeguards to
protect both the occupants of the park and the adjoining property owners and
tenants, including such measures as protection against noise, glare, traffic
hazards, dust and pollution.
J. No inoperative, or unlicensed vehicle, nor uncontained junk, trash or other
debris shall be permitted within a mobile home park. It shall be the
responsibility of the mobile home park management to ensure the tenants
abide with th is requirement.
K. Development of mobile home parks and replacement mobile homes shall be
with homes no more than five (5) years in age.
ORDINANCE 18-11
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 12, CHAPTER 1 OF THE SPRINGFIELD
MUNICIPAL CODE BY DELETING SECTION 12-104 ENTITLED
"MODIFICATIONS TO THE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE" IN ITS
ENTIRETY AND SUBSTITUTING A NEW SECTION 12-104 ENTITLED
"MODIFICATIONS TO THE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE" TO READ AS
SET FORTH IN "EXHIBIT A" ATTACHED
Whereas, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen desires to update the building codes of
the City of Springfield; and
Whereas, it is necessary to adopt a building code establishing, the minimum regulations
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demolition of such structures; and
Whereas, it is necessary to adopt a residential building code regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one and two-family
dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height, and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of
Springfield, Tennessee as follows:
Section 1. Title 12 of the Springfield Municipal Code is hereby amended by deleting
Section 12-104 of Chapter 1 entitled "Modifications to the residential building code" in
its entirety and substituting a new Section 12-104 entitled "Modifications to the
residential building code" to read as set forth in "Exhibit A" attached.
Section 2. All ordinances, resolutions, and policies in conflict herewith are hereby
rescinded to the extent of the conflict only.
Passed pt reading May 15. 2018
Passed 2d reading June 19. 2018
Passed 3rd reading June 21 2018
Ann Schneider, Mayor
Attest:
Lisa Crockett, City Recorder
Ordinance 18-11
Exhibit A
12-104. Modifications to the residential building code. The International Residential Code
for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, adopted by the provisions of this
chapter, is hereby modified as follows:
(1) Whenever the "building official" is referred to in this code, it shall, for the purposes of
the residential building code, mean such person as the City of Springfield shall have
appointed or designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the residential building
code.
(2) Sidewalk and driveway construction, when in the public right-of-way and/or adjoining a
public street, shall be approved by the director of public works and/or city engineer in a
written statement to the building official prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(3) All permit fees and scales for calculating permit fees shall be established by the board of
mayor and aldermen by separate ordinance.
(4) Section Rl 12, entitled "Board of Appeals" shall be rescinded in its entirety and shall be
substituted by the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals as established in title 2,
chapter 8 of the Springfield Municipal Code.
(5) Subsection Rl 13.4, entitled "Violation penalties" shall be rescinded in its entirety and
shall be substituted by a new Subsection RI.13.4 to read as follows:
RI 13.4. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the
building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be
subject to a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued.
(6) Chapter I entitled "Scope and Administration" is amended by amending section Rl02
entitled "Applicability" by amending subsection RI 02.6 entitled "Partial invalidity" by
adding a new subsection RI 02.6. l entitled "Automatic sprinkler systems" to read as follows:
Rl02.6.l Automatic fire sprinkler systems. Any provisions contained within this code
relating to automatic fire sprinkler systems shall not be construed to be mandatory unless
specifically adopted in accordance with the provisions contained in Tennessee Code
Annotated title 68, section 120, part 101. However, should an automatic frre sprinkler
system be utilized, it must comply fully with all requirements contained herein.
(7) Table R301.2(1) is amended by adding the following Design Criteria in the appropriate
fields: Ground Snow Load -- 15#, Wind -- 90 mph 3 sec gust, Seismic Design Category-- C,
Weathering -- Severe Frost Line Depth -- 12 in., Termite -- Moderate to Heavy, Winter
Design Temp -- 14 deg. F, Ice Shield Underlayment Required -- No, Flood Hazard -- See
FEMAIDFIRM Flood Map, Air Freezing Index -- 332, Mean Annual Temperature -- 59.2
deg. F.
(8) Chapter 11 entitled "Energy Efficiency" is amended by deleting subsections NI I 01.1
Scope. The provisions of the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code shall regulate
the energy efficiency for the design and construction of buildings regulated by this code, to
read as follows:
Nl 101.1 Scope. The provisions of the 2012 International Residential Code shall regulate the
energy efficiency for the design and construction of buildings regulated by this code; except
the provisions of Table 402.1.1 - Insulation and Fenestration requirements by component of
the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, shall apply to the Residential
Code for One and Two-family Dwellings.
(9) Appendix L entitled "Permit Fees" is deleted in its entirety.
(10) Section R3 l 3 .1 regarding Automatic Sprinkler System in Townhouses, replace the
existing exception with the following exception: "An automatic residential fire sprinkler
system shall not be required if a 2-hour fire resistance rated wall exists between units, if
such walls do not contain plumbing and/or mechanical equipment, ducts, or vents in the
common wall."
(11) Delete Section R313.2 Automatic Sprinkler system in 1 & 2 Family Dwellings (1981
Code,§ 4-104, as replaced by Ord. #96-01, Feb. 1996, Ord. #01-02, March 2001, Ord. #03-
12, Aug. 2003, Ord. #04-16, Nov. 2004, Ord. #08-01, March 2008, and Ord. #14-14, Oct.
2014)
ORDINANCE 18-22
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD ZONING ORDINANCE
BY THE ADDITION OF SECTION 11-513 ENTITLED HISTORIC ZONING
DISTRICT TO CHAPTERS ENTITLED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
TO READ AS SET FORTH IN "EXHIBIT A" ATTACHED AND AMENDING
APPENDIX A TO READ AS SET FORTH IN "EXHIBIT B" ATTACHED
Whereas, T.C.A. Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210 delegate the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry; and
Whereas, the City of Springfield Planning Commission has reviewed this proposed ordinance
amendment on July 5, 2018 and recommends its passage;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Springfield,
Tennessee as follows:
Section 1. The City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended by the addition of Section
11-513 entitled Historic Zoning District to Chapter 5 entitled Residential Districl Regulations for
the City of Springfi eld to read as set forth in "Exhibit A" attached and is further amended by
modifying Appendix A to read as set forth by "Exhibit B" attached.
Section 2. All ordinances, resolutions and policies in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded to the
extent of the conflict only.
Passed on !81 reading: September 18. 2018
Passed on 2nd reading: October 16,20 LS
Passed on 3rd reading: November 20, 2018
Ann Schneider, Mayor
Attest:
Lisa H. Crockett, City Recorder
ORDINANCE 18-22
EXHIBIT A
11-513 Historic Zoning District
A. Historic District Guidelines
GUIDELINES PROPOSED FOR THE SPRINGFIELD RESIDENTIAL
HISTORIC DISTRICT
General Guidelines
(1) All guidelines concerning remodeling are written to preserve the front
of the house that faces the street and not intended to regulate any
interior or rear remodeling.
(2) Any property that is not in compliance with these guidelines at the time
of their adoption, will not have to bring it into compliance at that time.
Only when the non-complying feature has been taken down, will the
guidelines take effect.
Roofs
(1) Make the shape and pitch of roofs on new construction imitate the shape
and pitch of roofs on neighboring existing houses or other houses of the
same architectural tyle. Replacement roofs must copy the shape and
pitch or original roofS, and the soffit, fasc ia and trim detail between roof
and wall should be compatible with the original.
(2) The eaves on additions or new buildings should have an overhang that is
compatible with the original eaves. A minimum overhang of at least
twelve inches should be used on new buildings or additions to existing
buildings. Repair or rep lace roof details (chimneys roof cresting, finials,
attic vent windows, molding and other unique roof features). Use some
of these details in designing new buildings.
(3) Mateiials used in roofing exi ting buildings or new construction shaU
duplicate the original roofing materials as much as possible. Asphalt or
fiberglass shingles can be appropriate, as are slate, standing seam metal,
or metal or wood shingle roof coverings.
(4) Do not use satellite dishes, solar collectors, modern skylights on roof
planes that are visible from the street, or install them where they
interfere with decorative roof elements.
Windows
(1) Reuse original windows, if possible. It will be much less expensive and
much better historically to retain the original windows.
(2) Storm windows are often considered when a homeowner wants to
increase the heating and cooling efficiency of a building. Interior storm
windows that cannot be seen from the street might be a better
alternative to exterior storm windows. If exterior storm windows are
used they can be wood, or color clad metal to match the building's trim.
Exterior storm windows shall only be used if they do not damage or obscure
the original windows and frames.
(3) If replacement windows are necessary, they must be the same overall size
as the originals, with the same pane division.
(4) Windows may not be replaced with fixed thermal glazing or be made
inoperable.
(5) Tinted or reflective glass shall not be used on primary or other important
elevations. LO-E glass, which selectively blocks ultraviolet light, is
allowed.
(6) The designs shall be compatible with the overall design of other windows in
the building.
(7) Historic windows shall not be blocked in. If ceilings have been dropped,
provide a setback to allow for the full height of the original window
openings, do not cut across an existing window with a new floor or ceiling,
so that the outside appearance of the window is changed.
(8) Reuse existing, serviceable window hardware.
Porches
(1) Porches on historic houses shall be repaired or replicated using wood
materials for ceilings, balustrades, posts and colunms that duphcate the
original size and design. Reconstruction of the d cumented original porch
is appropriate.
(2) As a general rule, porches, particularly porches visible from a street,
should not be enclosed. If lJOrches are enclosed, the enclosure should be
compatible with the original size and design of the porch and maintain the
existing architectural clements, and installed in a way that it may be
removed at a later date.
(3) New buil.dings constrnct d in Springfield Residential District must contain
front porches large enough to pr vide seating. The proportion of the
porches to the front facade is to be consistent with the historic porches in
the neighborhood Details such as columns, pots, piers balustrades and
porch flooring and ceilings will be built with materials that are consistent
in appearance with historic materials.
Entrances
(1) Entry features which must be preserved include sidelights and transoms,
fan light windows, entablatures and original doors. All add character to the
structures in the historic district.
(2) It may be appropriate to design or construct a new entrance if the historic
one is missing. Any restoration shall be based on historical, pictorial and
physical documentation and be compatible with the historic character of
the building.
(3) A replacement entrance must not create a false historic appearance. A new
entrance shall be compatible in size, scale, and materials.
(4) Entrances shall not be removed when rehabilitating a building.
(5) Secondary entrances seen from the public right-of way shall be compatible
with the originals in size, scale and materials.
(6) Determine if a storm door will be instrumental to saving energy. If a storm
door is used, it must have a color-clad frame and a full view glass, or be
designed to respect design features of the original entry door.
(7) Retain, repair or replace historic screened doors.
Wall Coverings Wood
(1) Do not use destructive paint removal methods such as propane or butane
torches, sand blasting or water blasting. These methods can damage
historic wood and create the need for expensive repairs. Water or sand
blasting can abrade the soft material in wood. Water blasting can also
result in soaking the wall so thoroughly that it will. not bold paint until it has
dried for many months.
(2) Replacement siding, trim and patterned shingles shall duplicate the
original.
(3) New construction shall use materials that duplicate the appearance of
neighboring historic buildings, so that the new buildings blend with the
fabric of the area.
(4) Repair wooden features by patching, piecing-in or otherwise reinforcing the
wood. Repair may also include limited replacement with matching or
compatible substitute materials, when elements remain and can be copied.
(5) Wood features which are important in defining the overall historic character
of the building shall not be removed.
(6) Replace only the deteriorated wood. Reconstructing in order to achieve a
uniform or "improved'' appearance is inappropriate because of the loss of
good historic materials.
(7) An entire wooden feature that is too deteriorated to repair, or is
completely missing, must be replaced in kind. ff features are replaced, the
materials they are made from shall be compatible with the original in size
and scale. Replacement parts mu 't be based on historical pictorial and
physical docwnentation. If documentation does not exist, a new
sympathetically designed feature would be better than a hypothetical
"old" one.
(8) Remove damaged or deteriorated paint only to the next sound layer using
the gentlest method possible (e.g., band sanding or hand scrapin.g)
(9) When paint must be removed, electric hot-air guns and beat plates hould
be used only with extreme caution since the high temperatures they cause
can ignite material in the wall cavities and cause fi re damage. When using
electric heating devices be sure to keep a fire extinguisher handy, since
fires can start with these devices.
(10} The use of synthetic sidings is not recommended; however, if used the
important architectural element of the building must remain visible.
Original woodwork must not be removed or destroyed in the sicling
process.
Masonry
(1) Never sandblast brick surfaces using dry or wet grit or other
abrasives. These methods of cleaning pennanently destroy the surface
of the material, may harm the mortar, and speed up deterioration.
(2) Identify and preserve masonry features that define the hist01ic
character of the bttilding, including walls, railing, column and piers,
cornices and door and window pediments.
(3} Replace an entirn masomy feature that is too deteriorated to repair, use the
remaining physical evidence to guide the new work, and match new to
old. Examples can include large sections of a wall, cornice balustrade
column or stairway.
(4) If historical pictorial or physical documentation cannot be found about a
masomy feature, a modem design sympathetic to the building wo d be
more appropriate than a hypothetical historical one. A new masonry
feature shall be compatible in size scale and material .
(5) Mortar shall match the original mortar in color, composition profile and
depth. If necessary, analyze the original mortar to determine the
proportions of lime sand and cement. Tbe width or joint profile ·baU not
b changed unless change will return it to its original appearance.
Infill Building New Construction
(1} Maintain the historic facade lines of streetscapes by locating the front
wall of new building in the same plane as the facade of adjacent
buildings. This can be an average of the setback of the adjacent structur s.
If all of the buildings setback along one ·ide of the street at 10' to 25'
setback, then a. new building could have anywhere from 1 O' to 25' setback.
Never violate the existing setback pattern by placing new buildings in front
of the historic setback line. Avoid placing buildings at odd angles to the
street.
(2) Prope11y owners bave the right to rebuild structures on the existing
footprints. Go d documentation of the placement, setback, pacing etc.,
hould be presented to the ommission for their review.
(3) Relate the size and proportions of new structures to the scale of adjacent
buildings.
(4) Break up boxlike forms into smaller mas es like those of buildings from the
hist01ic period. New buildings should be designed with a mix ofwalJ areas
with door and window elements in the facade like th se found on near y
historic houses. The placement of door and window openings should be
imitated.
(5) Relate the vertical, horizontal or non-directional facade character of new
buildings to the directional alignment of nearby buildings. A new builcLing
should reinforce the horizontal and vertical connection between historic
houses present on the street.
(6) Relate the roof forms of the new building to those found in the area,
duplicating existing roof shapes and pitches.
(7) New buildings should equal the average height of existing and adjacent
buildings.
(8) New housing shall be built with raised fowJdations/water tables or designed
to sugge t that there is a raised water table equaJ to those of adjacent
buildings.
(9) In new buildings the height of roofs and eaves shall conform to adjacent
prope1ties. Height of stories, windows and door must be compatible with
adjacent historic buildings.
(10) The materials used for new buildings will be consistent in appearance with
existing historic building materials along the street.
(11) Front elevations must be designed with a strong sense of entry.
(12) Do not reproduce the styles, motifs or details of historic older architecture.
(13) New additions must be located at the rear or on an inconspicuous side of a
historic building. To give extra :freedom in this area, additions may set back
as far as any other house on the same side of the block.
(14) New additions must be designed so that it is clear what is new and what is
old, but must be compatible in terms of mass, mate1ials, size texture, scaJe,
and relationship of solids to void.
(15) New additions shall not alter the basic character of the building, or cause a
lessening of historic character.
Fences
(1) Fr011t yard fences sha11 be of a compatible style to blend with the style of
the house and shaU be a maximum of 42" to 48" in height. Side yard
fencing shall be graduated to a maximum of 6 feet if built so as to not to
obscure the streetscape sight line.
(2) Chain link shall not be allowed in the front yard.
Landscaping
(1) To cut trees of a 12" diameter or greater in yards adjacent to a public
r adway, a tree replanting plan and time table for replanting shall be
required. If there are already other trees existing in these areas, replanting
may not be necessary.
B. Special Provisions for Bed and Breakfast Establishments, Museums and
Event Houses in the Historic District.
(1) Conditional Uses. Bed and Breakfast Establishments and Museums
may be approved as home occupations in the Springfield Historic
District with approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals and subject to
the following criteria:
(2) The use of the dwelling unit as a bed and breakfast inn or museum shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants.
(3) No traffic shall be generated by such bed and breakfast inn or museum in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
( 4) One off street parking space per room to be occupied by bed and breakfast
guests shall be provided for, in addition to any residential parking on
premises. For museums, one space for each 400 square feet devoted to such
use shall be provided in additional to any residential parking on premises.
Parking areas shall be located in the rear or side yard and designed or
screened so as not to detract from the character of the dwelling or
neighborhood.
( 5) The outside appearance of the dwelling unit shall maintain conformance
with the general character of the neighborhood.
( 6) Small signs advertising the bed and breakfast inn or museum are allowable,
subject to the provisions of Section 11-203 of this ordinance, and provided
they are in character with the neighborhood and are otherwise approved by
the Springfield Historic Commission.
(7) No more than three (3) rooms or 15 percent of the dwelling unit to be used as
the bed and breakfast Inn (whichever is the most restrictive) shall be allowed
to be used for occupancy by guests as the bed and breakfast Inn or for
museum use.
(8) Proprietors of the bed and breakfast Inn or museum shall be residents of the
dwelling in which it is located.
(9) All area, setback and yard requirements of the district must be met.
(10) An accurately drawn site plan shall be presented to the Springfield
Planning Office in accordance with the site plan provisions of the
Springfield Zoning Ordinance. Copies should be provided for the Site
Plan Review Committee as well as for the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(11) The Board of Zoning Appeals may attach other conditions on the use of
the structure or site, which are necessary to protect the neighborhood
and historic district and the intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Event Houses
(1) Conditional Uses. Event Houses may be approved as home
occupations in the Springfield Historic District with approval of the
Board of Zoning Appeals and subject to the following criteria:
(2) Definition: An event house is a home occupation used for small and
intimate functions within a single-family residence on an occasional
basis. Event House uses may include weddings, wedding receptions,
bridal and baby showers, birthday celebrations, luncheons, rehearsal
dinners, meetings, private parties, small corporate events, etc.
Seating arrangements are usually limited in availability. Hours of
operation can be flexible, usually afternoon through evening hours.
(i) The use of the dwelling unit as an event house shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by
its occupants.
(ii) No traffic shall be generated by such event house in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
(iii) No more than three (3) rooms or 15 percent of the dwelling unit
shall be allowed to be used for event house functions (whichever
is most restrictive). A portion of the lawn may be used for
events, if neighboring properties are not disturbed.
(iv) For event houses, one off street parking space for each 4 seats or
4 persons of the occupancy load shall be provided, in addition to
residential parking on premises. Each home shall have at least
two parking spaces for its residents. Parking areas shall be
located in the rear or side yard and designed or screened so as
not to detract from the character or dwelling or neighborhood.
(v) Additional parking on adjacent property can be used with
written permission of the owner. In lieu of on-site parking,
valet parking may be utilized for off street parking if
approved by owner of the parking lot.
(vi) The outside appearance of the dwelling unit shall maintain
conformance with the general character of the historic
neighborhood.
(vii) Small signs advertising the event house are allowable, subject to
the provisions of Section 1 1 -808 of this ordinance, and provided
they are in character with the historical neighborhood and are
otherwise approved by the Springfield Historic Preservation
Commission.
(viii) Proprietors of the event house shall be residents of the dwelling
in which it is located.
(ix) All area, setback and yard requirements of the district must be
met.
(x) An accurately drawn site shall be presented to the Springfield
Planning Office in accordance with the site plan provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance. Copies should be provided with the site
plan provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Copies should be
provided for the Site Plan Review Committee as well as the
Historic Preservation Commission.
(xi) The Board of Zoning Appeals may attach other conditions on the
use of the structure or site, which are necessary to protect the
neighborhood, the Historic District and the intent of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(xii) All parking and driveways shall be shown on the site plan and
shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Storm water pollution
guidelines shall be adhered to.
(xiii) Only lots of20,000 square feet or more shall be used for an event
house.
(xiv) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold by the proprietor of the
event house, but persons using the facility may bring alcoholic
beverages.
(xv) If the event house establishment becomes a nuisance to the
neighborhood, the conditional use permit can be revoked by the
BZA by action after notice and public hearing.
(xvi) The right to operate an event house runs with the ownership
and not the land.
(xvii) Each new owner of the house must make application to the
BZA for a permit.
Ordinance 18-22
Exhibit B
Appendix A
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTIONS
A-1. Springfield Historic Preservation District (S.H.P.D.)
A-2. Historic Preservation Commission
A-3. Administration
A-4. Building permit procedures
A-5. Certificate of appropriateness
A-6. Administrative standards and legal status provisions
A-7. Remedy of dangerous conditions
A-8. Appeal
A-9. Injunctive powers and penalties
A-1. Springfield Historic Preservation District CS.H. P .D).
A. It is the intent of this district to preserve the historic sites and
structures of the City of Springfield. The requirements of the
district are designed to protect and preserve historic and/or
architectural value; create an aesthetic atmosphere; strengthen the
economy; protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and
visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry
thereby provided; and promote education and patriotic heritage of
the present and future citizens of the community. In order to
achieve the intent of the S.H.P.D. as shown on the official zoning
map of Springfield, Tennessee, the following regulations shall
apply:
( 1) Any use permitted by the existing zoning classification is also
permitted by the S.H.P.D.
(2) The S.H.P.D. classification may be superimposed in addition to
existing zoning classification where the following criteria shall
be determined to exist by the Historic Zoning Commission.
(3) The quality of significance in American history,
architecture, archeology, and CLtlture is present in districts,
sites, buildings, and structures that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling
and association, and
(i) That are associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of our
history; or
(ii) That are associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; or
(iii) That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, or method of construction or that represent the
work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or
that represent a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction; or
(iv) That has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
archeological information.
A-2. Springfield Historic Preservation Commission (S.H.P.D.)
A. Creation and appointment. In accordance with Tennessee Code
Annotated. 13-7-402, a Historic preservation Commission is
hereby established. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
create a five ( 5) member Historic Preservation which shall
consist of a representative of a local patriotic or historic
organization; an architect, if available; a member of the planning
commission, at the time of his appointment; and the remaining
members shall be appointed from the Springfield Residential
District. All members of the S.H.P.C. shall be a resident
property owner of the district, if possible. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall be appointed by the mayor,
subject to confirmation by the city council. Appointments to
membership on the Historic Preservation Commission shall be
arranged so that the term of one member shall expire each year
and his successor shall be appointed in like manner in terms of
five (5) years. All members shall serve without compensation.
The members of the commission shall elect a chairman from
among themselves to preside over meetings.
B. Procedure. Meetings of the Historic Preservation Commission
shall be held at the call of the chairman or by the majority of the
membership. All meetings of the commission shall be open to
the public. The commission shall give notice of the place, date,
and time of any public hearings which they hold under the
provisions of this chapter, by publication in an official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation at least five ( 5)
days immediately prior thereto. At least three (3) members of
the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
its business. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the
commission shall constitute final action of the commission on
any matter before it. The commission shall keep minutes of its
procedures showing the vote of each member upon each
question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
C. Powers and duties. The Springfield Historic Preservation
Commission shall have the followingpowers:
(1) To request, where necessary, detailed construction plans
and related data pertinent to thorough review of any
proposal before the commission.
(2) The Historic Preservation Commission shall within thirty (30)
days following availability of sufficient date, direct the granting or
refusal of a "Certificate of Appropriateness".
(i) Upon review of the application for a building permit and
"Certificate of Appropriateness", the Historic Preservation
Commission shall give prime consideration to:
(ii) Historic and/or architectural value of present structure;
(iii) The relationship of exterior architectural features of
such structures to the rest of the structures of the
surrounding area:
(iv) The general compatibility of exterior design,
arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be
used;
(3) Additional powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the
Springfield Historic Preservation Commission to make the
following determination with respect to the historic district:
A-3 Administration.
(i) Appropriateness of the exterior architectural feature
altering or demolishing any building or structure within the
historic district. The commission may require interior and
exterior photographs, architectural measured drawings of
the exterior, or other notations of architectural features to
be used for historical documentation as a condition of any
permission to demolish a building or structure, such
photographs, drawings, etc.
(ii) Appropriateness of exterior design of any new
extension of any existing building or structure within the
historic district.
(iii) The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement,
texture, and material of the building or other structure in
question and the relation of such factors to similar features
of buildings in the immediate surroundings. However, the
Springfield Historic Preservation Commission shall not
consider interior arrangement or design, nor shall it make
any requirements except for the purpose of preventing
extensions incongruous to the historic aspects of the
surroundings.
(iv) The S.H.P.C. shall make recommendations for the
designation of local historic districts, landmarks and
landmark sites.
(v) The S.H.P.C. shall advise and assist property owners and
other persons and groups concerned with historic
preservation and shall undertake educational programs for
the public on historic preservation.
A. No building permit for construction, major alteration or rehabilitation,
moving, or demolition to be carried on within the S.H.P.D. shall be issued by
the building inspector until it is submitted to and receives approval in
writing by the Historical Zoning Commission.
B. Administration shall be by the office of the building inspector and the
Historic Preservation Commission and all items regulated within the
S.H.P.C. shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission
(through the office of the building inspector) for its review.
C. Building permit required. All alterations, additions or new construction
which, previous to the establishment of this S.H.P.D., required that
application be made for a building permit shall continue to require that
application be made for a building permit, and approval obtained before
the work on such alterations, additions, or new construction can begin.
In addition, it shall be required that application be made in the same
manner for any work including but not limited to, alterations, additions,
demolition, removal or new construction which alters or contributes to
the exterior appearance of existing structures.
D. Within 90 days of the passage of this district designation, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall prepare and submit the design review
guidelines, which shall be used by the Historic Preservation Commission
in the consideration of any application for "Certificate of
Appropriateness", applied for under this chapter.
E. Fences in the Springfield Historic Preservation District that face a
street shall have a maximum height of 48". There shall be no chain
link fence in the front yard. A review on this issue by the Springfield
Historic Commission is not required unless an ·appeal is being
requested.
A-4 Bujlding permits procedures.
A. Applications for building permits with the S.H.P.D. shall be made to the
office of the building inspector and all such applications shall be referred
directly to the Springfield Historic Preservation Commission. A supplied
"checklist" must be completed for application. The S.H.P.C. shall have
broad powers to request detailed construction plans and related data
pertinent to thorough review of any application.
B. Upon receiving an application for a building permit, the S.H.P.C. shall,
within thirty (30) days following the availability of sufficient date, issue
to the office of the building inspector a letter stating its approval with or
without attached conditions or disapproval with the grounds for
disapproval stated in writing.
C. The office of the building inspector shall additionally review applications
for building permits (which have received written approval from the
S.H.P.C.) in the same manner review is made of building permit
applications outside of the S.H.P.D., and final issuance or rejection shall
additionally be based upon tbe adopted building codes of the City of
Springfield. The fee charged for building permits within the H=l District
shall conform to existing fee schedules for building permits in any other
zoning district within the City of Springfield.
A-5 Certificate of appropriateness. No person shall, without first applying for and
obtaining a "Certificate of Appropriateness", cause or permit any of the following
changes in exterior appearances of real estate in which he has a legal or equitable
interest lying within the S.H.P.D. to include all commercial, residential, government
and all other properties.
A. Additive changes.
(1) Moving any principal or accessory building onto or within any lot
in the district or on the landmark site.
(2) Material change of the exterior appearance of any existing
building by addition, reconstruction or alteration, including
change in form.
(3) Construction of any new principal accessory building or other
structure.
B. Changes by removal .
(1) Demolition of any principal or accessory building.
(2) Moving any principal or accessory building from the historical zone
or the landmark site.
(3) The words "change in exterior appearance", as used in this
subsection, shall apply to changes within front or street side from
any public roadway as defined in the Springfield Zoning
Ordinance, which are vivid.
A-6 Administrative standards and legal status provisions.
A. Liability of Historic Preservation Commission members. Any Historic
Preservation Commission member acting within the powers granted by
this chapter is relieved from all personal liability for any damage and shall
be held harmless by the city government. Any suit brought against any
member of the commission shall be defended by a legal representative
furnished by the city government until the termination of the procedure.
B. Jurisdiction. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have exclusive
jurisdiction relating to historic matters. Anyone who any final order or
judgement of the commission may aggrieve may have said order or
judgement reviewed by the courts by the procedures of statutory certiorari
as provided for in the Tennessee Code Annotated, title 7 chapter 9.
C. Conflict of interest. Any member of the Historic Preservation
Commission who shall have a direct or indirect interest in any property
which is the subject matter of, or affected by, a decision of said
commission shall be disqualified from participating in the discussion,
decision, or proceedings of the Historic Preservation Commission in
connection therewith.
A-7 Remedy of dangerous conditions. In_any case where a city enforcement agency
shall order or direct the construction, removal, alteration, or demolition of any
improvement in a historic district for the purpose of remedying conditions determined to
be dangerous to life, health, or property, nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as making it unlawful for any person, without prior issuance of an official
approval pursuant to this chapter, to comply with such order of direction. However,
the enforcement agency shall give the commission notice of any proposed order or
direction, which affects or may affect the exterior appearance of any structure, or
site, on or in the environs of a historic district. The commission shall be afforded
adequate opportunity to review and provide written comments upon any action
proposed by an enforcement agency within a historic district prior to the initiation of
any said action.
A-8 Appeal. Anyone who may be aggrieved by any final order or judgment of the
historic preservation commission may have such order or judgment reviewed by the
courts by the procedure of statutory certiorari, as provided in Tennessee Code
Annotated, title 27 Chapter 8.
A-9 Injunctive p wers and penalties.
A Where it appears that the owner or person in charge of an improvement on
a landmark site or preservation site threatens or is about to do or is doing
any work in violation of this chapter, the city attorney for the City
Springfield shall, when directed by the mayor or city council, forthwith
apply to an appropriate court for an injunction against such violation of this
chapter. If an order of the court enjoining or restraining such violation does
not receive immediate compliance, the city attorney shall forthwith apply
to an appropriate court to punish said violation pursuant to law.
B. A violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than two
dollars ($2.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Every day
of violation will be held to constitute a separate offense.
ORDINANCE 18-23
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 11-308 A. ENTITLED "LIMITED MANUFACTURING ACTIVITIES" TO
READ AS SET FORTH IN "EXHIBIT A" ATTACHED
Whereas, T.C.A. Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210 delegate the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry; and
Whereas, the City of Springfield Planning Commission has reviewed this proposed ordinance
amendment on September 6, 2018 and recommends its passage;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of
Springfield, Tennessee as follows:
Section 1. The City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 entitled "Use Classification" is
hereby amended by rescinding Section 11-308 A. entitled "Limited Manufacturing Activities" in
its entirety and substituting a new Section 11-308 A. entitled "Limited Manufacturing Activities"
to read as set forth in "Exhibit A" attached.
Section 2. All ordinances, resolutions and policies in conflict herewith shall be rescinded to the
extent of the conflict only.
Passed on pt reading: September 18, 2018
Passed on 2nd reading: October 16, 2018
Passed on 3rd reading: November 20, 2018
Clw~~L
Ann Schneider, Mayor
Attest:
~t,&n;attz
Lisa H. Crockett, City Recorder
Ordinance 18-23
Exhibit A
City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance Chapter 3 entitled "Use Classification"
Section 11-308 Manufacturing Activities
A. Limited Manufacturing Activities: Include the following operations:
(1) The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging, treatment, or
fabrication of the following products:
Apparel and Apparel Accessories
Art Objects
Bakery Goods
Beverages
Dairy Products
Instruments for Medical, Dental, Engineering, Scientific, and Other Professional
Purposes
Optical Instruments and Lens
Printed Matter
Signs
(2) Activities and operations which include the following:
Book Binding
Data Processing Service
Photocopying
Photoengraving
Precision Machining of Dies, Jigs, and Fixtures
Printing
Publishing
Record Pressing
Upholstering
Welding
ORDINANCE 20-12
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF SPRINGFIELD ZONING ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 13, SECTIONS 11-1305A.,11-1306 B., 11-1307 C. AND CHAPTER 14,
SECTION 1403.4 G., 1. AND 2. TO READ AS SET FORTH IN "EXHIBIT A"
ATTACHED
Whereas, T.C.A. Sections 13-7-201 through 13-7-210 delegate the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of Springfield,
Tennessee as follows:
Section 1. The City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance Chapter 13 entitled Administration and
Enforcement is hereby amended by rescinding the existing Sections 11-1305 A., 11-1306 B. and 11-
1307 C. and replacing with new Sections 11-1305 A., 11-1306 B. and 11-1307 C.; to read as set forth
in "Exhibit A" attached;
Section 2. The City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14 entitled Gradmg and Erosion
Requirements is hereby amended by rescinding the existing Section 1403.4 G., 1. and 2.; to read as
set forth in "Exhibit A" attached;
Section 3. All ordinances, resolutions and policies in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded to the
extent of the conflict only.
Passed 1st reading: _M_a~y_1 9_,,_2_0_2_0 _______ _
Passed 2nd reading: _Ju_n_e_16_,,_2--0-'-2_0_ ________
Passed 3rd reading: _ Jun_e_ l 8,,'-2_0_2_0 ________ _
Ann Schneider, Mayor
Attest:
~ WvJ!~ LiSai. Crockett, City Recorder
ORDINANCE 20-12
EXHIBIT A
Amendment 1- The City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance Chapter 13 entitled Administration and
Enforcement. Rescind Sections 11-1305 A., 11-1306 B. and 11-1307 C. and replace with new Sections
11-1305 A., 11-1306 B. and 11-1307 C.; to read as follows:
11-1305. Zoning V aiiances
A. Application for Variances, Notice of Hearing, Fee
A written application for a variance shall be filed with the board by the property owner or his
designated agent on forms provided by the board or by letter, and the application shall contain
information and exhibits as may be required under Section 11-1303(b )(2). No more than 60 days
after the filing of the application, a hearing shall be held on the application, unless otherwise
withdrawn or postponed by written request by the applicant. Notice of hearing shall be in
accordance with Section 11-1304(g). A fee established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by
separate ordinance, payable to the City shall be charged to cover review and processing of each
application for a variance, except that the fee shall be waived for a governmental agency.
11-1306. Conditional Use Permits
B. Application for Conditional Use Permit, Notice of Public Hearing
The application for a conditional use permit shall be made by the property owner or his
designated agent and filed in writing with the board on forms provided by the board and shall
contain information and exhibits as may be required under Section 11-l 303(b) or in the case of
buildings or other structures or uses to be located within floodplain districts, as may be required
by Chapter 9. Not more than 60 days after filing such application, a hearing shall be held on the
application, unless otherwise withdrawn or postponed upon written request by the applicant.
Notice of hearing shall be held in accordance with Section l 1-1304(h)(2). A fee established by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by separate ordinance, payable to the City shall be charged
to defray cost of review and processing for each application for a conditional use permit, except
that the fee may be waived for any government agency.
11-1307. Amendments
C. Application for Amendment--Fee
An application by an individual for an amendment shall be accompanied by a fee established by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by separate ordinance, payable to the City, and shall also be
accompanied by maps, drawings, and data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed amendment
is in general conformance with the general plan of the area and that public necessity,
convenience, and general welfare, require the adoption of the proposed amendment. An accurate
legal description and scale drawing of the land and existing buildings shall be submitted with
application.
Amendment 2-The City of Springfield Zoning Ordinance Chapter 14 entitled Grading and Erosion
Regufrements. Rescind Section 1403.4 G., 1. and 2. and replace with new Section 1403.4 G., 1. and 2.;
to read as follows:
1403.4 Issuance of Permit
G. Permit Fees
A fee shall be paid to the Office of the Code Enforcement Officer by the applicant in order to
validate the permit after the plan review and approval. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) For projects involving 10,000 square feet or less or 500 cubic yards or less, the grading
permit fee shall be as established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by separate
ordinance.
(2) For projects involving over 10,000 square feet or over 500 cubic yards, the grading permit
fee shall be as established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by separate ordinance.