CHAPTER 1. VOTING HOURS.
1.01. Schedule Times. In every election to be held in the City of Ashland the election polls shall
be opened at 7:00 a.m. and closed at 8:00 p.m., provided that any voter waiting a turn to vote
either in the polling booth or in line outside the polling booth at the time of closing shall be
permitted to vote.
ADOPTED: 1(1191)06/13/1989
Page 1-1
CHAPTER 2. PRIMARIES (CHARTER ORDINANCE).
2.01. Primary Required. Whenever three or more candidates file nomination papers for a city
office, a primary to nominate candidates to the office shall be held in accordance with Sec.
8.11(1)0), Wis. Stats.
ADOPTED: 2(1193) 6/13/1989
Page 2-1
CHAPTER 3. ALDERMANIC DISTRICTS.
3.01. Creation of Aldermanic Districts. Pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 62.08, Wis. Stats.,
the aldermanic districts of the City of Ashland shall be recreated as set forth in this chapter.
3.02. Number of Aldermanic Districts. There shall be eleven aldermanic districts in the City of
Ashland. Each aldermanic district shall be numbered consecutively one through eleven
following a general west to east pattern.
3.03. Composition of Aldermanic Districts. Each aldermanic district shall consist of one ward
as created and detailed by Resolution #15731 adopted by the Common Council of the City of
Ashland on August 28,2001, and incorporated herein by reference.
3.04. Map/Listing of Census Blocks. A map showing census block numbers produced by the
United States Census Bureau on which ward/aldermanic district boundaries are outlined and a
listing of the census blocks comprising said wards/aldermanic districts shall be attached to this
ordinance for reference.
ATTACHMENTS ATTACHED TO ORIGINAL
ORDINANCE IN VAULT
ADOPTED: 3(1525) 10/30/2001
Page 3-1
Page 25-1
CHAPTER 25. SALARIES OF THE MAYOR AND THE COMMON COUNCIL.
25.01. Councilperson’s Salary. In accordance with Sec. 62.09, Wis. Stats., the following salary
for Councilors shall be set established.
(a) Salary. Councilors elected or re-elected on or after April 6, 2010, shall receive $75.00
per Council meeting and $50.00 per Council Committee meeting.
(b) Absences. (Effective May 1, 2015). Councilors shall not be paid for any Regular
Council meeting from which they are absent. Councilors shall not be paid for any Committee
meetings or Special Council meetings from which they are absent.
25.02. Mayor’s Salary.
(a) Salary. In accordance with Section 62.09 (6), Wis. Stats., the salary of the Mayor
shall be $14,000.
(b) Benefits. (Effective May 1, 2015). The Mayor shall be eligible for inclusion in the
retirement and life insurance programs in which the City participates through the State of
Wisconsin - Department of Employee Trust Funds. The Mayor shall be eligible to enroll in the
City’s health and dental insurance programs. The City will contribute a prorated share of fifty
(50%) percent of the premium contribution offered to a full-time employee.
ADOPTED: 25 (1624) 2/14/2006
AMENDMENTS: 25 (1720) 1/26/2010; 25 (1811) 8/13/2013; 25 (2016-1874) 7/12/2016
CHAPTER 26. MAYORAL TERMS (CHARTER ORDINANCE).
26.01. Mayoral Term. The regular term of office for the office of Mayor of the City of Ashland
shall be four years.
26.02. Requirements for Taking Effect. This Charter Ordinance shall take effect upon
completion of all of the following:
(a) Two-thirds Vote. A two-thirds vote of the members of the Common Council of the City
of Ashland, but this Ordinance shall not take effect until sixty days after its passage and
publication and shall be subject to the referendum provisions prescribed in Sec. 66.01 (5), Wis.
Stats.
(b) Publication. The Charter Ordinance, after its adoption by the Common Council, shall be
published as a Class 1 notice under Chapter 985, Wis. Stats.
(c) Records. The Charter Ordinance, after its adoption by the Common Council, shall be
recorded by the City Clerk of the City of Ashland in a permanent book containing Charter
Ordinances with a statement of the manner of its adoption.
(d) Certification. After its adoption by the Common Council, the City Clerk shall file a
certified copy of the Charter Ordinance with the Secretary of State of the State of Wisconsin.
ADOPTED: 26(1297) 10/12/1993
Page 26-1
Page 27-1
CHAPTER 27. BOARD OF REVIEW.
27.01. Board of Review. The Board of Review shall consist of five (5) regular members and two
(2) alternates who are residents of the City of Ashland; none of whom shall occupy any City
office or be employed by the City.
27.02 Appointment. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Common Council, and shall hold office as members of the board for staggered five (5) year
terms.
27.03. Compensation. Committee members shall receive no compensation for serving on the
Board of Review.
27.04. Hours of Annual Meeting. As authorized by Sec. 70.47(3)(b), Wis. Stats., the hours of
the annual meeting of the Board of Review shall be designated annually. At least 15 days before
the date of the annual meeting of the Board of Review, a notice stating the date and time of such
meeting shall be published in the official newspaper of the City and posted in not less 3 public
places.
27.05 Statutory Proceedings. Any conflict between the procedures set forth by Section 70.47
Board of Review Procedures, Wisconsin Statutes, and this Ordinance shall be resolved in favor
of the statutory procedures unless the statute authorized the City to deviate from those
procedures, in which case the procedures set forth in this Ordinance shall control.
ADOPTED: 27 (1192) 6/13/1989
AMENDMENTS: 27 (1374) 4/30/1996; 27 (1560) 2/11/2003; 27 (1599) 11/09/2004;
27 (2019-1917) 5/28/2019;
Page 28-1
CHAPTER 28. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
28.01. Office of the City Administrator. In order to provide the City of Ashland with a more efficient,
effective, and responsible government under a system of a mayor and common council (hereinafter
referred to as “council”) at a time when city government is becoming increasingly complex, there is
hereby created the Office of City Administrator for the City of Ashland (hereinafter referred to as
“administrator”).
28.02. Appointment, Term of Office and Removal. The administrator shall be appointed on the basis
of merit with due regard to training, experience, administrative ability and general fitness for the office,
by a majority vote of the council. The administrator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to
removal at any time by a two-thirds vote of the council. This section, however, shall not preclude the
council from establishing other employment terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions
of this ordinance or the Municipal Code of the City of Ashland.
28.03. Functions and Duties. The administrator, subject to the limitations defined in resolutions and
ordinances of the City of Ashland and Wisconsin State Statutes, shall be the chief administrative officer
of the city, responsible only to the mayor and the council for the proper administration of the business
affairs of the city, pursuant to the statutes of the State of Wisconsin, the ordinances of the City of
Ashland, and the resolutions and directives of the council. The administrator shall be responsible to and
be under the supervision of the mayor on a day-to-day basis. Any dispute between the mayor and
administrator shall be resolved by the decision of the council which resolution shall be final and
binding. The powers and duties of the administrator are set forth in sections 28.04 through 28.07.
28.04. General Duties.
(a) Implementation. Carry out directives of the mayor and council which require administrative
implementation, reporting promptly to the mayor and council any difficulties encountered therein;
(b) Day-to-Day Operations. Be responsible for the administration of all day-to-day operations of the
city government including the monitoring of all city ordinances, resolutions, council meeting minutes
and state statutes;
(c) Strategic Plan. Annually after the spring general election, the Administrator and Council shall
jointly develop a strategic plan outlining the goals and objectives to be accomplished by the resources
of City government for the following budget year. The strategic plan, to be reviewed and adopted by
the Council by May 15th annually, shall serve as guidance for the allocation of municipal resources
during the following fiscal year. The strategic plan shall:
(1) Take into account the City’s planning documents of record;
(2) Consider the results of the most recent surveys of community residents;
(3) Consider the resources of the City available for implementation; and
(4) Reflect on the capacity of staff to implement.
(d) Efficiency. Establish when necessary administrative procedures to increase the effectiveness and
Page 28-2
efficiency of city government according to current practices in local government, not inconsistent with
paragraph 3 above or directives of the mayor and council;
(e) Non-Voting Board Member. Serve as ex-officio nonvoting member of all boards, commissions
and committees of the city, except as specified by the council or Wisconsin State Statutes;
(f) Keeping Informed. Keep informed concerning current federal, state, and county legislation and
administrative rules affecting the city and submit appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to
the council;
(g) Coordinate Funding. Coordinate initiatives to secure federal, state, county or private funds for
local programs. Assist department heads and the council in obtaining these funds under the direction of
the mayor and the council;
(h) Representation. Represent the city in matters involving legislative and intergovernmental affairs
as authorized and directed as to that representation by the mayor and council;
(i) Public Information Officer. Act as public information officer for the city with the responsibility
of assuring that the news media are kept informed about the operations of the city and that all open
meeting rules and regulations are followed;
(j) Communication. Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications between
citizens and city government to assure that complaints, grievances, recommendations and other matters
receive prompt attention by the responsible official, and to assure that all such matters are
expeditiously resolved;
(k) City Projects. Coordinate and ensure development of city projects such as the Waterfront
Development Plan and Comprehensive Plan;
(l) Leadership. Contribute to and be a vital part of the leadership team that is charged with
developing Ashland's future;
(m) Goals and Objectives. Promote the well-being of the City of Ashland through public and private
sector cooperation. Coordinate the development and acceptance of city-wide goals and objectives.
Ensure that achievement plans are created and successfully implemented for these goals and objectives;
(n) Promoting Economic Development. Work in conjunction with appropriate stakeholders such as
commercial, industrial, and citizen representatives to promote the economic well-being of Ashland.
28.05. Responsibilities to the City Council.
(a) Meetings. Attend all meetings of the council, assisting the mayor and the council as required in
the performance of their duties;
(b) Agendas. In coordination with the mayor, the council, and the clerk, ensure that appropriate
agendas are prepared for all meetings of the council, all council committees, and all other appropriate
committees and commissions of the city, together with such supporting material as may be required;
with nothing herein being construed as to give the administrator authority to limit or in any way
Page 28-3
prevent matters from being considered by the council, or any of its committees and commissions;
(c) Ordinance and Resolution Preparation. Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as
requested by the mayor or the council, or as needed;
(d) Reporting to Council. Keep the mayor and council regularly informed about the activities of the
administrator's office by oral or written report at regular and special meetings of the council;
(e) Directives. In the event that action normally requiring council approval is necessary at a time
when the council cannot meet, the administrator shall receive directives from the mayor
28.06. Personnel.
(a) Supervising. Be responsible for the administrative direction, supervision, and coordination of all
employees of the city according to the established organization procedures;
(b) Department Heads. Recommend to the mayor the appointment, promotion, and when necessary
for the good of the city, the suspension or termination of department heads;
(c) Personnel. In consultation with the appropriate department head, be responsible for the
appointment, promotion, and when necessary for the good of the city, the suspension or termination of
employees below the department head level;
(d) Evaluations. Coordinate with the personnel officer for the city to see that complete and current
personnel records, including specific job descriptions, for all city employees are kept; evaluate the
performance of department heads on a regular basis; assure that employees below the department head
level are evaluated by their supervisor(s) on a regular basis; recommend salary and wage scales for
city employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements; develop and enforce high standards
of performance by city employees; assure that city employees have proper working conditions; work
closely with department heads to promptly resolve personnel problems or grievances;
(e) Negotiations. Assist in labor contract negotiations and collective bargaining issues;
(f) Employee Training. Work closely with department heads to assure that employees receive
adequate opportunities for training to maintain and improve their job-related knowledge and skills and
act as the approving authority for requests by employees to attend conferences, meetings, training
schools, etc., provided that funds have been budgeted for these activities.
28.07. Budgeting and Purchasing.
(a) Preparation of Budget. Be responsible for the preparation of the annual city budget, in
accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the city council and the mayor and in coordination
with department heads, and pursuant to state statutes, for review and approval by the mayor and the
council;
(b) Administering Budget. Administer the budget as adopted by the council;
(c) Fiscal Reporting. Report regularly to the council on the current fiscal position of the city;
Page 28-4
(d) Accounting System. Supervise the accounting system of the city and ensure that the system
employs methods in accordance with current professional accounting practices;
(e) Purchasing. Serve as the purchasing agent for the city, supervising all purchasing and
contracting for supplies and services, subject to the purchasing procedures established by the council
and any limitation contained in the Wisconsin State Statutes;
28.08. Cooperation. All officials and employees of the city shall cooperate with and assist the
administrator so that the city government shall function effectively and efficiently.
28.09. Severability. The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed severable and it is expressly
declared that the Council of the City of Ashland would have passed the other provisions of this
ordinance irrespective of whether or not one or more provisions may be declared invalid; and if any
provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
ADOPTED: 28 (1313) 3/15/1994
AMENDMENTS: 28 (1627) 3/28/2006; 28 (1805) 4/16/2013; 28 (1829) 7/29/2014;
28 (2018-1903) 5/29/2018;
CHAPTER 29. ALDERMANIC TERMS (CHARTER ORDINANCE).
29.01. Office of Aldermen. The offices of the Aldermen for the Common Council of the City of
Ashland shall continue as two year terms but the terms of the offices shall be staggered as
hereinafter provided.
29.02. Elections.
(a) Even Numbered Wards. For the aldermanic election in April, 1988, the aldermanic offices
for Wards 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 shall have three year terms expiring in April of 1991 and the terms
for those aldermanic offices shall thereafter be two years.
(b) Odd Numbered Wards. For the aldermanic election in 1988 and thereafter, the aldermanic
offices for Wards 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 shall have two year terms.
29.03. Approval. This ordinance shall be effective only upon approval by two-thirds of the
members elect of the Common Council and upon compliance with the terms of Sec. 66.01, Wis.
Stats., pertaining to adoption of charter ordinances.
ADOPTED: 29(1100) 6/09/1987
Page 29-1
CHAPTER 30. CODE OF ETHICS.
30.01. Declaration of Policy.
(a) The proper operation of city government demands that:
(1) City officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people;
(2) Decisions be made in the proper channels of the city governmental structure;
(3) City offices should not be used for personal gain;
(4) City business should be conducted in such a way so as to re-enforce the public's
confidence in its integrity.
(b) In recognition of these fundamental principles, there is hereby created a code of ethics.
30.02. Purpose. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all city
officials and employees by identifying those acts or actions that are not compatible with the best
interest of the city. Because representatives of the city are drawn from society, they cannot and
should not be without all personal and economic interest in the decisions and policies of
government. Citizens who serve as city officials and employees retain their rights as citizens to
personal and economic interests. Therefore, the standards of ethical conduct for city officials and
employees must distinguish between minor and inconsequential conflicts which are unavoidable
in a free society and those conflicts which are substantial and material. City officials and
employees have a right to:
(a) Engage in employment and professional or business activities, other than official duties, in
order to support themselves and their families;
(b) Maintain continuity in their professional or business activities;
(c) Maintain investments or activities which do not conflict with specific provisions of this
code.
(d) The provisions of this code, and such rules and regulations which may be established, are
to be interpreted in the context of the above principles and are deemed to be in the best interest of
the public.
30.03. Responsibility of Public Office. City officials and employees are agents of public
purpose and hold office to serve the public interest. They are bound to uphold the Constitution
of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Wisconsin and to carry out efficiently and
impartially all laws of the United States, the State of Wisconsin and the City of Ashland.
Further, they are bound to observe in their official acts, the standards of ethics set forth in this
code and to faithfully discharge the duties of their office. The public interest must be their
primaiy concern.
Page 30-1
30.04. Coverage. This code governs all city officials, whether elected or appointed, paid or
unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions, department heads or other
city employees that have management, purchasing and other discretionary duties.
30.05. Exemptions. Political contributions which are reported under Chapter 11, Wis. Stats., are
exempt from the provisions of this code.
30.06. Definitions.
(a) Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association or organization.
(b) Financial Interest. Any interest which yields, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other
material benefit to the City officer or employee or to any person employing or retaining services
of the city officer or employee.
(c) Anything of Value. Any money or property, favor, service, payment, advance forbearance,
loan or promise of future employment, but DOES NOT INCLUDE such things as compensation
and expenses paid by the city, fees, honorariums and expenses, unsolicited advertising or
promotional material such as pens, pencils, notepads, calendars, informational or educational
materials of unexceptional value, plaques, other advertising giveaways or any other thing which
is not likely to influence the judgment of individuals covered by this code.
(d) Privileged Information. Any written or oral material related to city government which has
not become part of the body of public information and which is designated by statute, court
decision, lawful orders, ordinances, resolution or custom as privileged.
(e) Official. All city department heads or directors, City Councilors, and all other elected or
appointed city officers.
(f) Employee. All persons filling an allocated position of city employment and all members of
boards, committees, and commissions and those individuals included in Sec. 30.06(e), Wis.
Stats.
(g) Immediate Family. An official's or employee's spouse or family member who contributes
more than one-half of the support of the official or receives that level of support from the official
or employee.
30.07. Fair and Equal Treatment.
(a) Use of Public Property. An official or employee shall not use or knowingly permit the use
of city services or city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials for unauthorized non-governmental
purposes or for unauthorized personal convenience or for profit, unless such services or use are
available to the public generally and consistent with practices and policies of the city.
(b) Obligations to Citizens. An official or employee shall not grant any special consideration,
Page 30-2
treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. This
section does not affect the duty of city councilors to diligently represent their constituency.
30.08. Conflict of Interest.
(a) Receipt of Gifts and Gratuities Prohibited. An official or employee shall not accept
anything of value whether in the form of a gift, service, loan or promise from any person which
may impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her
official duties.
(b) Exception. It is not a conflict of interest for an official or employee to receive a gift of
gratuity that is an unsolicited item of insignificant value or anything which is given to them
independent of their position as an official or employee.
(c) Business Interest. An official or employee shall not engage in any business or transaction
or act in regard to any financial interest, direct or indirect, which:
(1) Is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties for the benefit of
the public;
(2) Is contrary to the provisions of this code; or
(3) May impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his
or her official duties.
(d) Employment. An official or employee shall not engage in or accept any private
employment or render any service for a private interest when such employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which may impair his or
her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties unless
otherwise permitted by law or unless disclosure is made as hereinafter provided.
(e) Contracting. An official or employee or a business in which an official or employee holds
a 10% or greater interest, may not enter into a contract with the city involving a payment or
payments of more than a $2,000 amount within a twelve month period unless the official or
employee has made a written disclosure of the nature and extent of such relationship or interest
to the City Clerk and reported such interest to the City Council. Further, pursuant to Sec. 946.13,
Wis. Stats., an official or employee is prohibited from participating in the formation of a
contract(s) with the City of Ashland involving the receipts or disbursements in any one year of
more than the maximum dollar amount set forth in that statute.
(f) Financial Interest in Legislation. Any member of the City Council who has a financial
interest in any proposed action before the City Council shall disclose the nature and extent of
such interest to the City Clerk and the City Council prior to or during the initial discussion of
such action. Any other official or employee who has a financial interest in any proposed action
before the City Council and who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or
recommendation to the City Council shall first disclose the nature and extent of such interest to
Page 30-3
the City Council.
(g) Disclosure of Privileged Information. An official or employee shall not knowingly
disclose or permit the disclosure of privileged information to any person not lawfully authorized
to receive such privileged information. An official or employee shall not use privileged
information to advance his or her personal financial interest or that of his or her immediate
family.
(h) Gifts and Favors. An official or employee shall not accept, from any person or organization
directly or indirectly, anything of value without full payment, if it could reasonably be expected to
influence his or her vote, governmental actions or judgments or could reasonably be considered
as a reward for any governmental action or inaction.
30.09. Compliance with State Statutes.
(a) Statutes Incorporated by Reference. The following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes are
hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this Code of Ethics:
(1) Sec. 19.01 (Oaths and Bonds).
(2) Sec. 19.21 (Custody and Delivery of Official Property and Records).
(3) Sees. 19.81 - 19.89 (Open Meetings of Governmental Bodies).
(4) Sec. 19.59 (Codes of Ethics for Local Government Officials, Employees and
Candidates).
(b) Violation of Incorporated Statutes. Officials shall comply with the sections of the
Wisconsin Statutes incorporated in this code and failure to do so shall constitute a breach of this
Code of Ethics.
30.10. Investigation and Enforcement.
(a) Advisory Opinions. Any person governed by this Code of Ethics may apply in writing to
the City Attorney for an advisory opinion and shall be guided by any opinion rendered. The
applicant shall present his or her interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of
provisions of this Code before the advisory opinion is rendered. All opinions shall be in writing.
Records of the City Attorney's opinions, opinion requests and investigations of violations shall
be closed to public inspection, as required by Chapter 19, Wis. Stats. However, such records
may be made public with the consent of the applicant.
(b) Complaints. The City Attorney shall accept from any person a verified written complaint
which states the name of the officer or employee alleged to have committed a violation of this
Code and sets forth the material facts involved in the allegation. The City Attorney shall forward
a copy of the complaint to the accused officer or employee within ten (10) days. If no action on
the verified complaint is taken by the City Attorney within thirty (30) days, the complaint shall
Page 30-4
be dismissed.
(c) Preliminary Investigations. Following the receipt of a verified complaint, the City Attorney
may make preliminary investigations with respect to alleged violation of this Code. A
preliminary investigation shall not be initiated unless the accused officer or employee is notified
in writing. The notice shall state the exact nature and purpose of the investigation, the
individual's specific action or activities to be investigated and a statement of such person's due
process rights.
(d) Time Limitations. The City Attorney shall investigate any complaint properly filed with
him or her. However, no action may be taken on any complaint which is filed more than one
year after a violation of the Ethics Code is alleged to have occurred.
(e) Enforcement. If the City Attorney finds that probable cause exists for believing the
allegations of the complaint, the City Attorney may:
(1) Request the officer or employee to conform his or her conduct to the ethics code.
(2) Recommend that the City Council order the officer or employee to conform his or her
conduct to the ethics code or recommend that the official or employee be censured,
suspended or removed from office.
(3) Refer the matter to the District Attorney to commence enforcement pursuant to the
procedures and remedies of Sec. 19.59 Wis. Stats.
ADOPTED: 30(1274) 5/12/1992
Page 30-5
CHAPTER 31. ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREASURER/COMPTROLLER.
31.01. Creation of Office. The combined office of City Treasurer/Comptroller is hereby created
with the duties of the combined position being those as set forth in Sees. 62.09(9) and 62.09(10),
Wis. Stats.
31.02. Appointment. The officer filling the office of the City Treasurer/Comptroller of the City
of Ashland shall be selected by appointment by the Common Council as permitted by Sec.
62.09(3)(b)3, Wis. Stats.
31.03 Appointment and Removal.
(a) The individual appointed by the Common Council to fill the office of City
Treasurer/Comptroller shall be appointed for an indefinite term, subject to removal by the
Common Council for just cause. .
(b)The Common Council may, in its discretion, make the Treasurer/Comptroller's initial
appointment provisional and provide for a six-month probationary period. Prior to the end of the
probationary period, the Mayor, City Administrator and Finance Director, acting in concert, shall
advise the Common Council whether it should proceed with the permanent appointment for an
indefinite term subject to removal by the Common Council for just cause or terminate the
candidate prior to the end of the probationaiy period.
ADOPTED: 31 (1698) 3/10/2009
Page 31-1
CHAPTER 33. UNEXCUSED ABSENCES FROM COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS,
AND BOARDS.
33.01 Applications and Exclusions. This ordinance shall apply to the members of all
committees, commissions, and boards appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Common
Council with the exception of the following:
(a) Committees of the Common Council.
(b) Water Utility Commission.
33.02. Cause for Removal. Unexcused absences from three or more scheduled meetings within
a twelve month period shall result in automatic removal from the committee, commission, or
board.
33.03. Reinstatement Procedure. In order to be reinstated to said committee, commission, or
board, the member must be reappointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council.
ADOPTED: 33 (1219) 2/13/1990
Page 33-1
CHAPTER 35. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT - REVOLVING LOAN FUND
ADVISORY BOARD.
35.01. Economic Development-Revolving Loan Fund Advisory Board Created. A task force
to be named the Economic Development (ED) - Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) Advisory Board
(ED AB) shall be created.
35.02. Duties and Responsibilities. The ED AB shall have the following duties related to the
Economic Development Revolving Loan Fund: review all business plans, financial statements,
and loan amortization schedules, review and approve documentation of ED-RLF expenditures,
record security instruments, maintain accounting records, review and rank Final Applications,
make recommendations to the City Council for appropriate action on the Final Application, and
report annually to the City Council and the Wisconsin Department of Commerce (DOC)
regarding use of ED-RLF income.
35.03. Membership. The ED AB shall consist of five members. The Mayor shall be a voting
member and act as chairperson. The remaining four appointments shall be made by the Mayor,
with confirmation by the Common Council. Upon creation of the ED AB, two members shall be
appointed for two-year terms, and two members shall be appointed for three-year terms.
Thereafter, appointments will be made for three-year terms.
35.04. Meetings. Meetings shall be held on an as-needed basis. The members of the ED AB shall
receive no compensation for service on said board. A quorum shall consist of three members. A
quorum shall be required for official ED AB action to take place on any application.
ADOPTED: 35 (1467) 3/30/1999
AMENDMENTS: 35(1645) 1/16/2007
Page 35-1
CHAPTER 38. CITY PLAN COMMISSION.
38.01. Creation of Plan Commission. The City Plan Commission has been created under Sec.
62.23, Wis. Stats.
38.02. Membership. The City Plan Commission shall consist of the Mayor, who shall be the
presiding officer, an Alderperson, and five citizens. The Mayor shall appoint another Plan
Commission member to substitute as the presiding officer in the Mayor's absence.
38.03. Appointment of Alderperson. The Alderperson member of the Plan Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with approval by the Common Council, at the Reorganizational
Council meeting each April.
38.04. Appointment of Citizen Members. The five citizen members shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with approval by the Common Council. All appointments shall be for three years to
expire on April 30.
38.05. No Compensation to be Paid. The members of the Plan Commission shall receive no
compensation for service on said commission.
ADOPTED: 38(1769) 1/10/2012
Page 38-1
CHAPTER 39. ORDINANCE TO APPROVE CITY PERFORMANCE OF CERTAIN
PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT SUBMITTING THE SAME FOR BIDS.
39.01. Public Construction. The following described public construction, the cost of which
exceeds $10,000, shall be performed by the City of Ashland Department of Public Works
without submitting the same for bids as permitted by Wisconsin Statute 62.15 (1):
39.02. Storm sewers. Place approximately 1030 feet of storm sewer pipe, set 14 storm sewer
inlets, perform all necessary removals, perform sub-base preparation, construct approximately Vi
of the crushed aggregate base course preparation according to the project plans, specifications
and details. Above work would be done with City equipment and labor.
39.03. Lighting Fixtures. Erection and placement of 36 lighting fixtures inside and outside TIF
District 4 in accordance with project plans. (Primary wiring will be performed by Northern
States Power and secondary wiring will be performed by a private contractor.)
ADOPTED: 39(1107) 8/26/1987
Page 39-1
CHAPTER 45. JOINT ORDINANCE TO REORGANIZE THE AIRPORT
COMMISSION.
45.01. Airport Commission Reorganization. The City of Ashland and County of Ashland have
previously established an Airport Commission; however, the current organization of the
Commission does not comply with Sec. 114.14, Wis. Stats.
45.02. Replacement of Previous Ordinance. This ordinance is intended to repeal and replace
the Joint Resolution of Ashland County Board and City of Ashland passed by the City and
County in March of 1967 and to repeal City of Ashland Ordinance 454.
45.03. Establishment of New Commission. Pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 114.14, Wis.
Stats., there is hereby established an Airport Commission in which is vested the jurisdiction for
the construction, improvement, equipment, maintenance and operation of the airport facility on
behalf of the County of Ashland and City of Ashland.
45.04. Commission Members. The Commission shall consist of five commissioners who shall
be especially interested in aeronautics.
45.05. Commission Appointments. The existing Commission is hereby abolished and the new
five member Commission shall be established and appointed as follows:
(a) Appointments by Mayor. Two members to be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Ashland, said members to serve for terms of 6 years commencing on the date of their
appointment and successors are to serve 6 year terms.
(b) Appointments by County Board. Two members to be appointed by the Chairperson of the
County Board subject to the approval of the County Board, said members to be elected County
Board Supervisors, said members to serve terms of 2 years commencing on the date of their
appointment and successors are to serve 2 year terms.
(c) Joint Appointments. One (1) member to be appointed jointly by the City and County of
Ashland and said member to serve for a term of six (6) years commencing on the date of the
appointment.
45.06. Compensation. The compensation and allowance for expenses of the Commissioners
shall be fixed jointly by the Common Council of the City of Ashland and the County Board.
45.07. Election of Chair and Secretary. The Commission shall elect one member chairman and
one secretary who shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings and transactions and report
such to the City and County.
45.08. Duties of Commission. Such Commission shall have complete and exclusive control and
management over the airport for which it has been appointed. All monies appropriated for the
construction, improvement, equipment, maintenance or operation of an airport or airports, or
earned by such airport or made available for its construction, improvement, equipment,
Page 45-1
maintenance or operation in any manner whatsoever, shall be kept in a special fund and paid out
only on order of the Airport Commission, drawn and signed by the secretary and countersigned
by the chairman.
45.09. Employment of Manager. In carrying out its duties, the Airport Commission may
employ a manager who may be a member of the Airport Commission and fix his compensation
(but no member of the Commission shall vote on the question of his selection as manager nor on
any question as to his compensation), and may employ and fix the compensation of such other
employees as may be deemed necessaiy; may make such contracts or other arrangements as may
be deemed necessaiy for the construction, improvement, equipment, maintenance or operation of
the airport; may contract with the United States or any agency thereof; may contract with private
parties for a term not to exceed ten years for the operation of the airport, including all necessary
arrangements for the improvement and equipment and successful operation thereof. Provided,
that in no case shall the public be deprived of equal and uniform use of the airport; and further,
that no act, contract, lease or any activity of the Airport Commission shall be or become a
binding contract on any governmental unit unless expressly authorized, and then only to the
extent so expressly authorized.
45.10. Compliance with Airport Operation Policies. The Commission shall comply with and
enforce the Airport Operation Policies and land use within the boundaries of the John F.
Kennedy Memorial Airport.
45.11. Duties of Manager. The manager, under the supervision of the Commission, shall have
the duty of administering and enforcing all airport ordinances, leases and agreements, and rules
and regulations.
45.12. Quarterly Meetings. The Commission and the manager shall meet at the airport at least
once each calendar quarter to inspect the airport facilities, review airport operations and financial
matters, and discuss proposed airport development and other business.
45.13. Accounting System. The Commission shall, in cooperation with the appropriate
municipal department, establish an airport accounting system of sufficient detail to enable the
Commission to accurately establish rates and charges, eliminate inefficient operation and
maintenance practices, and accomplish sound financial planning.
45.14. Annual Report. The Commission shall prepare and submit an annual report to the City
and County governments. Such report shall include current information on aircraft operations,
based aircraft, airport expenditures and revenues, along with comparative figures for the past year
and projections for the coming year, and include other information deemed pertinent.
45.15. Annual Budget. The Commission shall prepare and submit to the City and County
government an annual budget for the ensuing year setting forth anticipated revenues and
expenditures, including capital improvements. The said budget is to be submitted on or before
the 1st day of August of the preceding year of said budget.
45.16. Specific Duties of Commission. The Commission shall prepare and submit for adoption
Page 45-2
by the City of Ashland and County of Ashland and ordinance establishing minimum
requirements for the conduct of aeronautical services on the airport and an ordinance regulating
vehicle and pedestrian traffic on the airport.
45.17. Lease Agreements. The Commission shall prepare and submit for adoption by the City of
Ashland and County of Ashland standard leases and agreements for the various authorized types
of airport activities and land uses.
45.18. Surveys and Studies. The Commission shall make studies and conduct surveys as
appropriate to assist in improving the operation of the airport. It shall cooperate with the
Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration in airport and
system planning functions and other activities.
45.19. Cooperation. The Commission shall cooperate with, and receive the cooperation of, all
municipal departments providing services or assistance to the airport.
45.20. Approval of Expenditures, The Airport Commission may not approve expenditures in
excess of $5,000.00 without receiving Council approval.
45.21. Cost of Operation and Maintenance. The City of Ashland and County of Ashland shall
each be responsible for one-half the cost of airport operations and maintenance.
ADOPTED: 45(1083) 1/13/1987
AMENDMENTS: 45(1243) 12/11/1990; 45(1570) 6/24/2003; 45(1728) 5/25/2010
Page 45-3
Page 46-1
CHAPTER 46. PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE.
46.01. Creation. The City of Ashland Public Works Committee is hereby created.
46.02. Membership and Organization
(a) The Public Works Committee shall be comprised of five members appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Common Council to serve staggered two year terms commencing in
September. One member of the Common Council shall serve on the Committee.
( b) Persons appointed to the Committee shall be qualified electors of the City of Ashland.
(c) Committee members shall be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred in
the performance of their duties. Committee members shall receive no compensation for
attending meetings.
(d) Annually, the Committee shall elect one member as chairperson. The Committee shall
keep an accurate record of all proceedings and transactions and report such to the City Council.
46.03. Powers and Duties. The Public Works Committee shall provide advice, study and reports
to the Public Works Director and to the Common Council of the City of Ashland on any issue
pertaining to municipal public works and utility improvements and/or services. Specifically, the
Public Works Committee shall:
(a) Review and recommend a multi-year capital improvement program for municipal street,
sidewalk, storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water, and landfill projects.
(b) Review and recommend a multi-year capital equipment purchase and replacement
program for Public Works Department equipment.
(c) Determine appropriate financing alternatives for capital improvement programs and/or
capital equipment replacement programs.
(d) Recommend for consideration of the Public Service Commission and the Common
Council appropriate utility rates and fees for services to maintain the financial health of the City.
(e) Monitor utility compliance reports and make appropriate recommendations to correct
noted violations or to address areas of noncompliance.
(f) Review and recommend rules, regulations, plans and policies for the orderly provision of
services by the Public Works Department.
(g) Review and recommend contracts for professional services to be provided to the Public
Works Department.
(h) Other advisory functions as assigned by the Common Council.
Page 46-2
(i ) The Common Council of the City of Ashland may refer any matter pertaining to City
public works projects or services to the Public Works Committee for review, study and report.
46.03. Meetings and Public Notice
(a) The Committee shall meet as determined by the Committee.
(b) All agenda items will be reviewed by the Committee Chair and staff for validity and
urgency of the request and determine when and if that item should be placed on a Committee
agenda.
(c) Except as provided by Committee rule or practice, the Committee shall operate under
Robert’s Rules of Order. Any deviation from Robert’s Rules that is not objected to by a member
of the Committee at the time shall be waived.
(d) All regular and special meetings of the Committee shall comply with the public
meeting requirements of Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) All meeting notices shall comply with the public meeting notice requirements of
Wisconsin Statutes.
46.04. Quorum. A quorum shall be a majority of the full Committee.
46.05. Public Participation: Citizen Participation Period.
(a) The following are the rules that apply to citizen comment during the public participation
period, and shall be read aloud by the Chairperson or designee before each public participation
period:
(1) Citizens may speak during the Citizen Participation Period.
(2) If any member of the audience would like to speak outside of the Citizen
Participation Period, please raise your hand and ask for permission from the Chairperson.
Upon motion and second, a majority vote of the Committee will allow the person to
speak.
(3) Citizens will be allowed to speak for 3 minutes. The committee may grant additional
time with a maximum of 10 minutes.
(4) Speakers will refrain from profanity and use of derogatory, accusatory, or
inflammatory remarks.
(5) All citizens are entitled to advance notice of topics that will be discussed at
Committee meetings. Therefore, Committee members will not respond to citizen
comments during the meeting. They will only listen. The Committee may address the
Page 46-3
matter by putting it on a future agenda for discussion or by providing for some other kind
of follow-up.
(6) The Committee may not take action on any matter not on the agenda.
(7) Any citizen wishing to present written materials to the Committee shall leave them at
a place designated by the committee chairperson or staff.
(b) If the committee chairperson decides that a citizen’s comments are not relevant or are
derogatory, accusatory, or inflammatory, or that the citizen has spoken beyond the time allotted,
the committee chairperson may, subject to appeal to the Committee by a Committee member, do
any of the following:
(1) Order the citizen to modify his or her comments;
(2) Order the citizen to refrain from speaking;
(3) Order the citizen to leave the premises; or
(4) Take such other steps as may be necessary to ensure the efficient conduct of the
Committee’s business.
46.06. Board of Public Works Abolished. The Board of Public Works as established under
Sec. 62.14, Wis. Stats., is hereby abolished and its functions transferred to the Common Council.
The Council may, by ordinance, delegate the discharge of specific duties and powers to other
committees or officers.
Adopted: 46 (2015-1845) 6/30/2015
Page 4 7 - 1
CHAPTER 47. PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE.
47.01. Purpose. The Parks and Recreation Committee was created to advise the City of Ashland’s
Parks and Recreation Department, Ashland Common Council and other City of Ashland Departments
to provide and improve the recreational resources of the City for the enhancement of the quality of life
for residents, the larger regional community, and visitors. The goals of this ordinance will be
accomplished through preserving, maintaining, and improving services, facilities, park lands,
parkways, trails, campgrounds, and open spaces within the City of Ashland and building collaborations
with regional partners.
The Parks and Recreation Committee will also serve as the Tree Management Advisory Committee
which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City of Ashland. The Parks and Recreation Committee
shall study and make recommendations regarding recreation issues affecting Ashland community
members; advise the City on all matters pertaining to tree and landscape planting, maintenance, and
removal in the City of Ashland; and undertake such projects as requested by the City's governing body.
47.02. Membership and Organization.
(a) The Ashland Parks and Recreation Committee (PRC) shall be composed of seven (7) members
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Common Council to serve terms commencing on May
1st.
(1) Six (6) members of the Committee shall be citizens of the City of Ashland (or work in the
City of Ashland) and serve staggered three year terms. The Mayor shall appoint and Council
approve members at the reorganizational meeting of the Common Council. No less than two,
of the six, members of the committee will have knowledge/background in forestry and/or
natural resources.
(2) The Mayor shall appoint, and the Council shall confirm one (1) member of the Common
Council to serve on the Committee; the Council appointment shall be appointed annually at the
reorganizational meeting of the Council and shall serve by virtue of his/her seat on the Council.
(3) Of the initial citizen appointments:
(A) Two (2) shall be for three (3) years.
(B) Two (2) shall be for two (2) years.
(C) Two (2) shall be for (1) year.
(4) Following the initial citizen appointments, each successive appointment shall be for a three
year term.
(5) Members shall serve until their successors have been appointed.
Page 4 7 - 2
(b) Members of the Committee shall elect their own Chair and Vice-Chair annually at the
committee’s first meeting in May.
(c) If any committee member has three (3) unexcused absences or resigns, the Committee may
declare the position vacant and request the Mayor to fill the vacancy (for the remainder of the term)
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
47.03. Duties. The Parks and Recreation Committee shall:
(a) Establish policies and procedures for the proper administration of the parks and recreation
programs of the City.
(b) Recommend to the Common Council the acquisition of certain lands and buildings deemed
necessary for use of City Parks and Recreational programs, the location of which shall be reviewed by
the City Plan Commission.
(c) Cooperate with all agencies, groups, clubs and individuals concerned with parks, conservation
and recreation in the City.
(d) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the Committee may perform its duties without first
obtaining the consent of the Common Council but in no event is the committee empowered to
financially obligate the City of Ashland in any manner without the consent of the Common Council.
(e) Encourage citizen participation.
(f) Present or discuss policies and programs affecting parks and recreation; to study issues.
(g) Provide input on the values, goals, and objectives of a program; develop program plans; and
contribute to continuous feedback.
(h) Make recommendations to both the Parks and Recreation Department and the Common Council
for maintaining and improving overall quality program/service deliveries.
(i) Advise the City on all matters pertaining to tree and landscape planting, maintenance, and
removal in the City of Ashland.
(j) Oversee the development and maintenance of an Urban Forestry Management Plan and make
recommendations to the City for policy, regulation, or ordinance changes necessary to implement such
a plan.
(k) Recommend actions to improve, maintain, and equip the playgrounds and recreational spaces of
the City of Ashland.
Page 4 7 - 3
(l) Recommend recreational programs, activities, exhibitions, games, contests, and festivals, etc. for
the recreation of residents and visitors.
(m) Recommend the adoption of suitable rules, regulations and bylaws for the use of City
recreational facilities and parks, and the conduct of all persons while on or using same.
47.04. Meetings and Public Notice.
(a) The Committee shall meet as determined by the Committee.
(b) All agenda items will be reviewed by the Committee Chair and staff for validity and urgency of
the request and determine when and if that item should be placed on a Committee agenda.
(c) The Committee shall operate under Robert’s Rules of Order.
(d) All regular and special meetings of the Committee shall comply with the public meeting
requirements of Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) All meeting notices shall comply with the public meeting notice requirements of Wisconsin
Statutes.
(f) All meeting notices and agendas shall be issued by the Parks and Recreation Department.
47.05. Quorum. A quorum shall be a majority of the full Committee.
47.06. Reports and Record Keeping.
(a) Committee members shall select one among themselves, or a Parks and Recreation Department
staff member, to record the minutes of each meeting of the Committee. A written record of all
meetings shall be kept and approved at the next subsequent meeting of the Committee.
(b) Committee reports and recommendations shall be reduced to writing and shall not be included
on a Council agenda until reduced to writing and submitted by the Committee to the City Clerk.
(c) The City Clerk is the record custodian for the City. All committee minutes and records shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
47.07. Referrals to the Committee. The Common Council of the City of Ashland may refer any
matter pertaining to City parks and recreation projects, programs, services or tree and landscape
planting, maintenance, and removal in the City to the Parks and Recreation Committee for review,
study and reports.
ADOPTED: 47 (2019-1915) 3/26/2019
Page 4 7 - 4
Page 48-1
CHAPTER 48. ORGANIZATION OF THE PUBLIC WORKS, PARK AND LEISURE
SERVICES DEPARTMENTS.
48.01. Responsibility of Public Works. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for
maintenance of and improvements on the City’s streets, alleys, sewers and other property.
48.02. Responsibility of Park Department. The Park Department shall be responsible for the
operation, maintenance and improvements of areas included in the City Park System.
48.03. Responsibility of Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall be
responsible for supervision of all employees in the Public Works and Park crews and for
preparation and administration of the departmental budgets.
48.04. Responsibility of Director of Leisure Services. The Director of Leisure Services shall
be responsible for planning and coordinating the delivery of recreational and leisure services,
supervision of Leisure Services staff, coordination of Parks and facility requirements with leisure
needs, preparation and administration of Leisure Services budget, and assisting with preparation
of Park budget.
48.05. Repeal of Ordinances. This ordinance shall repeal Ordinances 867 and 913 in total.
Any and all other ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are repealed to the extent of the
conflict.
ADOPTED: 48 (1041) 11/13/1984
AMENDMENTS: 48 (1088) 2/10/1987
Page 48-2
Page 49-1
CHAPTER 49: SUSTAINABILITY COMMITTEE.
49.01 Purpose
49.02 Membership and Organization
49.03 Duties
49.04 Meetings and Public Notice
49.05 Quorum
49.06 Reports and Record Keeping
49.07 Referrals to the Committee
49.08 Miscellaneous Provisions
49.01: Purpose.
The Sustainability Committee was created to advise the City of Ashland’s Planning and
Development Department, Ashland Common Council and other City of Ashland Departments to
provide and improve the sustainability resources (including environmental, economic, and
social) of the City for the enhancement of the quality of life for residents, the larger regional
community, and visitors. The goals of this ordinance will be accomplished through prioritizing
Ashland’s sustainability goals, completing annual reviews, organizing sustainability
improvement projects pertaining to natural resources, economic efficiency, and social
interaction, and enhancing communication within and between the City of Ashland and residents.
The Sustainability Committee will study and make recommendations regarding sustainability
issues affecting Ashland community members and undertake such projects and requested by the
City’s governing body. The Committee shall, from time to time as it deems desirable:
(a) Present or discuss policies and programs affecting all aspects of City sustainability.
(b) Recommend cooperation with all agencies, groups, clubs, and individuals concerned with
environmental conservation, economic efficiency, and social organization in the City.
(c) Make recommendations to both the Planning and Development Department and Common
Council for maintaining and improving overall quality program/service deliveries.
49.02. Membership and Organization.
(a) The Sustainability Committee shall be composed of 7 members appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Common Council to serve staggered two year terms commencing
July 1st.
One member must be a member of City Council
Page 49-2
(b) At the first meeting of the committee and the first meeting after July 1 of any given year,
the committee shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson.
(c) If any committee member has three unexcused absences or resigns, the Committee may
declare the position vacant and request the Mayor to fill the vacancy (for the remainder of
the term) pursuant to the provisions of this section.
49.03. Duties.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the Committee may perform its duties without first
obtaining the consent of the Common Council but in no event is the committee empowered to
financially obligate the City of Ashland in any manner without the consent of the Common
Council.
(a) Prioritize City sustainability initiatives
(b) Promote/disperse sustainability information to local area of influence
(c) Serve as contact for sustainability issues and questions
(d) Organize/Plan sustainability events and programs
(e) Conduct annual evaluations and monitoring of city sustainability goals and projects
(f) Encourage citizen participation.
49.04. Meetings and Public Notice.
(a) The Committee shall meet as determined by the Committee.
(b) All agenda items will be reviewed by the Committee Chair for validity and urgency of
the request and determine when and if that item should be placed on a Committee agenda.
(c) The Committee shall operate under Robert’s Rules of Order.
(d) All regular and special meetings of the Committee shall comply with the public meeting
requirements of Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) All meeting notices shall comply with the public meeting notice requirements of
Wisconsin Statutes.
Page 49-3
(f) All meeting notices and agendas shall be issued by the Planning and Development
Department.
49.05. Quorum.
A quorum shall be a majority of the full Committee.
49.06. Reports and Record Keeping.
(a) Committee members shall select one among themselves, or the Planning and
Development Department will designate a staff member, to record the minutes of each
meeting of the Committee. A written record of all meetings shall be kept and approved at
the next subsequent meeting of the Committee.
(b) Committee reports and recommendations shall be reduced to writing and shall not be
included on a Council agenda until reduced to writing and submitted by the Committee to
the City Clerk.
(c) The City Clerk is the record custodian for the City. All committee minutes and records
shall be filed with the City Clerk.
49.07. Referrals to the Committee.
The Common Council of the City of Ashland may refer any matter pertaining to City
sustainability programs and projects to the Sustainability Committee for review, study, and
reports.
49.08 Miscellaneous Provisions.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to
be invalid, unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, or clause or
phrase or portion thereof.
ADOPTED: 49 (2018-1906) 6/26/2018
Page 49-4
CHAPTER 50: MAIN STREET BOARD
50.01 Purpose
50.02 Membership and Organization
50.03 Duties
50.04 Meetings and Public Notice
50.05 Quorum
50.06 Reports and Record Keeping
50.07 Referrals to the Board
50.08 Miscellaneous Provisions
50.01: Purpose
The Main Street Board was created to advise the Main Street Manager, as well as the City of
Ashland’s Planning and Development Department, to promote and improve downtown Ashland
through prioritizing historic preservation and community revitalization in order to enhance the
downtown for residents, visitors, business owners, and the larger regional community. The goals
of this ordinance will be accomplished with the assistance of the Wisconsin Main Street
program, and will be focused on organization, design, promotion, and economic vitality within
the downtown.
The Main Street Board will study and make recommendations regarding various aspects of the
downtown affecting Ashland community members, and direct and undertake such projects as
requested by the City’s governing body and the Main Street Manager. The Board shall meet from
time to time as it deems necessary and shall:
(a) Present or discuss policies and programs affecting all aspects of downtown preservation,
promotion, and development;
(b) Recommend cooperation with all agencies, groups, clubs, and individuals concerned with
downtown promotion, economic development, and coordination of additional downtown
amenities and events;
(c) Make recommendations to the Main Street Manager, Planning and Development
Department, and Common Council for maintaining and improving overall vitality of the
downtown;
(d) Work to assist outside organizations as requested such as the Ashland Area Chamber of
Commerce, Ashland Area Development Corporation, and other community entities
directly involved in downtown promotion and support.
Page 2 of 4
50.02. Membership and Organization.
(a) The Main Street Board shall be composed of nine (9) members, appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Common Council, to serve staggered two year terms commencing
from the date of their approval. For the first year of the program, four (4) members shall
be appointed for a duration of only one (1) year to ensure the board will not have
complete turnover at any time.
(b) At all times, a minimum of 50% of board members must be made up of downtown
businesses, non-profits, and property owners.
(c) The Main Street Board shall represent a broad array of community interests and
downtown stakeholders, including:
a. Representative of Ashland Area Chamber of Commerce
b. Representative of Ashland Area Development Corporation
c. Representatives of a minimum of 3 downtown business or property owners
d. Representative from at least one (1) downtown non-profit entity
e. Representative of a downtown tenant
f. Representative of a local realtor OR representative of a downtown volunteer
organization
g. Representative from private community stakeholder outside of the downtown
(d) At the first meeting of the board and the first meeting after July 1 of any given year, the
board shall elect a chairperson.
(e) If any board member has three unexcused absences or resigns, the Board may declare the
position vacant and request the Mayor to fill the vacancy (for the remainder of the term)
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
50.03. Duties.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the Board may perform its duties without first obtaining
the consent of the Common Council, but in no event is the board empowered to financially
obligate the City of Ashland in any manner without the consent of the Common Council.
Central duties of Board members shall include:
(a) Providing leadership and input to promote sustainable downtown development;
Page 3 of 4
(b) Serving as a consistent, structured connection between the City, Ashland Area Chamber
of Commerce, Ashland Area Development Corporation, downtown property owners,
tenants, and other stakeholders;
(c) Assisting in developing ideas for new events and promotions which the City does not
currently offer;
(d) Prioritizing projects based on established program goals, existing community plans such
as the Comprehensive Plan, and future community input through forums, surveys, etc.;
(e) Encouraging citizen participation and volunteerism in the downtown to further program
goals, diversify City-hosted events, and continue to promote local support for downtown
businesses; and
(f) Generating an annual report for the Plan Commission and Ashland City Council to
update on program activities and projects.
50.04. Meetings and Public Notice.
(a) The Board shall meet monthly, and special meetings can be held as determined by the
Board and Main Street Manager.
(b) All agenda items will be reviewed by the Board Chair and Main Street Manager for
validity and urgency of the request and determined when and if that item should be
placed on a Board agenda.
(c) The Board shall operate under Robert’s Rules of Order.
(d) All regular and special meetings of the Board shall comply with the open meeting
requirements as outlined in Wisconsin State Statutes.
(e) All meeting notices shall comply with the public meeting notice requirements set forth by
Wisconsin State Statues and the City of Ashland.
(f) All meeting notices and agendas shall be issued by the Main Street Manager, in
conjunction with the City’s Planning and Development Department.
Page 4 of 4
50.05. Quorum.
A quorum shall be a majority of the full Board.
50.06. Reports and Record Keeping.
(a) Minutes of all meeting will be recorded by the Main Street Manager, or a member of the
Planning and Development Department staff. A written record of all meetings shall be
kept and approved at the next subsequent meeting of the Board.
(b) Board reports and recommendations shall be submitted for review by the Ashland
Committee of the Whole or Common Council as appropriate.
(c) All Board minutes and records shall be approved by Ashland City Council and filed with
the City Clerk.
50.07. Referrals to the Board.
The Common Council of the City of Ashland may refer any matter pertaining to the Main Street
Program or downtown programs and projects to the Main Street Board for review, study, and
reports.
50.08 Miscellaneous Provisions
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to
be invalid, unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence, or clause or
phrase or portion thereof.
ADOPTED: 50 (2020-1934) 06/30/2020
Page 51-1
CHAPTER 51. CITY COUNCIL PROCEDURE.
51.01. Statutory Procedures. Any conflict between the procedures set forth in Secs. 62.11(1) –
(4), Wisconsin Statutes, and this Ordinance shall be resolved in favor of the statutory procedures
unless the statute authorizes the City to deviate from those procedures, in which case the
procedures set forth in this Ordinance shall control.
51.02. Applicability. Except as specifically provided herein, these procedures apply to meetings
of the Common Council and not to meetings of the Committee of the Whole.
51.03. Meetings, Time, Date and Notice.
(a) Regular meetings of the City Council and Committee of the Whole shall be held on the
dates and times determined by Resolution passed by the City Council. If circumstances require a
change in regular meeting date, the Mayor shall notify the Council members, the media and
general public in writing at least seven days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date except
in exigent circumstances. All meetings of the City Council, and all meetings of any standing or
ad hoc committee of the Council, shall be held in compliance with the Wisconsin open meeting
law.
(b) Following the spring election of each year, the Common Council shall meet on the third
Tuesday of April for the purpose of organization. The Council President shall be selected by a
majority vote of the Council members at the annual Reorganizational meeting.
(c) If any meeting date, as fixed by par. (1), falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall instead
be held on the first business day after the holiday at the same hour and place.
(d) No meeting of the Council, the Committee of the Whole, or a combination of the two
held on the same day shall exceed three hours in length. At such time as the three hour mark is
reached, the presiding officer shall take a vote of the body to determine if the body wishes to
continue beyond the three hour mark in order to complete action on the matter then on the floor,
or to take up specific items later on the agenda. A majority vote shall be required to continue the
meeting. No matter not on the floor at that time may be taken up after the three hour mark is
reached except as approved by such a vote or except for adjournment or except for a matter
which, because of legal requirements, must be acted on before the next meeting of the Council.
51.04. Special Meetings.
(a) Who may call. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or Council
President and special meetings of the Committee of the Whole may be called by the Council
President.
(b) Notice of special meetings.
(1) For the purpose of scheduling a special meeting, the City Clerk shall attempt to
determine availability of members by notifying each member of the time and purpose of
Page 51-2
such meeting. If a quorum is likely, a copy of the notice will be delivered personally to
the member or left at the member’s residence at least six hours prior to the meeting. If a
quorum is not likely, the Mayor or Council President will specify an alternate date to be
held as quickly as possible and the Clerk shall provide notification to all Council
members.
(2) Public notice shall be given in accordance with sec. 19.84, Wisconsin Statutes.
51.05. Calling the Meeting to Order; Who is to Preside.
(a) The Mayor shall preside and call meetings of the Common Council to order. If the
Mayor is absent, the President of the Council shall preside. If the President of the Council is
absent, the senior member of the Council present (based on the length of continuous unbroken
service) shall preside until the Council, by motion, selects an acting president for that meeting.
(b) At Committee of the Whole meetings, the Council President shall preside and call the
meeting to order. If the Council President is absent, the Mayor shall preside. If the Mayor is
absent, the senior member of the Council present (based on the length of continuous unbroken
service) shall preside.
(c) In the absence of the Clerk, the Deputy Clerk shall act as Clerk for the meeting. In the
absence of the Deputy Clerk, the Mayor or Council President shall appoint a Clerk for that
meeting.
(d) The presiding officer shall make all procedural rulings regarding the conduct of the
meeting. Any procedural ruling by the presiding officer may be appealed to the Council or
Committee of the Whole, by motion and second, and may be reversed by a majority vote.
51.06. Roll Call and Opening Business (Effective May 1, 2015). After the presiding officer
calls the meeting to order, the Clerk shall call the roll, to be followed by a Moment of Silence or
an Invocation, as determined by the Common Council at its Reorganizational Meeting, and the
Pledge of Allegiance.
51.07. Call of the House.
(a) Any member may request, by motion, a call of the house in the presence or absence of a
quorum, and thereby require absent members to be sent for. Such a motion is in order at any
time, except when the Council is engaged in voting. The motion shall be decided by an
affirmative vote of a majority of all members present.
(b) While the City Council is under call and a quorum is present, business may be transacted
as if there were no call. If a quorum is not present, then the Council may either wait for the
arrival of absent members to form a quorum or may adjourn.
(c) When the attendance of absent members is secured, each member shall have the
opportunity to explain his or her absence; however, such explanation will not be mandatory.
Page 51-3
51.08. Approval of Minutes and Agenda. A copy of the minutes of the last meeting shall be
submitted by the Clerk for review by all members and any mistakes therein corrected on the
Council floor. The proposed agenda with any revisions must be approved by majority vote of
Council or Committee of the Whole prior to conducting any business. No business may be
added to the agenda that was not given public notice prior to the meeting.
51.09. Order of Business. At all regular meetings, the following order shall be observed, unless
otherwise provided in the approved agenda. The order of business may be changed by a majority
of the Common Council during the approval of the agenda. No business may be taken up out of
order except by majority consent.
(a) Call to order.
(b) Roll Call, Moment of Silence or an Invocation, as determined by the Common Council at
its Reorganizational Meeting, and Pledge of Allegiance.
(c) Approval of the Agenda.
(d) Approval of previous Council meeting minutes.
(e) Citizen Participation Period.
(f) Mayor’s Report, Announcements and Appointments.
(g) Consent Agenda to include reports or minutes of Committees, Commissions, Boards, and
items unanimously approved by Committee of the Whole.
(h) Other business.
(i) Listing of topics, without discussion, for future agendas.
(j) Adjournment.
51.10. Introduction of Business.
(a) (1) All items for Council consideration shall be in writing accompanied by such
explanatory materials as appropriate, together with the name of the authors presenting the same
and shall be delivered to the Clerk. (2) All items for Committee of the Whole consideration shall
be prepared as follows: Councilors will create and write an agenda bill using an agenda bill
form template which shall be reviewed by the Council President and the Clerk for formatting
before adding it to the Committee of the Whole agenda. The Clerk will create a final version of
the agenda bill in the appropriate format. If the item is approved by a majority of the Common
Council at the Committee of the Whole, the writing of the agenda bill would then be directed to
the appropriate Committee or staff member, or to the Councilor if he/she desires to be
responsible for writing the agenda bill. The Councilor would receive assistance from the
Page 51-4
appropriate staff member(s) in the preparation of the agenda bill. The agenda bill would then be
placed on a future Committee of the Whole or Council agenda following the guidelines in
Ordinance 51.
(b) Except as provided in this section, no business shall be placed on a Council or Committee
of the Whole agenda without an identification of its origin. Any proposal denied by the
Committee of the Whole, or other Committee, Commission or Board may be re-introduced to the
City Council, if the City Council has the statutory power to override the denial.
(c) Before an ordinance or resolution is introduced, a copy shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk by 9:00 a.m. on the Tuesday preceding the meeting at which it is to be introduced.
The Council may waive this requirement.
(d) No ordinance or resolution, having once been defeated, may again be introduced in the
same or in substantially similar form, sooner than ninety (90) days from the date when such
ordinance or resolution was defeated.
(e) Routine housekeeping or emergency measures may be placed on the agenda at the Clerk’s
discretion without referral to committee.
(f) A committee shall take action on any matter referred to it within a period of 60 days
unless this time is extended by vote of the Council or approved by the Mayor.
51.11. Presiding Officer to Preserve Order – Council and Committee of the Whole
Meetings.
(a) The presiding officer at a Council or Committee of the Whole meeting shall preserve
decorum and ensure that order and civility is maintained throughout the meeting. If a member or
visitor does not follow the Council’s rules, the presiding officer may, on his or her own motion,
or may, at any member’s request, call the offending member or visitor to order. The Council, if
appealed to by a member, shall decide the matter.
(b) Members of the Council also share in the responsibility of ensuring that proper conduct
and civility is maintained at all times. A point of order is in order at any time. Prior recognition
by the presiding officer is not required.
(c) When an offending member or visitor is called to order, that person shall immediately be
silent and await the decision of the presiding officer. If action is not taken by the presiding
officer or enforced by the presiding officer, appeal may be made by a member to the Council.
Any visitor continuing to violate the rules may be expelled by order of the presiding officer from
the room or building where the Council or Committee of the Whole is meeting, subject to appeal
by a Council member and final decision by the Council or Committee of the Whole. Any
member of the Council continuing to violate the rules may be expelled by order of the Council or
Committee of the Whole from the room or building where the Council or Committee of the
Whole is meeting. No Council member who has been expelled from a meeting shall receive any
pay from the City for attendance at that meeting.
Page 51-5
51.12. Addressing the Council or Committee of the Whole.
(a) No member shall address the Council or Committee of the Whole until recognized by the
presiding officer. All comments shall be addressed to the presiding officer. When two or more
members simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall name the member who is to
speak first. Each member has a right to speak on each issue unless the question has been called.
(b) After a motion has been made and seconded, the member who made the motion shall have
first priority to speak to the motion and shall be called on by the presiding officer to do so. The
presiding officer shall recognize members and determine the order in which they shall speak. A
member who has not yet spoken to an issue may be given priority over another member who has
already spoken to the issue. Otherwise, the presiding officer shall generally recognize members
in the order of their requests and shall name each member who is to speak.
51.13. Public Participation: Citizen Participation Period.
(a) The following are the rules that apply to citizen comment during the public participation
period, and shall be read aloud by the Clerk before each public participation period:
(1) Citizens may speak during the Citizen Participation Period.
(2) Audience members may speak outside of the Citizen Participation Period only by
approval of a majority of the Council. If you wish to speak outside of the Citizen
Participation Period, please raise your hand and wait for the presiding officer to
recognize you.
(3) Citizens will be allowed to speak for 3 minutes.
(4) Speakers will refrain from profanity and use of derogatory, accusatory, or
inflammatory remarks.
(5) All citizens are entitled to advance notice of topics that will be discussed at Council
and Committee of the Whole meetings. Therefore, Councilors and staff members will
not respond to citizen comments during the meeting. They will only listen. The Council
or Committee of the Whole, as allowed by the Presiding Officer (that is, the Mayor or the
Council President) may address the matter by putting it on a future agenda for discussion
or by providing for some other kind of follow-up.
(6) The Council may not take action on any matter not on the agenda.
(7) Any citizen wishing to present written materials to the Council shall leave them at a
place designated by the presiding officer.
(b) If the presiding officer decides that a citizen’s comments are not relevant or are
derogatory, accusatory, or inflammatory, or that the citizen has spoken beyond the time allotted,
Page 51-6
the presiding officer may, subject to appeal to the Council by a Council member, do any of the
following:
(1) Order the citizen to modify his or her comments;
(2) Order the citizen to refrain from speaking;
(3) Order the citizen to leave the Council Chambers; or
(4) Take such other steps as may be necessary to ensure the efficient conduct of the
Council’s business.
51.14. Public Participation: Public Hearings. In conducting a public hearing, the Council or
Committee of the Whole shall allow all interested parties an opportunity to speak on the subject
matter of the hearing. Each speaker shall have a time limit of five minutes to address the
Council or Committee of the Whole unless modified by majority vote.
51.15. Public Participation: Other. Citizens may be allowed to speak at times other than the
Citizen Participation Period upon approval by a majority vote of the Council or Committee of the
Whole. Speakers shall be limited to three minutes. All limitations on citizen comment set forth in
sec. 51.13 apply to comments made during other times of the meeting.
51.16. No Persons Allowed on Council Floor Except Members of the Council. No persons
except members and officers of the Council shall be allowed to come to the Council floor during
the session of the Council or Committee of the Whole without the permission of the presiding
officer or a recommendation of any Council member and approval by a majority vote of the
Council.
51.17. Motions – Council and Committee of the Whole. Once a motion has been made and
seconded, but before its final reading by the Clerk as provided below, the motion or the second
may be withdrawn, and by mutual assent of the maker and the seconder of the motion, the
motion may be amended. Upon request of the presiding officer or of any member, the motion
shall be read again by the Clerk prior to the vote. The Clerk shall announce the result of the vote
upon its conclusion.
51.18. Motion to Adjourn – Council and Committee of the Whole. A motion to adjourn shall
always be in order, unless the Council or Committee of the Whole is engaged in voting, and shall
be decided without debate. The member must be recognized by the presiding officer before the
motion can be made.
51.19. Calling the Previous Question– Council and Committee of the Whole. Upon motion
and second to call the question, the Council or Committee of the Whole by a majority vote may
terminate debate on any question. A motion to call the previous question shall be voted on
without debate.
51.20. Form of Question – Council and Committee of the Whole. The call for the vote shall
Page 51-7
be stated substantially as follows:
(a) If a voice vote: All those in favor of ... signify by saying ‘yes’, those opposed, ‘no.’
(b) If a roll call vote: All those in favor of ... signify by saying ‘yes’, those opposed, ‘no’ and
the Clerk will call the roll.
51.21. Taking and Recording the Vote. The votes for and against shall be taken and recorded
upon any motion, resolution, or ordinance before the Council or Committee of the Whole, or
upon any other question at the request of the Mayor or any Council members. While a roll call is
in progress, the members shall vote from their seats, and no member may explain a vote during
the roll call.
51.22. Roll Calls to be in Continuous Rotation. On roll call votes at Council and Committee
of the Whole meetings, the Clerk shall progress one (1) name on the Council roster beginning
each meeting when beginning each roll call vote.
51.23. Voting.
(a) Majority Vote All motions, resolutions, and ordinances shall be passed by an affirmative
vote of a majority of all the members of the Common Council or Committee of the Whole
present unless an extraordinary vote is required by law. In all cases, a majority of the votes cast
shall be necessary for Council action, provided a quorum has voted.
(b) Tie Vote The Mayor shall not vote except in the case of a tie. When the Mayor does
vote in the case of a tie, his or her vote shall be counted in determining whether a sufficient
number of the Council or Committee of the Whole has voted favorably or unfavorably on the
measure.
(c) Abstentions – Council and Committee of the Whole.
(1) A Council member shall not vote on any proposed motion, resolution, or ordinance in
which he or she has a direct pecuniary or personal interest not common to other members
of the Council.
(2) A Council member who is required by law to abstain from voting on any particular
matter shall not be counted as present for purposes of determining whether a quorum
exists for the vote or whether a sufficient number of Council members have voted in
favor of the matter for it to be approved.
(d) Vote Changes – Council and Committee of the Whole. A Council member may not
change a vote once the vote is cast.
51.24. Motions to Reconsider and Rescind.
(a) Motion to reconsider. Except for those motions which under parliamentary procedure are
Page 51-8
not subject to reconsideration, it shall be in order for any member who voted in the majority to
move a reconsideration of such vote at the same or next succeeding regular meeting of the
Council (if the action to be reconsidered was taken at a Council meeting) or at the same or next
succeeding regular meeting of the Committee of the Whole (if the action to be reconsidered was
taken at a meeting of the Committee of the Whole). A motion to reconsider having been lost
shall not be again in order.
(b) Motion to rescind. A motion to rescind may be made by any member at any time, if a
motion to reconsider is no longer procedurally available, except when something has been done
as a result of the vote that the Council cannot undo, such as when a contract has been entered
into with a third party based on the vote. A motion to rescind is the same as a motion to amend,
with the effect of the motion, if approved, being the deletion of the entire previous act which is
the subject of the motion.
51.25. Rules to Govern Council and Committee of the Whole. In the absence of a standing
rule, the Council and Committee of the Whole shall be governed by the most current version of
Robert’s Rules of Order kept on file in the City Clerk’s office. The most current version of the
League of Municipality Handbook kept on file in the City Clerk’s office shall be used to
determine rules of order when an item is ambiguous or Robert’s Rules of Order are unclear.
51.26. Committee of the Whole.
(a) The City Council may meet as a Committee of the Whole following the conclusion of
each Regular Council meeting. The President of the Council shall preside over the Committee of
the Whole meeting and call the meeting to order. The Committee of the Whole shall consider
items proposed for action and make recommendations for following Council agendas. All items
must receive favorable recommendation by the Committee of the Whole prior to placement on
the Council agenda except as provided in subsection (b), below.
(b) The following matters may be placed on a Council agenda without first receiving
recommendation from the Committee of the Whole:
(1) Recommendations of the City Attorney relating to accounts and claims.
(2) Recommendations and advice of the City Attorney relating to litigation in which the
City is or is going to become involved.
(3) Changes to ordinances and resolutions which may be mandated by state or federal
law.
(4) Changes to ordinances and resolutions which may be required by the adoption of the
annual City Budget.
(5) Petitions for direct legislation pursuant to the provisions of sec. 9.20, Wis. Stats.
(6) Ordinances and resolutions necessary to implement Public Works projects previously
Page 51-9
approved in the annual City Budget.
(7) Changes to ordinances and resolutions which are intended to correct errors, omissions
or inconsistencies therein.
(8) Items which require action in a timely manner as declared by the Clerk or Mayor.
51.27. Appointment of Special Committees. All special committees of the Council shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council unless otherwise directed by the Council,
and all special subcommittees of the Committee of the Whole shall be appointed by the Council
President and confirmed by the Committee, unless otherwise directed by the Committee.
51.28. Council and Committee of the Whole Agenda Preparation.
(a) A proposed agenda, together with relevant materials and communications, shall be
prepared by the City Clerk and delivered to the Mayor and Council members not later than 3
business days prior to a regular Council or Committee of the Whole meeting. A similar agenda
shall be prepared and delivered for special meetings of the Council, time permitting. No item
may be acted on by the Council unless it is included in the proposed agenda. The proposed
agenda for a Council meeting shall be prepared at the direction of the Mayor. The proposed
agenda for a Committee of the Whole meeting shall be prepared at the direction of the Council
President. Prior to the time established by this section for the preparation of the agenda, the
Mayor and Council President shall confer for the purpose of coordinating the Council and
Committee of the Whole agendas, taking into account the nature and number of the items of
business to be considered at the meetings, and any other considerations deemed relevant by
them.
(b) The proposed agenda with supporting documentation shall be available at the City Clerk’s
office for public inspection and copying two business days prior to a regular Council or
Committee of the Whole meeting. The agenda and materials for a special Council meeting shall
be available as soon as prepared and assembled by the City Clerk.
(c) The City Clerk shall, upon request, make copies of the agenda and accompanying material
available for distribution and may make a charge therefor sufficient to recover copy expenses (as
provided for in Codification Ordinance 165 - Comprehensive Fee Schedule), provided one copy
shall be made available without charge to each recognized news organization serving the City.
(d) Additions to or deletions from the proposed agenda may be made by the City Clerk and by
other City officers upon request or approval of the Mayor, until 12:00 noon of the day of the
Council or Committee of the Whole meeting. At such time, the City Clerk shall prepare a set of
materials, to include materials not previously delivered, for the Mayor and each member of the
Council, which shall be available in the Clerk’s office until 4:00 p.m. the day of the Council
meeting and available at the meeting place of the Council or Committee of the Whole one-half
hour prior to the time scheduled for convening the meeting.
51.29. Consent Agenda.
Page 51-10
(a) The City Clerk, subject to approval of the Mayor, shall place on the Consent Agenda
items which in the Clerk’s judgment are routine and noncontroversial and require no special vote
or action by the Council. An item on the Consent Agenda may be removed by motion, second,
and majority vote of the Council. Such motion shall be in order either at the time of the approval
of the agenda or at the time of the consideration of the Consent Agenda. Any item or part
thereof removed from the Consent Agenda by action of the Council shall be separately
considered at the appropriate time in the Council’s regular order of business. Any items
approved unanimously at a Committee of the Whole meeting will be placed on the Consent
Agenda. Any item that requires more than a simple majority of the Council members in
attendance to approve shall not be placed on the Consent Agenda.
(b) No separate discussion or debate on matters included in the Consent Agenda shall be
permitted. A single motion, seconded and adopted by majority vote of the Council shall be
sufficient to approve, adopt, enact or otherwise favorably resolve any matter listed on the
Consent Agenda without separate reading or discussion thereof.
51.30. Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable and if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this ordinance, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative
intent that this ordinance shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
51.31. Suspension of Rules. These rules or any part of them may be suspended by the Council
or Committee of the Whole in connection with any matter under consideration by a vote of twothirds
(2/3) of the members present.
51.32. Amending rules. By a recorded vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the
Council, these rules or any part of them may be amended.
51.33. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication except as
indicated in sec. 51.06 in the text of the amendment.
ADOPTED: 51 (1814) 8/27/2013
AMENDMENTS: 51 (2015-1847) 8/11/2015; 51 (2016-1875) 7/12/2016
51 (2017-1896) 8/29/2017
Page 78-1
CHAPTER 78. COMPENSATION SCHEDULE AND SALARY ALLOCATIONS OF
THE NON-UNION, NON-ELECTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
78.01. Compensation Plan. The “Salary Allocation List and Salary Schedule for Non-Union,
Non-elected City of Ashland Officers and Employees (12/80)” hereinafter referred to as the
“Compensation Plan” is incorporated by reference in this Ordinance as if fully forth herein at
length with amendments added according to Section 78.03 of this Ordinance; and is specifically
adopted by the Ordinance for the establishment of standardized rates of compensation for nonunion
and non-elected officers and employees of the City of Ashland, Wisconsin. A copy of the
Compensation Plan shall be kept on file by the Office of the City Clerk.
78.02. Administration. The Compensation Plan shall be administered by the Mayor and the
Clerk/Personnel Director and the Common Council shall review all proposed alterations,
amendments, changes and/or deletions to the Compensation Plan and submit their
recommendations to the Common Council for action.
78.03. Amendment of Compensation Plan. The Labor and Personnel Committee of the City of
Ashland Common Council shall review all proposed alterations, amendments, changes and/or
deletions to the Compensation Plan and submit their recommendations to the Common Council
for action.
78.04. Repeal. This Ordinance shall repeal all conflicting ordinances and/or resolutions in total
or portions thereof, to the extent to which they conflict.
ADOPTED: 78 (960) 11/26/1980
Page 80-1
CHAPTER 80. CITY EMPLOYEES SOLICITING OR RECEIVING GIFTS.
80.01. Soliciting or Receiving Gifts. No officer or employee of the City of Ashland may
directly or indirectly solicit, accept, or receive any gift having a value of $25.00 or more,
whether in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise
or in any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift
was intended to influence the officer or employee in the performance of official duties or was
intended as a reward of any official action on the part of said officer or employee.
80.02. Forfeiture. The forfeiture imposed for any violation of this section is not less than
$100.00 nor more than $500.00.
80.03 Waive Provisions. The Council may waive the provisions of this ordinance for amounts
above $25.00 if they deem it to be in the best interests of the City. Prior approval must be
granted.
ADOPTED: 80 (1095) 4/14/1987
Page 85-1
CHAPTER 85. EMPLOYEE EDUCATION ASSISTANCE POLICY.
85.01. Purpose. The purpose of the City of Ashland formal Education Assistance policy is to
provide a framework for formal professional education of city employees. This regulation
establishes the city's commitment to a program of employee professional development through
the financing of formal education at accredited colleges and universities. These policies are
designed to:
(a) Increase the technical, supervisory and professional knowledge of city employees;
(b) Improve the employee’s ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of his or
her job through education and training;
(c) Improve the quality of leadership and productivity in the City.
(d) Attract and retain qualified persons for city service.
85.02. Responsibility. All employees are responsible to know and adhere to these policies.
Department Heads and other management employees will ensure these policies are carried out by
department employees.
85.03. Common Council Review. These policies shall be reviewed by the Common Council
during its annual budget deliberations, and from time to time, as deemed necessary by the
governing body.
85.04. City Policy. It is the governing body’s policy to have a highly-trained, proficient work
force delivering municipal services to residents. Formal education attainment is an important
component of this policy. The following formal education targets are established by the City:
(a) City Administrator Master’s Degree
(b) City Clerk & Department Heads Master’s Degree
(c) Public Safety Employees Bachelor’s Degree
(d) Other employees Associate’s Degree
(e) Mid-management Employees Bachelor’s Degree
85.05. Educational Assistance. The City of Ashland may reimburse up to fifty (50%) percent of
the cost of tuition. Employees participating in this program are required to remain with the City
for at least five (5) years after the completion of their course.
85.06. Eligibility. To qualify for financial reimbursement, employees must meet the following
conditions:
Page 85-2
(a) The employee must have completed his or her probationary period.
(b) Employee must have completed state-required and other nationally-recognized
professional certifications.
(c) The employee must be a full-time worker, working at least 35 hours a week.
(d) Course work must relate to the employee’s present position or be toward a degree which
relates to the employee’s present position.
(e) Course work must be at an accredited college or university.
(f) Classes must be taken for credit and completed. Audits, incompletes and withdrawals are
not eligible for reimbursement.
(g) No reimbursement shall be made if an employee fails to receive at least a C grade for the
classes.
(h) No educational assistance for degree programs will be provided beyond the city’s formal
education target for that position unless the Department Head and City Administrator agree
specific courses would be beneficial to the person’s ability to perform the duties of their position.
(i) No reimbursement shall be made if an employee is eligible for or receiving educational
benefits under the G.I. Bill of Rights and/or any type of scholarship, fellowship or grant unless it
is inadequate to reimburse the employee as provided in this chapter. In these cases,
reimbursement shall be limited to the difference between the course cost and any financial
assistance provided by organizations outside the city.
85.07. Annual Appropriation. All education assistance programs offered by the City of
Ashland shall be subject to annual appropriation by the Common Council. In the event that the
Common Council chooses to not provide funding for education assistance, the City shall not be
considered to be obligated to provide any reimbursement of costs related to tuition for classes. If
requests for education assistance exceed funding provided by the Council, the Mayor and City
Administrator shall determine program participation based upon a decision of greatest benefit to
the City.
85.08. Participation Procedure. The following procedures will govern the city’s educational
assistance programs:
(a) Before enrolling, the employee must submit a written request to his or her Department
Head at least two months prior to the course commencement. The written request will be
accompanied by copies of diplomas, transcripts and degree requirements.
(b) The Department Head’s recommendations will be forwarded to the City Administrator for
review. The City Administrator is authorized to approve the course request for non-management
employees.
Page 85-3
(c) Management employee’s (City Administrator, City Clerk and Department Heads) coursework
requests will be forwarded to the City Administrator and Mayor for action.
(d) Upon successful completion of the course(s), the employee will submit to the City
Administrator a copy of the grade transcript and receipts for tuition and fees. Grade transcripts
and tuition receipts presented more than six (6) months after the course completion date may not
be considered for reimbursement. The closing date of the quarter or semester will be used to
determine the course completion date.
85.09. Attendance. Employees will make arrangements to attend such courses outside their
regularly scheduled work hours.
85.10. Termination. If the employee voluntarily terminates his employment or is terminated for
cause prior to completing five (5) calendar years of service following reimbursement of tuition
and fees, the amount paid by the city will be withheld from the employee’s final paycheck. No
reimbursement by the employee will be required in the cases of a termination through a
reduction of force.
85.11. Records. The City Administrator shall be responsible for maintaining a record of all
courses employees take under this program. This record shall become a part of the employee’s
official personnel file.
85.12. Tax Liability. Employees will assume their own tax liability with regards to any monies
received through the City’s Educational Assistance Program.
ADOPTED: 85 (1339) 1/25/1995
AMENDMENTS: 85 (1387) 2/11/1997; 85 (1552) 10/8/2002
Page 116-1
CHAPTER 116. REGULATION OF THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES OF THE
STREET DEPARTMENT.
116.01. Number of Employees. The employees of the Street Department of the City of Ashland
shall at no time exceed twenty-one in number, exclusive of the Street Commissioner, provided,
however, that additional employees may be engaged from time to time upon the approval of the
Mayor and Board of Public Works.
ADOPTED: 116 (630) 11/29/1956
CHAPTER 123. PROHIBITING INTERFERENCE WITH THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
WORKS AND WITH PERSONS EXECUTING CONTRACTS WITH THE CITY.
123.01. Director of Public Works. No person shall hinder or obstruct the Director of Public Works or
designee of the City of Ashland in the performance of any duty charged upon Director or designee by the
Job Description.
123.02 Contractors. No person or persons shall hinder, obstruct or prevent or in any manner interfere
with any person who may have taken a contract from the City of Ashland for any street or other work,
whether chargeable to the lots or otherwise, in repairing any street, alley or sidewalk or putting down any
curb, gutter, sidewalk, or paving or in grading any street, alley or sidewalk, or in removing any curb,
gutter, sidewalk, or pavement.
123.03. Violators. Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof
forfeit a penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.
ADOPTED: 123 (2016-1868) 2/09/2016
Page 131-1
CHAPTER 131. CITY WORK FOR PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS.
131.01. Driveways and Sidewalks. The City shall not pave driveways or construct sidewalks
when these services are privately available, unless it is part of a City project. The extent of the
paving will be limited to that identified by the construction project.
131.02. Trash Hauling. Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the City shall not provide
the service of hauling trash and/or rubbish when these services are privately available, unless it
is part of a City contract or scheduled City event. The City will have trash and/or rubbish picked
up at the landowner’s expense when such material becomes a nuisance or health hazard. Before
such action would be taken, notification will be given to the property owner.
ADOPTED: 131 (1223) 4/10/1990
Page 133-1
CHAPTER 133. MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF CITY RECORDS.
133.01 Definitions.
(a) “Authority” means any of the following City entities having custody of a City record: an
office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee, council, department or public
body corporate and politic created by constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally
constituted sub-unit of the foregoing.
(b) “Custodian” means that officer, department head, division head, or employee of the City
designated under sub. (3) or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any City records
or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to
possession of such public records and who is required by this section to respond to requests for
access to such records.
(c) “Record” means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or
electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. Record includes, but is
not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings,
tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. Record does not include drafts, notes,
preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator’s personal use or
prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials
which are purely the purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his or
her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published
materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for
sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library.
133.02. Duty to Maintain Records.
(a) Possession by Officers. Except as otherwise provided by law, each officer and employee
of the City shall safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her predecessor or
other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his or her office or which are
in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the
possession or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or
employees.
(b) Passing Records to Successors. Upon the expiration of an officer’s term of office or an
employee’s term of employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes
vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her successor all records then in his
or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file
said receipt with the City Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies,
such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be
delivered to such successor upon the latter’s receipt.
133.03. Legal Custodians.
Page 133-2
(a) Elected Officials. Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the
records of his or her office, but the official may designate an employee of his or her staff to act
as the legal custodian.
(b) City Clerk. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the City Clerk or the Clerk’s Designee shall
act as legal custodian for the Common Council and for any committees, commissions, boards, or
other authorities created by Ordinance or Resolution of the Common Council.
(c) Other Authorities. For every authority not specified in subs. (a) or (b), the authority’s
chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate
an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(d) Legal Custodian. Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his
or her absence or the absence of his or her designee.
(e) Power of Legal Custodian. The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render
decisions and to carry out the duties of an authority under subchapter 11 of chapter 19,
Wisconsin Statutes, and this section. The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the
powers and duties of an authority under this section.
133.04 Public Access to Records.
(a) Inspection of Records. Except as otherwise provided by law, any person has a right to
inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Section 19.35(1), Wis.
Stats.
(b) Availability of Records. Records will be available for inspection and copying during all
regular office hours.
(c) Office Hours. If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are
kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48 hours advance
notice of intent to inspect or copy.
(d) Requester. A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available
to city employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
(e) Supervision During Inspection. The legal custodian may require supervision during
inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original
record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(f) Requester Fee. A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and
copying records as follows:
(1) The cost of photocopying shall be as provided in the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee
Schedule. Said cost has been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and direct cost of
reproduction.
Page 133-3
(2) If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost
of photographing and photographic processing shall be charged.
(3) The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper,
such as films, computer printouts and audio- or video-tapes, shall be charged.
(4) If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged.
(5) There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefor exceeds
$50.00, in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and
billed to the requester.
(6) The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and may require a
cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such estimate exceeds $5.00.
(7) Elected and appointed officials of the City of Ashland shall not be required to pay for
public records they may reasonably require for the proper performance of their official
duties.
(8) The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or at a reduced
charge where he or she determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest. The charge for Council, Committee of the Whole and Plan Commission packets
shall be as listed in the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule. The Annual
Budget Book and the Zoning Ordinance shall be available at a rate of $10 each. This fee
may be adjusted annually by the City Clerk to reflect inflation and/or actual increased
costs of reproduction.
(g) Public Records Notice. Pursuant to sec. 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein
listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and
copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its
organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and
the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody,
make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. Each authority
shall also prominently display at its offices for the guidance of the public, a copy of subsections
133.04(f)(4) through (6) of this ordinance. This subsection does not apply to members of the
common council.
133.05. Access Procedures.
(a) Requesting a Copy. A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal
custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or
the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to
subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request.
A request may be made orally, but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the
request is commenced under section 19.37, Statutes. Except as provided below, no request may
be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified or to state the
Page 133-4
purpose of the request. No request may be refused because the request is received by mail,
unless prepayment of a fee is required under subsection 133.04(f)(6). A requester may be
required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record is kept at a private
residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so require.
(b) Fulfilling requests. Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as
practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority’s
determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor. If the legal
custodian, after conferring with the city attorney, determines that a written request is so general
as to be unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his
or her request in a manner which would permit reasonable compliance.
(c) Denying Requests. A request for a record may be denied as provided in sec. 133.06. If a
request is made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written statement
of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within five business days of the oral
denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall receive a written
statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform
the requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the determination is
subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under sec. 19.37 (1), Wis. Stats., or upon
application to the attorney general or a district attorney.
133.06. Limitations on Right to Access.
(a) Exemptions As provided by sec. 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records are exempt
from inspection under this section:
(1) Records specifically exempt from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to
be exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2) Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement
purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption
from disclosure is a condition to receipt or aids by the state;
(3) Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer program or
the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4) A record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common
law trade secret.
(5) As provided by section 43.30 Statutes, public library, circulation records are exempt
from inspection under this section.
(b) Responding to Copy Requests. In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a
record which is not specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring
with the city attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he or she determines that
the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in
full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused
Page 133-5
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and
given in order to obtain the information contained in them.
(2) Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
(3) Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion,
demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline or any city officer or employee, or
the investigation of charges against a city officer or employee, unless such officer or
employee consents to such disclosure.
(4) Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention.
(5) Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of city property,
investing of city funds, or other city business whenever competitive or bargaining
reasons require nondisclosure.
(6) Financial, medical, social, or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific
persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the
reputation of any person referred to in such history or data.
(7) Communications between legal counsel for the city and any officer, agent or
employee of the city, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to
current litigation in which the city or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is
likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under section 905.03,
Statutes.
(d) Private Information. If a record contains information that may be made public and
information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the
information that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made
public from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the City Attorney
prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the City Attorney
when separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian and the
City Attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the
nonexempt material without unreasonable jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt
material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
133.07. Destruction of Records. City officers may destroy the following nonutility financial
records of which they are legal custodians and which are considered obsolete, after completion
of any required audit by the bureau of municipal audit or an auditor licensed under Chapter 442
of the Wisconsin Statutes, but not less than seven years after payment or receipt of any sum
involved in the particular transition, unless a shorter period has been fixed by the state public
records board pursuant to Section 16.61(3)(c), and then after such shorter period:
(a) Bank statements.
Page 133-6
(b) Canceled checks.
(c) Receipt forms.
(d) Vouchers, etc.
133.08. Conflicts between ordinance and state law. In the event there is any conflict between
this ordinance and state law, state law shall control.
ADOPTED: 133 (998) 12/14/1982
AMENDMENTS: 133 (1006) 4/12/1983; 133 (1384) 8/27/1996; 133 (1545) 6/11/2002
133 (1721) 2/09/2010
Page 134-1
CHAPTER 134. CODE OF ORDINANCES.
134.01. Adoption. Pursuant to the powers granted to the Common Council of the City of
Ashland by sec. 66.0103, Wis. Stats., the Common Council hereby adopts this Code of
Ordinances.
134.02. Copy. A copy of this Code of Ordinances has been on file and open to public inspection
in the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Ashland for a period of not less than 2 weeks
before the adoption of this ordinance.
134.05. Access. A copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be permanently on file and open to
public inspection in the office of the City Clerk for the City of Ashland.
134.04. Repeal. All prior ordinances in effect on the date of approval of this Code and
incorporated in this Code are repealed and replaced by this Code.
134.05. Citation. This Code may be cited as “Ashland City Ordinances.” Chapters or sections
of the Code may be cited as “Chapter X of the Ashland City Ordinances” or sec. XX.XX of the
Ashland City Ordinances.”
134.06. Amendments.
(a) Amendments shall be made by an amendatory ordinance with a sequential number
that includes reference to the year of approval; for example, an ordinance approved in the year
2015 may be numbered “Ordinance No. 2015-XXX.”
(b) Amendatory ordinances shall be styled in substantially the form that follows:
Ordinance No.
An ordinance adopted by the Common Council for the City of Ashland at its regular meeting of
, 20xx, for the purpose of , by
amending [or creating, or repealing, or repealing and recreating] Sec ,
Ashland City Ordinances.
(c) Only the substantive language of the amendment shall be included in this Code of
Ordinances.
134.06. Section headings. Section and subsection headings are for the convenience of the
reader and are not part of the Code.
134.07. Conflict with statute. If any chapter, section, or subsection of this Code, or any part
thereof, or any amendment hereto, is in conflict with any applicable state statute, the statute shall
control, and the remainder hereof not in conflict with the statute shall not be affected thereby and
shall remain in full force and effect.
Page 134-2
134.08. Severability. If any chapter, section, or subsection of this Code, or any part thereof, or
any amendment hereto, is found to be unlawful for any reason by a Court of competent
jurisdiction the remainder hereof shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and
effect.
ADOPTED: 134 (1011) 6/14/1983
AMENDMENTS: 134 (2015-1840) 3/31/2015
Page 134-3
Page 135-1
CHAPTER 135. PUBLIC FUNDS USED BY OUTSIDE ORGANIZATIONS.
135.01. General Application. This ordinance shall apply to all organizations receiving $500 or
more per year in public funds.
135.02. Yearly Budgets. On or before September 1 of each year, each organization shall submit
a detailed budget for the coming year to the office of the Mayor.
135.03 Budget Details. The budget shall set forth in detail the anticipated revenue and intended
expenditures for the coming year.
135.04. Request for Public Funds. Any organization requesting public funds shall have a
representative present at the meeting of the City Council or Committee of the Whole at which
their budget is scheduled for consideration.
135.05 Yearly Reports. On or before January 31 of each year, each organization shall submit a
written report to the Common Council which shall include:
(a) A detailed account of all disbursements made during the preceding year;
(b) A brief summary of activities carried out by the organization during the preceding year.
135.06. Non-compliance. Failure to meet any of the requirements of this ordinance shall result
in no further disbursement of public funds to the organization until the provision of this
ordinance shall be complied with.
ADOPTED: 135 (1085) 1/13/1987
Page 153-1
CHAPTER 153. WATER UTILITY PAYMENTS TO GENERAL FUND.
153.01. Determining Payment Amounts. Each calendar year commencing with the year of
1970 there shall be paid from the Water Department Fund of the City to the General Fund of the
City an amount equivalent to local and school taxes as provided in Section 66.069 (c) of the
Statutes of the State of Wisconsin, which amount shall be determined by applying the previous
year’s tax rate for local and school purposes to the current book value less reserve for
Depreciation of the water plant and shall be paid in equal monthly installments during the
current year in which collected to the City Treasurer on the last day of each calendar month; and
on the last day of each calendar year there shall be applied to said book value the current year’s
tax rate for such local and school taxes and an adjustment made between the General Fund of the
city and the Water Department fund of the city so as to cause the amount paid during the current
year to be equal to the amount which would have been paid had the current rate of tax been
applied.
153.02. End of Year Payments. In the event that the revenue received by the city under the
provisions of 153.01 of this ordinance shall in any calendar year be less than the sum of Twenty
Thousand Dollars ($20,000), there shall on the last day of each calendar year be paid from the
Water Department Fund to the General Fund of the City an amount equal to the difference
between the amount received for the current year in the form of local and school tax equivalents
and the sum of Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000).
ADOPTED: 153 (809) 10/13/1970
Page 154-1
CHAPTER 154. ACCOMMODATIONS TAX.
154.01. Definitions.
(a) “Hotel” and “Motel” means a building or group of buildings in which the public may
obtain accommodations for a consideration, including without limitation, such establishments as
inns, motels, tourist homes, apartment hotels, resort lodges and cabins and any other building or
group of buildings in which accommodations are available to the public, except accommodations
rented for a continuous period of more than one (1) month and accommodations furnished by
any hospital, sanitarium, or nursing homes, or by corporation or associations organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes provided that no part of the
net earning of such corporations and association inures to the benefit of any private shareholder
or individual.
(b) “Gross Receipts” has the meaning as defined in Sec. 77.51 (1) (A)(B) and (C), Wis.
Stats., insofar as applicable.
(c) “Transient” means any person residing for a continuous period of less than one (1) month
in a hotel/motel or other furnished accommodations available to the public.
154.02. Tax Imposed. Pursuant to Sec. 66.0615, Wis. Stats., a tax is hereby imposed on the
privilege and service of furnishing, at retail rooms, lodging or sites to transients by hotel keepers,
motel operators and other persons furnishing accommodations that are available to the public,
irrespective of whether membership is required for the use of the accommodations.
154.03. Tax Rate. The accommodations tax shall be at the rate of six and one-half (6.5%)
percent of the gross receipts from such retail furnishing of rooms, lodging or sites. The tax shall
not be subject to the selective sales tax imposed by Sec. 77.52 (2) (a) 1, Wis. Stats.
(a) The proceeds of the six and one-half (6.5%) percent tax shall be allocated as follows:
(1) 32.31% of the tax proceeds shall go to the City to a special fund earmarked for
waterfront development. Investment and expenditures of the funds for waterfront development
are to be determined at the discretion of the Common Council.
(2) 2.31% of the tax proceeds to the City for administration.
(3) 65.38% of the tax proceeds to the Ashland Area Chamber of Commerce, Inc. (the
“Chamber”).
154.04 Payments by Chamber. Each calendar year for the next twenty-five (25) years,
beginning with calendar year 1998, the Chamber shall pay $26,000.00 of the room tax it receives
to the Bay Area Civic Center, Inc. (the “Civic Center”). Each calendar year, $25,000.00 of such
amount shall be used by the Civic Center only for servicing the presently existing debt of the
Civic Center and such additional debt as may be incurred to construct a women’s locker room,
and $1,000.00 of such amount is to be used for maintenance of the Civic Center building. Such
Page 154-2
$26,000.00 amount shall be paid by the Chamber to the Civic Center in four equal
installments of $6,500.00, approximately quarterly. If the accommodations tax payment to the
Chamber from the City in a given quarter is less than $6,500.00, then the Civic Center is to be
paid the full amount which the Chamber receives for that quarter, with the remaining balance of
the $6,500.00 due to the Civic Center for that quarter to be paid from the next quarterly
accommodation tax payment which the Chamber receives. Any accommodations tax payments
which the Chamber receives from the City which is not paid to the Civic Center shall be used by
the Chamber for the promotion of the hospitality and tourism businesses.
154.05. Chamber and Civic Center Reports. On or before September 1 of every year and of
any other reasonable time as required by the City, the Chamber and Civic Center shall provide
reports and document any evidence that the tax proceeds are being used for the purposes set forth
in sec. 154.04, above.
154.06. Payment of Tax. This section shall be administered by the City Treasurer. The tax
imposed is due and payable within thirty (30) days of the end of each calendar quarter. A return
shall be filed with the Treasurer, by those furnished at retail such room, lodging or sites with the
City on or before the same date on which such tax is due and payable upon a form approved by
the City Treasurer. Every person required to file such quarterly returns shall file an annual
calendar year return. Such annual return shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the close of each
calendar year.
154.07. Annual Return. The annual return shall summarize the quarterly returns, reconcile and
adjust for errors in the quarterly returns, and shall contain certain such additional information as
the Treasurer requires. The Treasurer may, for good cause, extend the time for filing any return,
but in no event longer than one (1) month from the filing date.
154.08. Permit Application. Every person furnishing rooms, lodging or sites under sec.
154.01(a) shall file with the Treasurer an application for a permit for each place of business.
Every application for a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the Treasurer. At the
time of making an application, the applicant shall pay the Treasurer a fee as set forth in the
City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
154.09. Issuance of Permit. Upon compliance by the applicant with all applicable provisions of
this Chapter, the Treasurer shall grant and issue a permit to each hotel. Such permit is not
assignable and is valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and for the transaction of
business at the place designated therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the
place for which issued.
154.10. Failure to Comply. When a person fails to comply with this section, the Treasurer may,
upon ten (10) days notification and after affording such person the opportunity to show cause
why his permit should not be revoked, revoke or suspend any or all of the permits held by such
person under this ordinance.
154.11. Notice of Suspension/Revocation. The Treasurer shall give to such person written
notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his permits. The Treasurer shall not issue a new
Page 154-3
permit after the revocation of a permit until said person complies with the provision of this
section. A fee as set forth in the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall be imposed for the
renewal or issuance of a permit which has been previously suspended or revoked.
154.12. Liability. If any person liable for any amount of tax under this section sells out his
business or stock of goods or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall be responsible for
any unpaid tax due under this ordinance.
154.13. Determination of Payment. The Treasurer may, by office or field audit, determine the
tax required to be paid to the municipality or the refund due to any person under this section.
This determination may be made upon the basis of the facts contained in the return being audited
or on the basis of any other information within the Treasurer's possession.
154.14. Failure to File. If any person fails to file a return as required by this section, the
Treasurer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts. Such estimates shall be
made for the period for which such person failed to make a return. On the basis of this estimate,
the Treasurer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the City, adding to
the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof.
154.15. Unpaid Taxes. All unpaid taxes under this section shall bear interest at the rate of ten
percent (10%) per annum from the due date of the return until paid.
154.16. Delinquent Tax Returns. Delinquent tax returns shall be subject to a ten and no/100
dollars ($10.00) late filing fee. In addition, if due to negligence no return is filed, or a return is
filed late, the entire tax finally determined shall be subject to a penalty of twenty-five percent
(25%) of the tax, exclusive of any interest or other penalties. If a person fails to file a return
when due or file a false or fraudulent return with the intent in either case to defeat or evade the
tax imposed by this section, a penalty of fifty percent (50%) shall be added to the tax required to
be paid, exclusive of interest and other penalties.
154.17. Records. Every person liable for the tax imposed by this section shall keep or cause to
be kept such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the Treasurer
requires.
154.18. Confidentiality. All tax returns, schedules, exhibits, writings or audit reports relating to
such returns of file with the Treasurer are deemed to be confidential, except the Treasurer may
divulge their contents to the following and no others:
(a) The person who filed the return.
(b) Officers, or agents of the City as may be necessary to enforce collection.
(c) Any person who is subject to the tax imposed by this section who fails to obtain a permit
as required by this Chapter or who fails or refused to permit the inspection of his state sales tax
records by the Treasurer after such inspection has been duly requested by the Treasurer, or who
fails to file a return as provided in this section, or who violates any other provision of this
Page 154-4
section, shall be subject to a forfeiture not to exceed two hundred and no/100 dollars ($200.00).
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
ADOPTED: 154 (982) 4/13/1982
AMENDMENTS: 154 (984) 5/11/1982; 154 (1115) 10/13/1987; 154 (1311) 2/8/1994
154 (1423) 12/2/1997; 154 (1592) 8/10/2004;
154 (2016-1867) 02/09/2016;
Page 182-1
CHAPTER 182. ELIMINATING THE REQUIREMENT OF THE TREASURER
PROVIDING A BOND TO THE COUNTY TREASURER.
182.01 Elimination of Bond Requirement. The Treasurer of the City of Ashland shall not be
required to give bond to the County Treasurer for the faithful performance of the duties of his or
her office, and particularly that he or she will account for and pay over according to law all taxes
of any kind which shall come into his or her hands and which he or she is required to pay to the
County Treasurer, and that in lieu thereof the said City does obligate itself to pay in case the said
Treasurer of the City of Ashland shall fail to do so, all state and county taxes required by law to
be paid by such treasurer to the said county treasurer; and that a certified copy of this ordinance
shall be filed with the Treasurer of the County of Ashland.
ADOPTED: 182 (516) 12/13/1949
Page 183-1
CHAPTER 183. ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM OF APPROVING FINANCIAL CLAIMS.
183.01. Approval of Claims. The Common Council of the City of Ashland hereby approves the
alternative system of approving financial claims against the municipal treasury other than claims
subject to Sec. 893.80, Wis. Stats., as provided by Sec. 66.0609, Wis. Stats.
183.02. Payments. Payments of financial claims against the municipal treasury may be made
from the City treasury after the Comptroller of the City audits and approves each claim as a
proper charge against the treasury and endorses his or her approval on the claim after having
determined that all of the following conditions have been complied with:
(a) That funds are available for the claim pursuant to the budget approved by the governing
body.
(b) That the item or service covered by the claim has been duly authorized by the proper
official, Department Head, Board or Commission.
(c) That the item or service has been actually supplied or rendered in conformity with the
authorization described in par. b.
(d) That the claim is just and valid pursuant to law. The Comptroller or Clerk may require
the submission of proof to support the claim as the officer considers necessary.
183.03 Monthly list of approved claims.. The Comptroller shall file with the governing body
not less than monthly a list of the claims approved, showing the date paid, name of the claimant,
purpose and amount.
183.04 Annual Audit. The governing body of the City shall obtain an annual detailed audit of
its financial transactions and accounts by a certified public accountant licensed or certified under
Wisconsin Statute Chapter 442 and designated by the governing body.
183.05. Fidelity bond. The Comptroller shall be covered by a fidelity bond of not less than
$5,000.00.
ADOPTED: 183 (1711) 7/27/2009
Page 194-1
CHAPTER 194. PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND APPROVAL OF
CHANGE ORDERS FOR PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.
Sec. 194.01. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
listed below.
(a) “Bid” means a bid or quote or, in the case of a service, a proposal or a statement of
qualifications.
(b) “If sufficient funds are budgeted” means, in the case of operation expenditures, that
the funds are in the current year’s budget; or in the case of capital expenditures, that the funds
are in the current year’s budget and that the City Council has approved an expenditure for the
particular capital item; or in either case, that the expenditure will be reimbursed to the City by a
third-party, and if not so reimbursed may be placed on the tax roll against real property in the
City, as a special tax, special charge, or special assessment.
(c) The cost of a purchase means the gross cost of the purchase, including the dollar
value of any allowance for a trade-in, and in the case of a capital expenditure includes all costs
capitalized with the purchase, including all costs of putting the purchase into service, such as
transportation, modifications, or repairs.
Sec. 194.02. Purchases of $15,000 or less. Purchases of $15,000 or less may be authorized by
the Department Director if sufficient funds are budgeted, but if the cost is over $5,000 then bids
or proposals must be sought by advertisement or by solicitation, in which case three bids or
proposals must be obtained unless the City Administrator waives the advertising or solicitation
requirement, or any part thereof. The City Administrator may review any purchase or proposed
purchase under this section, and may override the Department Director’s authority under this
section if the City Administrator deems such action in the public interest. This section applies to
the purchase of tangible personal property and to services, including construction contracts for
$15,000 or less.
Sec. 194.03. Purchases of more than $15,000 and less than $30,000. Purchases of more than
$15,000 and less than $30,000 may be authorized by the City Administrator if sufficient funds
are budgeted, but bids or proposals must be sought by advertisement or by solicitation, in which
case three bids or proposals must be obtained unless the City Administrator and Mayor waive the
advertising or solicitation requirement, or any part thereof. This section applies to the purchase
of tangible personal property and to services, including construction contracts for more than
$15,000 and less than $25,000 (or such other amount as by future statutory amendment sec.
62.15, Wis. Stats., requires advertisement and contracting with the lowest responsible bidder).
Sec. 194.04. Purchases of more than $30,000. Purchases of more than $30,000 may be
authorized by the City Council upon advertisement, unless the advertisement requirement is
waived by a majority vote of the City Council. Advertisement may be supplemented by
Page 194-2
solicitation or, upon approval by a majority vote of the City Council, may be substituted for
advertisement. This section applies to the purchase of tangible personal property and to services,
but does not apply to construction contracts under sec. 62.15, Wis. Stats.
Sec. 194.05. Construction contracts.
(a) Construction contracts equal to and exceeding $25,000 (or such other amount as by
future statutory amendment sec. 62.15, Wis. Stats., requires advertisement and contracting with
the lowest responsible bidder) shall be let according to the requirements contained in state
statutes.
(b) Construction contracts for projects where the estimated cost is greater than $5,000
but less than $25,000 (or such other amount as by future statutory amendment sec. 62.15, Wis.
Stats., requires advertisement and contracting with the lowest responsible bidder), may be
procured by requests for proposals or for bids, sought by advertisement or by specific solicitation
as directed by the City Administrator or the Administrator’s designee. If a request for proposals
or for bids is not advertised, then proposals or bids shall be sought from at least three contractors.
Prior to the letting of any contract under this section, a class 1 notice must be published of the
intended construction and contracting, unless the material or labor for the project are donated, or
unless the project is for repair and reconstruction due to an emergency. Any contract under this
subsection may be authorized by the City Administrator or the Administrator’s designee if
sufficient funds are budgeted.
(c) Any of the following classes of public construction or any part thereof may be done
by the City without submitting the same for bids:
(1) Roadway work, including: Storm Water system repair, replacement and
reconstruction; sidewalk repair, replacement and reconstruction; curb/gutter repair, replacement
and reconstruction; replacement of street lighting; addition and replacement of street signage;
street painting; and replacement and conditioning of gravel and paving.
(2) Water utility work, including: Distribution system repair, replacement and
reconstruction; treatment plant & storage facilities component repair and replacement.
(3) Wastewater Work, including: Collection system repair, replacement and
reconstruction; treatment plant & pumping facilities component repair and replacement.
(d) Any other class approved by a vote of three-fourths of the members-elect of the City
Council.
Sec. 194.06. Exceptions. Bids are not required for the following purchases:
(a) Operating supplies and maintenance agreements, except items budgeted under series
800 object codes.
Page 194-3
(b) Products for which only one supplier exists.
(c) Emergency purchases, such that the time spent to obtain bids would threaten health,
safety, the environment, and public or private property.
Sec. 194.07. Change orders.
(a) Change orders on City contracts may be approved by the City Administrator if the
amount of the change order is less than $25,000 and if there is a contract contingency fund
sufficient to cover the amount of the change order.
(b) Change orders on City contracts may be approved by the City Administrator in
excess of the total budgeted amount for a project, including the contingency fund, upon request
of the Department Director and the approval of the Finance Director to rebudget department
funds but for no more than $25,000.
(c) All other change orders must be approved by the City Council.
ADOPTED: 194 (2015-1848) 8-11-2015
Page 195-1
CHAPTER 195. VOLUNTARY SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR SEWER
IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE CORRECTION OF INFLOW AND INFILTRATION
PROBLEMS.
195.01. Authority. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to sections 66.0701 and 62.11(5), Wis.
Stats.
195.02. Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the securitization of financial assistance
provided to landowners for the purpose of correcting inflow and infiltration sources originating
from private property. The power of special assessment as provided for in this Chapter shall
only be exercised against a parcel of real property with the consent of the owner of the parcel at
the time of the assessment.
(b) Any special assessment made by the City for purposes or under conditions other than as
set forth in subsection (a), above, shall be made under sec. 66.0703, Wis. Stats., except as may
be otherwise specifically provided by ordinance.
195.03. Basis for Assessments. Any assessment made under this Chapter shall be made
pursuant to the City’s police power. The improvement for which each assessment is made shall
provide a benefit to the property against which it is assessed. The correction of inflow and
infiltration problems promotes the public health, comfort, convenience, and welfare of the City
by reducing the volume of water that is treated by the City’s sanitary sewer treatment facility,
thereby protecting the environment by allowing the more efficient operation of the treatment
facility and by reducing the occurrence of untreated sewage being discharged to surface waters.
195.04. Public Improvements for Which Special Assessments May be Levied. Pursuant to
sec. 66.0713(d), Wis. Stats., a public improvement is the result of the performance of work or the
furnishing of materials or both, for which special assessments are authorized to be levied against
the property benefited by the work or materials. A special assessment may be levied under this
Chapter for costs associated with the following public improvements:
(a) Disconnection of sump pumps to sanitary sewer lines.
(b) Elimination of drain tile connections to sanitary sewer lines.
(c) Repair or replacement of service laterals;
(d) Separation of service laterals;
(e) Disconnection of roof drains, downspouts, area drains, and other sources of inflow and
infiltration.
Page 195-2
195.05. Procedure.
(a) The owner of a parcel of real property within the City who desires to obtain financial
assistance in the form of a loan from the City for a public improvement under sec. 195.04, shall
apply to the City for such a loan, providing to the City all of the following:
(1) The name, mailing address, and phone number(s) of the contact person for the loan
application.
(2) The names and mailing addresses of all owners of the property, whether any of them
are married, and whether the property is the homestead of any of them.
(3) The location of the property including, as available, the street address, fire number,
legal description, and parcel identification number.
(4) The amount of the loan requested and the purpose.
(5) At least two contractors’ written estimates of the cost of providing the public
improvement for which the loan is requested.
(6) A statement, provided by the City, signed by all owners, indicating that each owner
understands that the amount of the loan will be secured by a special assessment against
the property and which will require annual payments to retire.
(b) The City may require an application fee in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of a
title report on the property and any other costs associated with processing the application.
(c) Upon receipt of an application as provided in subsection (a), above, the City Clerk shall
obtain a title report on the property confirming the names of the owners, the legal description of
the property, and the existence of any liens on the property. The City Clerk shall then determine
whether or not to grant a loan, based upon availability of funds, cost estimates, and prior liens. If
the City Clerk refuses to grant a loan, the Clerk shall provide a written notice to the applicant,
with a reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the denial of the loan to the City Council
by filing with the City Clerk, within ten days of the date of the denial, a written request for
Council review. If the City Clerk decides to grant a loan, then the Clerk shall provide a written
notice to the applicant, containing the following:
(1) The principal amount of the loan to be granted, which shall be equal to the special
assessment levied.
(2) The interest rate to be applied to the principal amount of the loan and special
assessment.
(3) The number of annual installments to be made to pay off the loan and special
assessment, the due date of the initial installment and of the subsequent installments, the
Page 195-3
amount of each installment, and whether any penalties attach for failure to make a
payment by its due date.
(4) Space provided for the notarized signatures of each of the owners stating (A) whether
they wish to have a hearing on the special assessment or wish to waive the hearing and
(B) stating whether they accept the terms of the loan and special assessment or not, and a
request that if the owners accept the terms as stated, they should return the statement,
signed and notarized, to the City.
(d) If all of the owners do not waive their right to a hearing on the special assessment, the
City Clerk shall, schedule a hearing before the City Council no less than 10 days and no more
than 40 days notice to the owners. Notice shall be provided by first class mail to the address
given by the owners in their application. In lieu of scheduling a hearing, the City Clerk may
provide notice to the owners that the special assessment shall not be levied and the loan
application shall be denied.
(e) If all of the owners waive their right to a hearing and if they have provided the signed and
notarized statement of the owners accepting the terms of the loan and special assessment, the
City may approve a special assessment resolution. The resolution shall contain the following:
(1) The nature and location (including legal description of the real property against
which the special assessment shall be levied) of the public improvements to be funded by
the special assessment.
(2) The cost of the public improvements to be funded by the special assessment.
(3) A statement that the special assessment is made pursuant to the City’s police power
and that a benefit shall be provided to the property against which the special assessment
is levied.
(4) The number, amount, and due dates of the installments to be permitted to pay the
special assessment, and whether any penalties attach for failure to make a payment by its
due date.
(5) A notice to the owner, substantially in the form as provided in sec. 66.0715(3)(e),
Wis. Stats., advising the owner of the right to elect to pay off the entire special
assessment by the following November 1, by providing to the City within 30 days of the
date of the notice a written statement making such election, and providing further that,
unless such election is revoked in writing, if the owner fails to pay the special assessment
by November 1, the entire assessment shall be placed on the following tax roll. An
owner who wishes to pay the special assessment in installments as provided in the
resolution need not take any action pursuant to the notice.
(6) The statement that all assessments or installments that are not paid by the due date
shall be extended upon the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property, and all
Page 195-4
proceedings in relation to the collection, return, and sale of property for delinquent real
estate taxes apply to the special assessment, except as provided by statute.
(7) Notification that the owner of the real property against which the special assessment
is levied has the right to appeal in the manner prescribed by sec. 66.0703(12) within 40
days of the date of approval of the resolution, that no funds will be released until the
wishes to cancel the special assessment during the 40 day period the owner may do so by
providing written notice to the City.
(8) Provide that if the special assessment is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid for any reason, the owners and their successors and assigns, upon request of
the City, shall execute a mortgage on the property against which the special assessment
was levied, for the amount of the loan then unpaid, with repayment terms as provided in
the special assessment resolution.
(f) Upon expiration of the appeal period, the City may release the funds upon such proof of
work and receipt of such construction lien waivers as the City deems prudent. No loan shall be
made without a special assessment to secure it.
195.06. Effect of Special Assessment.
(a) All assessments or installments that are not paid by the due date shall be extended upon
the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property, and all proceedings in relation to the
collection, return, and sale of property for delinquent real estate taxes apply to the special
assessment, except as provided by statute.
(b) A special assessment is a lien on the property against which it is levied from the date of
the levy.
195.07. Special Assessment Installments. Sec. 66.0715(1) and (3), Wis. Stats., are
incorporated by reference.
195.08. Special Assessment Found Invalid. If any special assessment levied under this Chapter
shall be found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, the City may reassess
the special assessment under any applicable law, or proceed against the owner of the
property in person for recovery of any unpaid amount of the special assessment.
ADOPTED: 195 (1828) 4/15/14
Page 201-1
CHAPTER 201. GENERAL CONDUCT ORDINANCE.
201.01. Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks. No person shall stand, sit, loaf or engage in any
sport or exercise on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground within the City in such
manner as to prevent or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to
prevent or hinder free ingress or egress to or from any place of business or amusement, church,
public hall or meeting place.
201.02. Littering and Garbage Disposal.
(a) Definitions. As used in this chapter, the words “garbage,” “refuse,” and “ashes” have the
following meanings:
(1) Garbage. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption
of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
(2) Refuse. Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes,
barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding; \
noncombustible trash, including but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt,
small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste;
street rubbish, including but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt,
contents of litter receptacles. Provided, refuse shall not include earth and wastes from
building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes
and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders,
lumber, scraps and shavings.
(3) Ashes. Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
(b) Littering Prohibited. No person shall leave, place, throw or deposit or cause or permit any
other person to leave, place, throw or deposit, in or upon any street or public place, or in or upon
any vacant or private lot or premises, any ashes, rubbish, garbage, refuse or other like or similar
substances or materials.
(c) Garbage Disposal. It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city
any garbage, or other material subject to decay other than leaves or grass, except in a tightly
covered container.
(d) Dust/Ash Disposal. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes
or trash of such a material that it can be blown away by the wind anywhere in the city except in a
covered container.
(e) Littering from Vehicle. It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle
any garbage, refuse, or ashes on any public street or alley in the city; provided, that this section
shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse, or ashes in a container complying with
the provisions of this ordinance preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in
the manner provided herein.
Page 201-2
(f) Dumping Without Consent. It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse or
ashes on any premises in the city without the consent of the owner of such premises.
201.03. Disorderly Conduct.
(a) Disorderly Conduct Prohibited: Whoever does any of the following shall be guilty of an
offense:
(1) The provisions of sec. 947.01 Wis. Stats., pertaining to Disorderly Conduct, exclusive
of the penalties provided in said Statute, are adopted and incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein.
(2) Intentionally engages in fighting or in violent, threatening or tumultuous behavior; or
who addresses abusive language or threats to any other person to the extent that it creates
a clear and present danger or violence; or in the presence of others encourages others to
create disturbance of public order or encourages acts likely to produce violence or create
a disturbance of public order; or who causes the likelihood of harm or serious
inconvenience by failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer, where
three (3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate
vicinity.
(3) Intentionally damages, befouls, or disturbs public property or the property of another
so as to create a hazard, unhealthy, or physically offensive condition.
(4) Intentionally commits a trespass on residential property or on public property.
(b) False Fire Alarms Prohibited. No person shall give or send or cause to be given or sent in
any manner any alarm of fire which he knows to be false.
(c) Resisting or Obstructing Law Enforcement Officer.
(1) No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct a law enforcement officer while such
officer is doing any act in an official capacity and with lawful authority.
(2) “Obstructs” includes without limitation knowingly giving false information to the
officer or knowingly placing physical evidence with intent to mislead the officer in the
performance of his or her duty including the service of any summons or civil process.
(d) Obedience to Officers. No person shall, without reasonable cause or justification, resist or
in any way interfere with any officer of the City while such officer is doing any act in his official
capacity and with lawful authority.
(e) Disorderly Conduct with a Motor Vehicle. No person shall, within the City, on public or
private property, by or through the use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile or mini-bike,
Page 201-3
under circumstances which tend to cause or provoke a disturbance or annoy one or more
persons, engage in violent, abusive unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct, including
but not limited to unnecessary or deliberate or intentional spinning of wheels, squealing of tires,
revving of engine, blowing of horns, causing the engine to backfire or causing the vehicle while
commencing to move or while in motion to raise one or more of its wheels off the ground.
201.04. Vandalism. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of vandalism in the City
of Ashland. Vandalism as used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
(a) The intentional or willful damaging or defacing of another person’s real or personal
property without the other person’s consent.
(b) The intentional or willful damaging, defacing, concealing or impairing the use of any real
estate or personal property in which another has a property interest, without the consent of the
other person, firm or corporation or an agent thereof.
201.05. Unlawful Trespassing on Railroad Property.
(a) Trespassing. It shall be unlawful for any person to “trespass” upon any property, real or
personally owned or used by any Railroad, within the City limits.
(b) Definition. “Trespass” is defined as entering upon or remaining on the property owned or
used by any railroad, after having been notified not to do so.
(c) Notice/Signage. A person has received notice not to enter upon or remain on railroad
equipment or property if said person has been notified personally, either orally or in writing or
the railroad property is posted with a legible “No Trespassing” sign.
201.06. Trespassing on School Grounds.
(a) Trespassing. It shall be unlawful for any person to “trespass” upon any property used by
the School District of Ashland for school purposes.
(b) Definition. “Trespass” is defined as entering, being upon, or remaining on the property
used by the School District of Ashland for school purposes after having been notified not to do
so by any School District of Ashland principal, administrator, or teacher, or an officer of the
Ashland Police Department.
(c) Notice/Signage. A person has received notice from any of the individuals listed in (b)
above if said person has been notified personally, either orally or in writing.
201.07. Lewdness. Whoever does any of the following acts in public shall be guilty of an
offense:
Page 201-4
(a) Indecent Acts. Commits an indecent act of sexual gratification, alone or with another,
with knowledge that he is in the presence of others.
(b) Indecent Exposer. Publicly or indecently exposes a sex organ, buttocks, or in case of a
woman, her breasts.
201.08. Shoplifting. The provisions of sec. 943.50, Wis. Stats., pertaining to shoplifting
exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute are adopted and incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein.
201.09. Spitting in Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or emit any spittle
or to discharge or throw any mucus or other secretion from or contents of the mouth or nose or
any cigarette or cigar stub, tobacco quid, fruit peeling, or other waste substance, on any public
floor, stairway, sidewalk, platform, or other public place or conveyance in the city, and such
practice is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and an offense against decency and public
morality.
201.10. Compulsory School Attendance and Truancy. The provisions of secs. 118.163 and
948.45, Wis. Stats., are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully set forth herein.
(a) Truancy Prohibited. No person between the ages of 6 and 18 shall be truant from school
without an acceptable excuse under secs. 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats.
(b) Habitual Truancy Prohibited. No person between the ages of 6 and 18 shall be habitually
truant from school without an acceptable excuse under secs. 118.15 and 118.16(4), Wis. Stats.
(c) School Dropout Prohibited. No person at least 16 years of age, but less than 18 years of
age, shall be a “dropout” from school without an acceptable excuse under sec. 118.15(1)(b)2(d)
or (3), Wis. Stats.
(d) Contributing to Truancy Prohibited. No person 17 years of age or older by any act or
omission, knowingly encourage or contribute to the truancy of a person 17 years of age or under.
(e) Enforcement. A Police Officer having probable cause to believe that a child is truant,
habitually truant, or a dropout may issue a citation for a violation of this ordinance.
(f) Penalties. For violation of the truancy provisions, the court may impose any of the
dispositions listed in sec. 118.163(1m)(a)3(c), Wis. Stats. For habitual truancy, the court may
impose any of the dispositions listed in sec. 118.163(2)(a)3(1), Wis. Stats.
(g) Dropout Provisions. For violation of the dropout provisions, the court may impose any of
the dispositions under sec. 118.163(2m)(a), Wis. Stats. in addition to all other penalties.
(h) Persons Under 17 years. The provisions of sec. 938.342, Wis. Stats. are adopted by
reference and may be imposed in addition to any other penalty provided by this ordinance against
any person who is under 17 years of age and the date of disposition.
Page 201-5
(i) Forfeitures. For violation of contributing to truancy provisions, a forfeiture of not less than
$100.00 and not more than $250.00, plus court costs may be ordered.
201.11. Possession and use of Alcoholic Beverages by Underage Persons. The provisions of
sec. 125.07, Wis. Stats., and all subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.12. Possession and use of Controlled Substances and Drug Paraphernalia.
(a) Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to have possession of, use, or consume any
“controlled substance” within the City of Ashland. “Controlled substance” means a drug,
substance or immediate precursor as defined in sec. 961.01(4) Wis. Stats.
(b) Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess “drug paraphernalia;”
to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance or controlled substance analog in the City
of Ashland. “Drug paraphernalia” has the definition given in sec. 961.571(1)(a), Wis. Stats.
201.13. Curfew Imposed on Persons Under Eighteen
(a) Hours. It shall be unlawful for any minor under eighteen (18) years to loiter, idle, wander,
stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playground, wharves,
docks, or other public grounds, public places, and public buildings, places of amusement, and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of thirteen (13) to loiter, idle, wander,
stroll, or play upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys parks, playgrounds, wharves,
docks, or other public grounds, public places, and public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 5:00
a.m.
(b) Persons Exempt. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by
his parent or guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where
the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
(c) Duties of Parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly permit the child
to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alley, parks,
grounds, public places, and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant
lots, or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. It shall be
unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a child
under the age of thirteen (13) years to knowingly permit the child to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or
play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, grounds, public places and
public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised
Page 201-6
places between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
201.14. Operation and Use of Bicycles.
(a) State law adopted. The provisions of secs. 346.77 through 346.81, Wis. Stats., are adopted
and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(b) Operation. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall obey each traffic signal
or sign facing a roadway.
201.15. Firearms.
(a) City Limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the City
limits with the exception of the Dog Warden or a sworn law enforcement officer in the line of
duty or at a municipally approved firing range. The provisions of sec. 941.20 (1), Wis. Stats.,
pertaining to reckless use of weapons, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are
adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(b) Transportation. The provisions of sec. 167.31, Wis. Stats., pertaining to the safe use and
transportation of firearms and bows, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are
adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(c) Government Building. Pursuant to sec. 943.13(1m)(c)4, Wis. Stats., no person shall enter
or remain in any part of a building owned, occupied, or controlled by the State or a local
government unit if the State or local government unit has notified the person not to enter or
remain in the building while carrying a firearm or a specific type of firearm.
(d) Signage. The City Administrator shall cause signs to be erected at all entrances to all
buildings owned, occupied, or under the control of the City of Ashland, providing notice that no
person is to enter or remain in any such building while carrying a firearm. Such signs shall be
five (5) inches by seven (7) inches or larger.
(e) Exemptions. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to apply to prohibit a peace
officer or armed forces or military personnel armed in the line of duty or any person duly
authorized by the Chief of Police to possess a firearm in any public building. Notwithstanding
sec. 939.22(22), Wis. Stats., for purposes of this section, peace officer does not include a
commission warden who is not a State certified commission warden.
(f) State Statues. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the carrying of any
firearm or dangerous weapon contrary to sec. 941.23 or 941.235, Wis. Stats.
201.16. Possession of a Pistol by Minor. The provisions of sec. 941.22 (1), Wis. Stats.,
pertaining to Possession of a Pistol by Minor, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute,
are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.17. Carrying Concealed Weapon.
Page 201-7
(a) Licensing. The provisions of sec. 175.60, Wis. Stats. ( License to Carry a Concealed
Weapon) are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. Violations of the
provisions of the statute shall be enforceable by the City of Ashland by issuance of a citation for
a civil forfeiture. The City of Ashland civil forfeiture shall be the maximums of any of the state
forfeitures provided in the penalty section of sec. 175.60, Wis. Stats.
(b) State Statutes. The provisions of sec. 941.23(1), Wis. Stats., pertaining to carrying
concealed weapons, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.18. Possession of Switchblade Knife. The provisions of sec. 941.24, Wis. Stats., pertaining
to Possession of Switchblade Knife, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are
adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.19. Entry into Locked Vehicle. The provisions of sec. 943.11, Wis. Stats., pertaining to
Entry Into Locked Vehicle, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.20. Trespass to Land. The provisions of sec. 943.13 (1) (a-d), Wis. Stats., pertaining to
Trespass to Land, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.21. Trespass to Dwelling. The provisions of sec. 943.14, Wis. Stats., pertaining to Trespass
to Dwelling, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.22. Theft. The provisions of sec. 943.20, Wis. Stats., (Sub (a) only) pertaining to Theft,
exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein.
201.23. Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper. The provisions of sec. 943.21, Wis. Stats.,
pertaining to Fraud on Hotel or Restaurant Keeper, exclusive of the penalties provided in said
statute, are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.24. Use of Cheating Tokens. The provisions of Sec. 943.22, Wis. Stats., pertaining to Use
of Cheating Tokens, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.25. Operating Vehicle Without Owner’s Consent. The provisions of sec. 943.23 (2), Wis.
Stats., pertaining to Operating Vehicle Without Owner’s Consent, exclusive of the penalties
provided in said statute, are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.26. Issue of Worthless Check. The provisions of sec. 943.24 (1), Wis. Stats., pertaining to
Issue of Worthless Check, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and
Page 201-8
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.27. Receiving Stolen Property. The provisions of sec. 943.34 (1), Wis. Stats., pertaining to
Receiving Stolen Property exclusive of the penalties provided in said statute, are adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.28. Unlawful Use of Telephone or Computer. The provisions of secs. 947.012 and
947.0125, Wis. Stats., pertaining to the unlawful use of telephone and the unlawful use of
computerized communication systems, exclusive of the penalties provided in said statutes, are
adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.29. Contributing to the Delinquency of Children. The provisions of sec. 948.40, Wis.
Stats., pertaining to Contributing to the Delinquency of Children, exclusive of the penalties
provided in said statute, are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.30. Prohibiting Swimming Outside of Designated Swimming Areas at Kreher Park.
(a) Safety Line. The designated swimming area at Kreher Park shall be defined by a safety
line with floats which shall be place annually during swimming season as defined by the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
(b) Designated Swim Area. Swimming at Kreher Park shall only be permitted in this
designated swimming area. Anyone swimming outside this area shall be guilty of an offense.
201.31 Prohibiting the Use of Tobacco Products or E-cigarettes in City-Owned Buildings
and Vehicles and on School Grounds.
(a) Use in City-Owned Building or Vehicle. It shall be unlawful to use tobacco products in
any form, including smoking, chewing or other consumption, in any city-owned building or
vehicle. Under the provisions of this subsection, vehicles shall include cars, trucks and any
equipment or machinery which has an enclosed cab.
(b) Vaughn Library Building. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco within ten
feet of the Vaughn Library building. Signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place or places on
the outside of the building to give notice of this restriction.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to use tobacco products in any form, including
smoking, chewing, or other consumption on premises owned or rented by or under the control of
the Ashland School District except as the School District allows pursuant to Sec. 120.12(20),
Wis. Stats.
(d) For purposes of this section, “smoking” or “to smoke” shall mean:
(1) Inhaling, exhaling, burning or holding any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form, or
Page 201-9
(2) Inhaling or exhaling from, holding, or operating any lighted or activated electronic
device which produces and/or delivers nicotine in a vaporized form, or is designed, advertised, or
marketed to do so, including, but not limited to, devices commonly known as electronic
cigarettes or e-cigarettes.
201.32. Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products by Underaged Persons. The provisions
of sec. 254.92, Wis. Stats., pertaining to the purchasing or possession of tobacco products by
underaged persons are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
201.33. Clean Indoor Air. Provisions of sec 101.123, Wis. Stats., (Clean Indoor Air Act) are
hereby adopted by reference.
201.34. Power Loading at City of Ashland Boat Launches. A watercraft owner or operator
shall be allowed to load a boat on a trailer using the boat’s engine. This section shall remain in
effect for one year, expiring on July 31, 2008.
201.35 Face Covering Requirements during the COVID-19 Pandemic
(a) Definitions. As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
“Commercial business” means any for-profit business open to the general public for the
purchase of goods, entertainment or services, including by way of example but not limited
to retail stores (such as grocery stores, convenience stores), restaurants, and service
businesses.
“City and public buildings” means any buildings owned by local government or not for
profit organizations, including public restrooms.
"Face covering" means a material covering the nose and mouth for the purpose of ensuring
the physical health or safety of the wearer or others. A face covering can be secured to the
head with ties or straps or simply wrapped around the lower face. It can be made of a variety
of materials, such as cotton, silk, or linen. A cloth face covering may be factory-made or
sewn by hand or can be improvised from household items such as scarfs, T-shirts,
sweatshirts, or towels. Acceptable, reusable face covering options for the general public
include bandanas, neck gaiters, homemade face coverings, scarves, or tightly woven fabric
such as cotton t-shirts and some types of towels.
“Outdoor Spaces” means any outdoor location where people are unable to distance
themselves a minimum of six feet.
(b) Mask Required. While indoors in any commercial business or City office, and in an
Outdoor Space that is open to the general public, all customers, employees, and any other
occupants or users of such area shall wear a face covering. While wearing a face covering,
social distancing (6’) shall still be maintained so far as possible as described by the Center
for Disease Control and Prevention.
Page 201-10
(c) Exceptions. Exceptions for face coverings will be made under the following
circumstances:
i. A person who cannot wear a face covering due to a medical or behavioral health
condition, including but not limited to anyone who has trouble breathing, or is
unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance;
ii. Children who are under (5) years of age;
iii. A customer dining in a restaurant, while that customer is sitting at his or her
table;
iv. A law enforcement officer or any emergency responder who reasonably deems it
necessary to remove a face covering in the course of his or her duties;
v. A person who reasonably deems it necessary to remove his or her face covering
for safety reasons or in order to carry out his or her job duties.
vi. Persons in settings where it is not practical or feasible to wear face coverings,
including when obtaining or rendering goods or services, such as the receipt of dental
services or medical treatments.
(d) Penalty. Any violation of this Ordinance will be subject to the issuance of a citation as
provided in City of Ashland Ordinances, Chapter 279, and penalties imposed shall be as
described in Section 201.91 of the City’s ordinances.
(e) Expiration. Unless abolished at an earlier date by the City of Ashland Common Council,
this Ordinance shall be effective for so long as any national, state, or local health official
and/or health department continues to declare a public health emergency regarding COVID-
19.
201.36 Enforcement of Public Health Order
(a). Authority. Pursuant to the authority of Chapters 252, Wisconsin Statutes, the City of Ashland
Common Council does hereby establish an ordinance regarding enforcement of orders issued by
Local Health Officers. The provisions and definitions of §§ 252.01 to 252.25, Wis. Stats., and
DHS Ch. 145, Wis. Adm. Code, as they may be from time-to-time amended, are adopted by
reference and incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein.
(b) Violations. Any person who willfully violates or obstructs the execution of any Local Health
Officer Order issued under Ch. 252, Wis. Stats., and/or DHS Ch. 145, Wis. Adm. Code, relating
to the public health, for which no other penalty prescribed, shall, in addition to being subject to
all other legal and equitable actions and relief available to the City of Ashland, be subject to a
forfeiture of not more than $200 for each violation.
Page 201-11
201.37 Enforcement of Emergency Orders.
(a) Authority. Pursuant to the authority of Chapters 323, Wisconsin Statutes, the City of Ashland
Common Council does hereby establish an ordinance regarding enforcement of orders issued by
the Governor or the designate agency to lead emergency response and emergency orders issued
by the City of Ashland. The provisions and definitions of Ch. 323, Wis. Stats, as they may be
from time-to-time amended, are adopted by reference and incorporated into this section as if
fully set forth herein.
(b) Violations. Whoever intentionally fails to comply with an order issued by an agent of the
state or of a local unit of government who is engaged in emergency management activities under
this chapter is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $200 for each violation.
201.91. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which a penalty
is not otherwise provided shall upon conviction thereof be punished as follows:
(a) Forfeiture. He or she shall forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $500 plus the costs of
prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeitures and costs of prosecution shall be
imprisoned in the County Jail until the forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not
exceeding ten (10) days, provided however, that for children fourteen (14) or older who shall be
found violating the provisions of said section, said child shall be dealt with according to the
provision of sec. 48.17 (2), Wis. Stats.
(b) Penalties otherwise provided. For a violation of any other provision of this chapter, he or
she shall be subject to a penalty as provided in this chapter.
(c) Liability. In addition to any penalty imposed under subsections (a) or (b) of this section,
any person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall be liable for
the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed property. The parent or parents of
any unemancipated minor child who violates any provision of tis chapter may also be held liable
for the costs of replacing or repairing the damaged or destroyed property in accordance with sec.
895.035 Wis. Stats.
Adopted: 201 (934) 2/28/1980
Amendments: This Ordinance was previously Codification 301, then this ordinance
was changed to Codification 201 by Codification Ordinance 1372
301 (956) 10/14/1980; 301 (1024) 1/10/1984; 301 (1032) 6/12/1984;
301 (1035) 8/14/1984; 301 (1054) 9/24/1985; 301 (1072) 6/10/1986;
301 (1214) 12/12/1989; 301 (1227) 5/8/1990; 301 (1232) 6/12/1990;
301 (1247) 1/15/1991; 301 (1261) 9/10/1991; 301 (1264) 11/12/1991;
301 (1284) 11/10/1992; 301 (1287) 2/9/1993; 301 (1288) 5/11/1993;
Page 201-12
301 (1356) 9/26/1995; 301 (1361) 11/28/1995
201 (1372) 4/16/1996; 201 (1407) 8/26/1997; 201 (1476) 7/27/1999;
201 (1551) 9/10/2002; 201 (1565) 4/15/2003; 201 (1607) 6/14/2005;
201 (1634) 7/11/2006; 201 (1660) 6/26/2007; 201 (1663) 7/31/2007;
201 (1726) 4/20/2010; 201 (1757) 10/25/2011; 201 (1761) 1/10/2012;
201 (2015-1842) 4/21/2015; 201 (1936) 08/04/2020
Page 202-1
CHAPTER 202. NOISE POLLUTION PREVENTION.
202.01. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the
words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) “A” Band Level. “A” band level shall mean the total sound level of all noise as measured
with a sound level meter using the “A” weighting network. The unit is the dbA.
(b) Ambient Noise. Ambient noise shall mean the all-encompassing noise associated with a
given environment, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far.
(c) Band-pressure Level. Band-pressure level of a sound for a specified frequency band shall
mean the sound-pressure level for the sound contained within the restricted band.
(d) Cycle. Cycle shall mean the complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which
occurs during a period.
(e) CERCLA. The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act
as codified at 42 U.S.C. § 9601, et seq., including any subsequent amendments thereto.
(f) Decibel. Decibel (db) shall mean a unit of level which denotes the ratio between two
quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ration of
two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio.
(g) District. Commercial. Areas zoned Neighborhood Convenience, Regional Commercial,
City Center, Mixed Commercial/Industrial, Waterfront Commercial, and/or Waterfront City
Center. Also included are areas zoned Public Institutional, Public Parks, Future Development,
Planned Residential/Institutional, and/or Waterfront Public Institutional.
(h) District: Industrial. Areas zoned Light Industrial, Heavy Industrial, Airport, and/or
Waterfront Industrial districts.
(i) District: Residential. Areas zoned Residential Estate, Single-Family Residential, Single
and Two-Family Residential, Medium Density Residential, High Density Residential,
Manufactured Home Community, Mixed Residential Commercial, Waterfront Single-Family
Residential, Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial, and/or Waterfront
Conference/Residential Mix districts.
(j) Emergency Work. Emergency work shall mean work made necessary to restore property to
a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from
an imminent exposure to danger.
(k) Frequency. Frequency of a function periodic in time shall mean the reciprocal of the
primitive period. The unit is the cycle per unit time and shall be specified.
Page 202-2
(l) Microbar. Microbar shall mean a unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics and is equal
to one dyne per square centimeter.
(m) Period. Period of a periodic quantity shall mean the smallest increment of time for which
the function repeats itself.
(n) Periodic Quantity. Periodic quantity shall mean oscillating quantity, the values of which
recur for equal increments of time.
(o) Sound Analyzer. Sound analyzer shall mean a device for measuring the band pressure
level or pressure spectrum level of a sound as a function of frequency.
(p) Sound-level Meter. Sound-level meter shall mean an instrument including a microphone,
an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of noise
and sound levels in a specified manner.
(q) Sound-pressure Level. Sound-pressure level in decibels of a sound shall mean twenty
times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the reference
pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated.
(r) Spectrum. Spectrum of a function of time shall mean a description of its resolution into
components, each of a different frequency.
(s) Spills Law. The Wisconsin Spills Law as codified in Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 292,
including any subsequent amendments thereto.
(t) Motor Vehicle. Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle such as, but not limited to, a
passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical
power, and shall include motorcycles, snowmobiles, minibikes, go-carts, and any other vehicle
which is self-propelled.
(u) Sound-amplifying Equipment. Sound-amplifying equipment shall mean any machine or
device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. Sound-amplifying
equipment shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the
occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. Sound-amplifying
equipment, as used in this ordinance, shall not include warning devices or authorized emergency
vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used for traffic safety purposes.
(v) Sound Truck. Sound truck shall mean any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless
of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto,
any sound-amplifying equipment.
(w) Variance. Relief from ordinance requirements.
202.02. Decibel Measurement Criteria. Any decibel measurement made pursuant to the
provisions of this ordinance shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 0.002 microbars as
Page 202-3
measured in any octave band with center frequency, in cycles per second, as follows: 63, 125,
250, 500, 1000, 2000, 4000 and 8000 or as measured with a sound level meter using the “A”
weighting.
202.03. Schools, Hospitals and Churches. It shall be unlawful for any person to create any
noise on any street, sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or
church while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes
with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital,
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalk or public place indicating the
presence of a school, church or hospital.
202.04. Noise Sources/Levels/Hours.
(a) Use Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the City
to use or operate any machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00
a.m. of the following day in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of
neighboring residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitivities residing in the area.
(b) Prima Facie Violation. Any noise exceeding the ambient noise level at the property line of
any property (or, if a condominium or apartment house, within any adjoining apartment) by more
than five decibels shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of
this section.
202.05. Animals. No person shall keep or maintain or permit the keeping of, on any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or bird otherwise permitted to be kept,
which by frequent or habitual howling, barking, meowing, squawking or other noise
unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or causes discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person.
202.06. Machines, Equipment, Fans and Air-Conditioning. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air-conditioning apparatus, or similar
mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at
the property line of any property to exceed the ambient noise level by more than five decibels
based on a reference sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars as measured in any octave band center
frequency, in cycles per second, as follows: 63, 125, 250, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, and 8,000 for
the combined frequency bands, “A” band.
202.07. Continuous Sources of Sound. The maximum permissible sound pressure levels of any
continuous source of sound shall be as herein established for the time period and district listed in
Table A of this section. This includes, but is not limited to, sound from such activities as
production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, operating or repairing either vehicles,
materials, goods, products or devices. Sound pressure levels in excess of those established for
the districts of the City, in times herewith listed, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such
sound is an unnecessary noise. Sound pressure level shall be measured at the approximate
location of the property line or the boundary of the public way, at a height of at least four feet
above the immediate surrounding surface on a sound level meter of standard design and operated
Page 202-4
on the “A” weighting network.
TABLE A
Sound Pressure Level Limit
Day Night
District 7 a.m. - 10 p.m. 10 p.m. - 7 a.m.
Residential 55 45
Commercial 60 55
Industrial 80 75
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Any bell or chime or any device for the production or reproduction of the sound of bells
or chimes from any church, clock or school;
(b) The loading or unloading of any trucks;
(c) Any trucks or other oversize commercial vehicles granted a Conditional Use Permit by
the City of Ashland Plan Commission and operated pursuant to the terms thereof;
(d) Domestic power equipment;
(e) Commercial power equipment; or
(f) Motor vehicles operating on public rights-of-way but shall apply to motor
vehicles parked on public rights-of-way.
202.08. Construction. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person shall engage in,
cause or permit any person to be engaged in construction activities in any residential or
commercial district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day. Construction projects shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise level specified for
industrial districts for the periods within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any
applicable building permit. Construction activities directly connected with the abatement of an
emergency are excluded from the provisions of this section.
202.09. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate or permit to be operated on private
property or on the public way within any residential or commercial district(s) any power
equipment rated five horsepower or less and used from home or building repair or grounds
maintenance between the hours of 10 p.m. of one day and 7 a.m. of the next day or operate or
permit to be operated between the hours of 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. any such power equipment which
emits a noise sound pressure level in excess of eighty decibels in the weighting network dB(A).
Page 202-5
Such power equipment shall include, but not be limited to, lawn mowers, garden tools, snow
removal equipment, electric or chain saws or any other power equipment used for homes or
building repair or grounds maintenance. Noise sound pressure levels shall be measured at a
distance of twenty-five feet from the noise source.
202.10. Power Tools. No person shall operate on any property within a residential or commercial
district or on any public way within a residential or commercial district, any power equipment
rated more than five horsepower, excluding construction equipment used for construction
activities, such as but not limited to, chain saws, pavement breakers, log chippers, riding tractors,
powered hand tools, between the hours of 10 p.m. of one day and 7 a.m. on the next day. No
person shall operate within residential, commercial or industrial noise districts between the hours
of 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. any power tool which emits a noise level in excess of eighty-eight decibels,
in the “A” weighting network dB(A). Noise sound pressure levels shall be measured at a
distance of twenty-five feet from the noise source.
202.11. Additional Regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or
continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which
disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to
any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. The standards which shall be
considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) The volume of the noise;
(b) The intensity of the noise;
(c) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
(d) Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
(e) The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
(f) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities
(g) The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
(h) The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
(i) The duration of the noise;
(j) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
Page 202-6
202.12. Owner Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, occupant,
or is in control of, any premises to permit any noise prohibited under any section of this
ordinance to be created on, or emanate from, such premises.
202.13. Exclusions. This ordinance shall not apply to any persons engaged in the removal of
snow from public or private property used for routes of vehicular travel or parking or pedestrian
travel.
202.14. Variances. To accommodate remediation of environmental contamination being
performed under the Spills Law or CERCLA and under the supervision of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the
Common Council may permit a variance when it determines such variance to be in the public
interest. The variance may be subject to such conditions as the Common Council determines to
be consistent with the purposes of the ordinance.
202.15. Procedure.
(a) Application. The entity responsible for the remediation may apply for a variance by
submitting all of the following to the Department of Planning & Development:
(1) A written explanation of the provisions from which variance is sought, the nature of
the variance requested, the justification for the variance, and such other information as
the applicant believes relevant.
(2) Such other information as requested by the Department of Planning & Development
within ten (10) working days after receipt of such written explanation.
(3) Such fee as the Common Council may establish by resolution.
(b) Department of Planning & Development. The Department of Planning & Development
designated authorized agent shall complete the following tasks:
(1) Determine when the application for a variance is complete. The application shall be
considered completed when all of the items under (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section have
been received by the Department of Planning & Development.
(2) Prepare a report to the Plan Commission with a recommendation for action on the
application.
(3) Provide a Class 2 notice Public Hearing before the Plan Commission to be held within
sixty (60) days following the date when the application is complete.
(4) Provide a mailed Notice of Public Hearing by U.S. mail to the owners of record of
real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property under consideration at least
ten (10) days prior to the date set for the public hearing.
(c) Plan Commission Recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
(1) Conduct a Public Hearing within sixty (60) days after the application is complete. If
the Plan Commission determines that more information is necessary, the Public Hearing
Page 202-7
may be extended to a following meeting.
(2) Following the Public Hearing, make a recommendation to grant or deny the variance.
Any recommendation to grant a variance shall include an expiration date and list any or
all sections within this ordinance as exempt or excluded from the variance. The Plan
Commission may also include additional conditions as deemed necessary.
(d) Common Council Decision. Within thirty (30) days following the recommendation by the
Plan Commission, the Common Council shall complete the following tasks:
(1) Review the application and the recommendation made by the Plan Commission.
(2) Determine whether additional public hearings are necessary, and if so, hold such
additional hearing.
(3) Grant, in whole or in part, or deny the variance. Any granted variance shall include
an expiration date and list any or all sections within this ordinance as exempt or excluded
from the variance. The Common Council may also include additional conditions as
deemed necessary.
202.16. Variance Determination. In determining whether or not to grant a variance and what
conditions should be placed upon such variance, the following shall be considered:
(a) The intent of this ordinance;
(b) Other City Ordinances;
(c) Compatibility of the request with existing development within two hundred (200) feet of
the site;
(d) Importance of the remediation to the City and the public;
(e) The public benefits and costs of the requested variance; and
(f) The effect on persons and property near the remediation work.
202.17. Review of Variance. For remediation activities that are anticipated to last longer than six
(6) months, the Department of Planning & Development will conduct a “ninety (90) day checkin
review” following the remediation operations start date to determine how the variance
operated during remediation. A “six (6) month check-in review” shall occur every six (6) months
throughout the lifetime of the remediation, following the initial “ninety (90) day check-in
review”. The Department of Planning & Development will assess performance with respect to
variance conditions and evaluate whether those conditions are adequately protecting the public
health and safety, whether noise is being reasonably controlled or mitigated and whether there
are more reasonable methods of noise control that may be employed. The “six (6) month checkin
review” also provides an opportunity for the public to comment on project-related noise
impacts, conditions and effectiveness of the noise variance, and any recommended improvements
or modifications. Notice for the “six (6) month check-in reviews” will occur in the same manner
as described for decisions on applications in Section 202.15(b)(3).
202.21. Variance Fee. The processing fee for variance applications shall be as set forth in
Page 202-8
Chapter 165 (Comprehensive Fee Schedule).
202.22. Forfeiture. Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a civil forfeiture of not
less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, plus the costs of prosecution, including reasonable
attorney’s fees.
ADOPTED: 202 (1794) 9/25/2012
AMENDMENTS: 202 (1801) 3/12/2013; 202 (2015-1861) 10/27/2015
Page 203-1
CHAPTER 203. LOITERING.
203.01. Loitering. Whoever does any of the following within the limits of the City of Ashland
shall be liable for a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’
fees, but not more than $500.00 plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees:
(a) Loiters or prowls in a public or private place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for lawabiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property
in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such
alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer,
refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself of any object.
(b) Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a peace officer
shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel
any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and
explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
if the peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would
have dispelled the alarm.
(c) Loiters in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private
place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related
activity contrary to any of the provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(d) Circumstances which may be considered in determining whether a purpose to engage in
drug-related activity is manifested include but are not limited to:
(1) The person loitering is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes
of this Ordinance, a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller is a person who has,
within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any Court within this
State of any violation involving the use, possession, or sale of any of the substances
referred to in Chapter 161 of the Wisconsin Statutes, or such person has been convicted
of any violation of any of the provisions of said chapters of the Wisconsin statutes, or
substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this State or of any other State;
or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as
needle tracks; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia.
(2) The person loitering is currently subject to an order prohibiting his/her presence in a
high drug activity geographic area;
(3) The person loitering behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that
he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity,
including by way of example only, such person acting as a lookout,
(4) The person loitering is physically identified by the officer as a member of a gang, or
association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity;
Page 203-2
(5) The person loitering transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive
fashion;
(6) The person loitering takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer;
(7) The person loitering manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object
which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity;
(8) The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and
trafficking;
(9) The premises involved are known to have been reported to law enforcement as a place
suspected of drug activity.
203.02. Non-repealer. The provisions of this ordinance are intended as cumulative and
selective, and shall not repeal any other ordinance involving the same subject matter.
ADOPTED: 203 (1368) 4/16/1996
Page 205-1
CHAPTER 205. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
205.01. Parent Responsibility.
(a) A parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal
guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise
proper parental responsibility, and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the violations
along with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this
ordinance, if the child has been found on private or public property within the City of Ashland in
violation of any provisions of the Ashland City Ordinances twice within a six-month period.
(b) An adjudication by a court that the child has violated an ordinance, subject to admissible
proof thereof under Section 904.10, Wis. Stats., shall in an action under subsection (a) above,
bar a child's parents or parent from denying that the child committed the act.
205.02. Defenses.
(a) It shall be a defense to the offense of failure to exercise parental responsibility if the
parent or parents can provide specific evidence of enrollment or ongoing participation in or
recent completion of parenting classes, family therapy, group counseling or AODA counseling.
This is not to exclude other such activities associated with making a reasonable effort at
enhancing one's parenting effectiveness.
(b) It shall be a defense to the offense of failure to exercise parental responsibility if the
parent reported the act to the appropriate authorities.
205.03. Penalty. The offense described under Section 205.01 shall be subject to a penalty of not
less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00.
ADOPTED: 205 (1385) 10/8/1996
Page 206-1
CHAPTER 206. FALSE FIRE ALARMS AND INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE
SUPPRESSION.
206.01. Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or give a false alarm of
fire or in any way tamper with any fire alarm box or other fire equipment apparatus or fire
hydrant, or interfere with the lawful fighting or extinguishing of any fire. shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a forfeiture of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Two Hundred
Dollars ($200.00), and upon failure to pay the same shall be confined to the County Jail of
Ashland County until paid, not to exceed sixty days.
206.02 Penalty. Any person violating Sec. 206.01 shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
forfeiture of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00),
plus court costs and attorney fees.
ADOPTED: 206 (546) 6/12/1951
Page 207-1
CHAPTER 207. A JOINT ACTION EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT ORDINANCE
BETWEEN ASHLAND COUNTY AND THE CITY OF ASHLAND TO COPE WITH
EMERGENCIES RESULTING FROM ENEMY ACTION AND MAN-MADE OR
NATURAL DISASTERS.
207.01. Joint Action Ordinance. A Joint Action Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of
Ashland County providing for a county-municipal joint action emergency government plan of
organization adopted by said County Board on the 26th day of February, 1974. A copy of said
County Ordinance is attached hereto, and made a part hereof, by reference, and is hereby ratified
and accepted by the municipality of City of Ashland, County of Ashland.
207.02 Ratification and Acceptance. This ratification and acceptance of the Joint Action
Ordinance shall constitute a Mutual Agreement between the municipality of City of Ashland and
the County of Ashland as provided by Section 7 of said Joint Action Ordinance.
207.03 Emergency Government Director. The County-Municipal Emergency Government
Director, appointed and employed by the Ashland County Board as provided in the referred to
Ordinance is hereby designated and appointed Emergency Government Director for the
municipality of City of Ashland, subject to the conditions and provisions as set forth in the
Wisconsin Statutes, and the Ashland County Joint Action Ordinance.
ADOPTED: 207 (857) 3/9/1976
Page 208-1
CHAPTER 208. SHOOTING ARROWS WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
208.01. Bow and Cross-bow Regulations.
(a) Locations. Hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow is not permitted on city-owned
property or within 100 yards of any occupied building unless permitted by the owner of the land
on which the building is located or unless specifically approved by the Police Department.
(b) Discharge toward ground required. Hunting with a bow and arrow or crossbow shall only
be permitted from a tree stand or elevated platform no fewer than twelve (12) feet above the
ground, and arrows or bolts shall be discharged toward the ground, except for an individual with
a disability which prevents him or her from access to a tree stand or elevated platform.
208.02. Penalty. Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of not less than
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus court costs
and attorney fees.
Adopted: 208 (716) 4/9/1963
Amendments: 208 (1832) 9/9/2014
Page 209-1
CHAPTER 209. WATERCRAFT REGULATIONS.
209.01. Provisions of State Law Adopted by Reference. All provisions of Sections 30.60
through 30.71, Wis. Stats., inclusive, and the definitions in Sec. 30.50, Wis. Stats., are hereby
adopted and by reference made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act
required to be performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is
required or prohibited by this ordinance.
The sections adopted by reference shall include the following:
30.50 Definition.
30.60 Classification of Motorboats.
30.61 Lighting Equipment.
30.62 Other Equipment.
30.63 Sale and use of certain outboard motors restricted.
30.635 Motorboat Prohibition.
30.64 Patrol Boats.
30.65 Traffic Rules.
30.66 Speed Restrictions.
30.67 Accidents and Accident Reports.
30.675 Distress Signal Flag.
30.68 Prohibited Operation.
30.69 Water Skiing.
30.70 Skin Diving.
30.71 Boats Equipped with Toilets.
References to specific statutory sections used in this ordinance shall mean the Wisconsin
Statutes of 1983-1984 or subsequent amendments thereto.
209.02. Penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be a forfeiture
of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
209.03. Enforcement. Enforcement shall be by the issuance of citations and by the procedure set
forth in Chapter 279 and the Wisconsin Statutes.
Adopted: 209 (1061) 1/14/1986
Page 210-1
CHAPTER 210. UNLAWFUL SHELTERING OF MINORS.
210.01 Unlawful Sheltering of Minors.
(a) No person owning, operating or controlling any premises shall by any means conceal or
shelter or assist in the concealing or sheltering of any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years
on or in the said premises while the minor is under the legal custody of the parents or legal
guardian and while the minor is on report to any law enforcement agency as a missing person, a
runaway, or a wanted person.
(b) The person owning, operating or in custody of the premises shall not be liable under the
foregoing paragraph if the owner, operator or custodian of the said premises has:
(1) Obtained the permission of the parents or legal guardian, or
(2) Notified the City of Ashland Police Department of the presence of the said minor.
210.02. Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall, by any means, permit or assist an underage
person to consume any malt beverage or intoxicating liquor.
210.03 False Information. No person shall supply false information to or obstruct any Police
Officer in the performance of his duty to locate or take into custody any minor described in
section 210.01(a).
210.04 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture
of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the cost of prosecution.
ADOPTED: 210 (1618) 12/13/2005
Page 211-1
CHAPTER 211. CHARGING EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS.
211.01. Fees. Any person having a burglar, hold-up or any type of intrusion alarm shall be
charged the following fees for the indicated number of false alarms responded to by the Police
Department within a calendar year:
NUMBER OF FALSE ALARMS FEE
Up to 4 No fee
5 and up $50.00 for each false alarm
211.02. Definition of False Alarm. False alarm means an alarm signal which elicits a response
by the police when a situation requiring a response by the police does not in fact exist.
211.03. Determination of False Alarm. If the possessor of the alarm shows to the satisfaction
of the Chief of Police that such false alarm was not the result of negligence or improper
maintenance, or other good and sufficient cause beyond the reasonable control of the possessor
of the alarm, such fee may be waived and the response of the alarm shall not count as a false
alarm in computing the fee established under section 211.01.
Adopted: 211 (1101) 7/14/1987
Page 213-1
CHAPTER 213. APPOINTMENT OF SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
213.01. Appointment of Crossing Guards. Pursuant to the authority provided in Sec.
349.215, Wis. Stats., the City of Ashland may appoint adult school crossing guards for
the protection of persons who are crossing U.S. Highway 2/Lakeshore Drive East in the
vicinity of Our Lady of the Lake School at 215 Lakeshore Drive East.
213.02. Identification. The school crossing guards shall wear insignia or uniforms which
designate them as school crossing guards and shall be equipped with signals or signs to
direct traffic to stop at school crossings.
213.03. Approval by Police Chief. The City of Ashland may delegate the selection of
the individuals who will fill the adult school crossing guard positions to Our Lady of the
Lake School, however, selection of the individual or individuals and the determination of
sufficiency of training of the individuals are subject to the approval of the Police Chief of
the City of Ashland. The individual school crossing guards shall not be considered as
employees of the City of Ashland.
Adopted: 213 (1473) 5/25/1999
Page 245-1
CHAPTER 245. CONSTRUCTION LIMITS, ADOPTION OF A FIRE CODE, AND
AUTHORIZATION OF FIRE INSPECTIONS.
245.01. Reserved.
245.02. Adoption of a Fire Code. Chapter SPS 314, Wisconsin Administrative Code, is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code for the City of Ashland.
245.03. Fire Inspection Requirements.
(a) Inspection of Public Buildings. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for
having all public buildings and places of employment inspected for the purpose of ascertaining
and causing to be corrected any condition liable to cause fire, or any violations of any law or
ordinance relating to fire hazards or to the prevention of fires.
(b) Determining Public Building to Be Inspected. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for
determining those public buildings and places of employment that are to be inspected.
(c) Schedule of Inspections. Fire prevention inspections shall be conducted at least once per
calendar year, provided the interval between those inspections does not exceed 15 months.
245.04 Enforcement. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be accomplished through citations
issued by the Fire Chief or the Chief’s designee.
245.05 Forfeiture. Any violation of this Chapter or of any order of the Fire Department issued
hereunder shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $10 and not more than $100. Each day
that a violation of this Chapter or an order issued hereunder continues shall be a separate and
distinct violation.
Adopted: 245 (1131) 5/10/1988
Amendments: 245 (1278) 8/11/1992; 245 (1802) 3/12/2013
Page 246-1
CHAPTER 246. CONTRACTUAL FIRE AGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE CITY OF
ASHLAND AND NEIGHBORING MUNICIPALITIES AUTHORIZED.
246.01. Intent of Chapter. It is the intent of this chapter to establish a system for providing fire
protection to neighboring municipalities according to contractual agreements authorized by the
Common Council of the City of Ashland and the municipality which is party to the contract.
246.02. Contracts authorized. The Common Council of the City of Ashland is hereby
authorized to contract with neighboring cities, towns, villages, and other municipalities to
provide City of Ashland fire equipment and/or personnel in the event of fire emergency.
246.03. Resolutions. Contracts such as those described in section 246.02 shall be authorized and
embodied in a Resolution of the Common Council of the City of Ashland and shall consist of
terms negotiated with each individual municipality.
246.04. Records of contracts. Resolutions passed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk in a file provided specifically for that
purpose or in any manner as the Common Council may direct by resolution or ordinance.
Adopted: 246 (906) 9-19-1978
Page 279-1
CHAPTER 279. CITATIONS FOR VIOLATION OF CITY ORDINANCES.
279.01. Use of Citation Authorized. The use of a citation as provided in this section is
authorized for any violation of any ordinance of the City of Ashland. Any citation for which a
particular form is prescribed by state law shall comply with state law. In other cases, the citation
shall be in substantially the form as set forth in Appendix A to this Ordinance (or an electronic
version thereof) and shall provide for the following:
(a) The name and address of the alleged violator.
(b) The factual allegations describing the alleged violation.
(c) The time and place of the offense.
(d) The section of the ordinance violated.
(e) A designation of the offense in a manner that can be readily understood by a person
making a reasonable effort to do so.
(f) The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court.
(g) A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator:
(1) That the alleged violator may make a cash deposit of a specified
amount to be mailed to a specified official within a specified time.
(2) That if the alleged violator makes such a deposit, he or she need not
appear in court unless subsequently summoned.
(3) That, if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear
in court, he or she either will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no
contest and submitted to a forfeiture, plus costs, fees, and surcharges
imposed under Ch. 814, Wisconsin Statutes, not to exceed the amount of the deposit or
will be summoned into court to answer the complaint if the court does not accept the plea
of no contest.
(4) That, if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does
not appear in court at the time specified, the court may issue a summons
or a warrant for the defendant's arrest or consider the nonappearance to
be a plea of no contest and enter judgment or the Commission may commence an action
against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture, plus costs, fees, and surcharges
imposed under Ch. 814, Wisconsin Statutes.
Page 279-2
(5) That if the court finds that the violation involves an ordinance that
prohibits conduct that is the same as or similar to conduct prohibited by
state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the
violation resulted in damage to the property of or physical injury to a
person other than the alleged violator, the court may summon the alleged
violator into court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under sec.
800.093, Wisconsin Statutes.
(6) A direction that if the alleged violator elects to make a cash
deposit, the alleged violator shall sign an appropriate statement which
accompanies the citation to indicate that he or she read the information provided under
this subsection 10.40(g), and shall send the signed statement with the cash deposit.
(7) Such other information as the issuing officer may deem necessary or useful.
279.02. Establishment of Bond Schedule.
(a) Statutory counterpart. For any ordinance for which a statutory counterpart exists, the
minimum cash deposits that shall be required with a plea of no contest or guilty shall be as set
forth in the then current Bond and Bail Schedules adopted by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference.
(b) Municipal Bond Schedule. For any ordinance for which a cash deposit is set forth in
the Municipal Bond Schedule attached as Appendix B to this Ordinance, the minimum cash
deposits that shall be required with a plea of no contest or guilty shall be as set forth therein. If
the costs, fees, and surcharges imposed under Chapter 814, Wisconsin Statutes are amended,
Appendix B shall be deemed amended to comply therewith, as of the effective date of the
amendment to Chapter 814, and the total deposit required shall be adjusted accordingly without
further action required of the City Council.
(c) No statutory counterpart or municipal bond schedule amount. For any ordinance for
which a statutory counterpart does not exist, and for which no deposit amount is provided in
Appendix B, the minimum cash deposits that shall be required with a plea of no contest or guilty
shall be 120% of the minimum forfeiture, rounded up to the nearest five dollars or, if no
minimum forfeiture is provided in ordinance, then one-quarter of the maximum forfeiture,
rounded up to the nearest five dollars, together with the then current and applicable costs, fees,
and surcharges imposed under Chapter 814, Wisconsin Statutes.
279.03. Payment of Deposits. All deposits shall be submitted to the Ashland County Clerk of
Court.
279.04 Authority to Issue Citations. Any law enforcement officer may issue a citation for any
violation of any City ordinance. In addition, the following officials may issue citations with
respect to ordinances which are directly related to the official responsibilities of the official:
Page 279-3
(a) Building Inspector
(b) Zoning Administrator
(c) Marina Manager
(d) Park and Recreation Director
(e) Fire Chief
(f) Humane Officer
(g) Public Works Director
279.05. Other Proceedings. The issuance of a citation does not preclude the City from
proceeding under any other law or procedure related to the same subject matter for which the
citation was issued.
ADOPTED: 279 (1838) 11/18/2014





Page 351-1
CHAPTER 351. LICENSING, REGULATING, AND MAINTENANCE OF DOGS AND
CATS.
351.01. Appointment and Duties of Humane Officer. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council, some suitable person to be known as the Humane Officer,
who shall hold this office for an indefinite period. The Humane Officer shall be supervised by
the Chief of Police. The compensation for service shall be fixed annually by the City Council.
351.02. Running at Large Prohibited. No dogs or cats shall be permitted to run at large in the
City of Ashland. This prohibition shall apply to licensed and unlicensed dogs and cats alike.
351.03. Impoundment/Disposal. It shall be the duty of the Humane Officer to catch, take and
impound every dog and cat found to be running at large within the City in violation of this
ordinance. The Humane Officer is hereby given the same powers as a special policeman for the
above stated purpose. The Humane Officer shall have the power to pursue animals upon the
premises of the owner and elsewhere. Each and every dog and cat caught and taken by the
Humane Officer shall be conveyed to the pound and there solely kept for a period of seven (7)
days from the time the animal is captured unless sooner released as hereinafter provided. The
Humane Officer shall notify the owner personally, by telephone, or through the United States
mail if such owner be known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort. Any
person whose dog or cat has been impounded, may obtain its release by paying to the City
Treasurer’s office or any police officer on duty, the sum of twenty dollars ($20) for an initial
pick-up fee, plus six dollars ($6.00) per day kennel fee for each day the animal was boarded and
by obtaining a receipt therefor. If the dog or cat is unlicensed and required to be licensed, the
owner shall also exhibit a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year.
Every person taking a dog or cat from the pound shall give a receipt therefore in a book to be
kept for that purpose. The receipt shall describe the animal by some marks or identification. All
animals remaining in the pound for a period of seven (7) days from the time of capture shall be
transferred to a humane association or animal shelter, unless the animal is suffering from an
untreatable injury or illness, whereby it will be humanely euthanized, or unless it is not suitable
for adoption due to being dangerous or vicious as defined in 351.18, or is a feral adult cat.
351.04. Nuisance Dogs and Cats Prohibited. Nuisance dogs and cats are prohibited. A dog or
cat shall be considered a nuisance if it:
(a) Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property other than the owners or on public
walks and recreation areas, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of
by the owner.
(b) Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions.
(c) Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making.
(d) Chases vehicles or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on
public or private property.
Page 351-2
351.05. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of Sec. 351.02 or 351.04 shall be required
to pay a forfeiture of twenty-five dollars ($25) for the first offense and fifty dollars ($50) for
subsequent offenses.
351.06. Rabies Control Program. If a district is quarantined for rabies, all dogs within the
district shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed or muzzled. Any dog not confined, tied,
leashed, or muzzled is declared a public nuisance and may be impounded. All officers shall
cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The City Clerk shall promptly post, in at least
three public places in the City, notices of quarantine.
351.07. Exemptions to Quarantine. A dog which is immunized currently against rabies, as
evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination, or other evidence is exempt from these
quarantine provisions if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog’s collar.
351.08. Rabies Vaccinations. The owner of a dog shall have the dog vaccinated against rabies,
by a veterinarian within 30 days after the dog reaches 4 months of age and revaccinated within
one year after the initial vaccination. If the owner obtains the dog or brings the dog into this
state after the dog has reached 4 months of age, the owner shall have the dog vaccinated against
rabies within 30 days after the dog is obtained or brought into the state unless the dog has been
vaccinated, as evidenced by a current certificate of rabies vaccination from this state or another
state. The owner of a dog shall have the dog revaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within
three years after the previous vaccination.
351.09. Penalty. An owner who fails to have a dog vaccinated against rabies as required may be
required to forfeit not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
351.10. Dog and Cat Licenses. The owner of a dog or cat more than five months of age on
January 1 of any year or five months of age within the license year, shall annually on or before
the date the dog or cat becomes five months of age pay the dog or cat license tax and obtain a
license.
351.11. License Fee. There shall be license fees for neutered and un-neutered male dogs and
spayed and un-spayed female dogs and cats and the fees for neutered male cats and dogs or
spayed female cats and dogs will be allowed upon presentation of evidence that the dog or cat is
neutered or spayed. The fee shall be one half (½) the regular fee if the dog or cat became 5
months of age after July 1 of the license year. The license year shall commence on January 1 and
end on the following December 31. The prescribed fee shall be set forth in the City of Ashland
Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
351.12. Proof of Vaccination. Proof of a rabies vaccination and a booster shot, if applicable, is
required prior to purchase of a dog license.
351.13. Late Fee. The Treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee of $5.00 from every dog or cat
owner of a dog or cat five months of age or older, if the owner failed to obtain a license prior to
Page 351-3
April 1 of each year or within 30 days of acquiring ownership or bringing into the City a
licensable dog or cat, or if the owner failed to obtain a license on or before the dog or cat reached
licensable age.
351.14. Exemption of Service Animals. Every animal specially trained as a service animal shall
be exempt from licensing and every taxpayer owning such an animal shall annually receive a
free license from the local Collection Officer upon application therefore.
351.15. Licenses and Collar Tag. Upon payment of the required license tax on any dog or cat,
the collection officer shall execute and issue to the owner a license for such a dog or cat. The
license shall be in the form prescribed by the Department of Agriculture and shall state the date
of its expiration, shall bear a serial number, the owner’s name and address, and the name, sex,
spayed or unspayed, breed and color of the dog or cat licensed, and a duplicate copy of the
license shall be kept on file.
351.16 Unlicensed Dogs or Cats Impounded, Without a Collar, Presumed to be Unlicensed.
The fact that a dog or cat is without a license attached to a collar shall be presumptive evidence
that the dog or cat is unlicensed. No action shall be maintained for an injury to or the destruction
of a dog or cat without a tag, unless it appears affirmatively that the dog or cat is duly licensed
and that a tag has been properly attached to the collar of the dog or cat and it had been lost or
removed without the knowledge or consent of the owner, or that the dog or cat is not required to
be licensed.
351.17. No License. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or permit to remain about his
premises a dog or cat for which no license exists and for which one is required.
351.18. Dangerous and Vicious Dog Definitions.
(a) “Dangerous Dog:” Any dog which is capable of inflicting death or serious injury on a
person or another animal and which:
(1) Has, without provocation, attacked or bitten a person engaged in a lawful activity; or,
(2) Has, while off the property of its owner and without provocation, killed or seriously
injured another animal; or
(3) Has, without provocation, chased, confronted or approached a person on a street,
sidewalk or other public property in a menacing fashion such as would put an average
person in fear of attack, or
(4) Has exhibited a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, cause injury or threaten
the safety of persons or other animals without provocation; or
(5) Has acted in a manner that causes or should cause its owner to know that it is
potentially vicious.
Page 351-4
(b) “Vicious Dog:” Any dog which:
(1) Has caused death or serious injury to a person engaged in a lawful activity;
(2) Has, on two or more occasions within a 12-month period, attacked or bitten without
provocation a person engaged in a lawful activity;
(3) Has, on two or more occasions within a 12-month period, while off the property of its
owner and without provocation, killed or seriously injured another animal; or
(4) Has been trained for dog fighting or is owned or kept for the purpose of dog fighting.
(c) “Owner.” Includes any person having a right or property in a dog, and any person who
keeps or harbors a dog or has it in his care, or who acts as its custodian, and any person who
permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
351.19. Prohibitions and Limitations. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the
city any vicious dog. Upon finding that a dog is vicious, a court of competent jurisdiction may
order the dog to be impounded and destroyed, or to be removed from the city. It shall be
unlawful for any person to keep within the city any dangerous dog, except in compliance with a
permit issued by the Humane officer under section 351.21 below.
351.20. Complaints of Dangerous and Vicious Dogs; Processing of Complaints.
(a) Verbal Complaints. Any person may make a verbal or written complaint to the city
humane officer of a dog which the complainant believes to be dangerous and vicious. The
complaint shall include sufficient information to enable the humane officer to ascertain the
location and owner of the dog and shall also include the reasons why the complainant believes
the dog to be vicious or dangerous. In the case of a verbal complaint, the complaint shall be put
in writing by the humane officer. A copy of the complaint shall then be mailed by the humane
officer to the owner of the dog at the owner’s last known address.
(b) Investigations. Within 10 days of the making of the complaint, the humane officer shall
undertake an investigation to determine whether the dog identified in the complaint is vicious or
dangerous. Such investigation shall include an opportunity for the owner of the dog to present
evidence to the humane officer pertinent to the viciousness or dangerousness of the dog, and
may include interviews with the complainant and other person having personal knowledge
regarding the dog and observations of the dog in its normal habitat.
(c) Determinations. Upon completion of the investigation, the humane officer shall determine
whether the dog identified in the complaint is vicious or dangerous.
(1) If the humane officer determines that the dog is neither vicious nor dangerous, the
humane officer shall inform the complainant and the owner of the determination, and no
further action shall be taken on the complaint.
Page 351-5
(2) If the humane officer determines that the dog is vicious, the humane officer shall put
the determination in writing, as well as the reasons supporting it. The humane officer
shall then personally serve this written determination on the owner and, in addition, shall
notify the owner that the dog must be destroyed or removed from the city. The humane
officer may issue a summons or warrant against the owner of a vicious dog and
immediately impound the dog.
(3) If the humane officer determines that the dog is dangerous, the humane officer shall
put the determination in writing as well as the reasons supporting it. The humane officer
shall then personally serve this determination on the owner and, in addition, shall notify
the owner of the requirements to keep a dangerous dog in the City as provided by Section
351.21.
351.21. Requirements for Keeping a Dangerous Dog in the City of Ashland. Upon receipt of
a determination by the animal humane officer that a dog is dangerous, the owner may keep the
dog within the City only so long as the owner complies with the requirements set forth in this
section. The requirements are as follows:
(a) That the owner obtain a Permit from the Humane Officer and pay a one time $50 permit
fee.
(b) That the owner immediately notify the humane officer in the event the dog is loose and
unconfined, has attacked or injured a human being or another animal, has been sold or given to
another person, or has died;
(c) That the dog, while on the property of the owner, be confined indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked structure, suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent
the dog from escaping;
(d) That the owner display one or more signs on his property which provide a clear warning to
children of all ages and adults that a dangerous dog is present on the property;
(e) That, while off the owner’s property, the dog be muzzled, restrained in a particular
manner, or both, and the dog must be under the control of an adult;
(f) That the owner make the dog available for inspection by the humane officer at reasonable
times upon reasonable notice.
351.22. Appeal. If an owner disagrees with the humane officer’s determination that a dog is
dangerous or vicious, the owner may commence an action in the Circuit Court for Ashland
County for a certiorari review of the humane officer’s determination. Such action shall be
commenced within ten (10) days after the owner’s receipt at the humane officer’s determination.
If no action is filed in accordance with this section, the humane officer’s determination shall be
final. If the court finds any error in the humane officer’s determination which renders the
determination erroneous or void, it shall remand the determination to the humane officer for
further action in accordance with the Court’s determination and retain jurisdiction of the matter
Page 351-6
until the humane officer has made a determination in accordance with the court’s order.
351.23. Killing Certain Animals That Cannot be Safely Taken Up and Impounded.
If any vicious or dangerous dog or any dog, cat or other animal suspected of, or having rabies,
found at large, cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the dog or other animal may be slain
by any police officer. Such animal’s head shall be examined for rabies.
351.24. Reports of Animal Bites.
(a) Any owner whose animal bites a person shall immediately notify the humane officer, the
health department or police department of the city.
(b) It shall be the duty of every physician and medical practitioner practicing in the city and
of every hospital in the city to report to the humane officer or the health department the name
and address of any person treated for bites or wounds inflicted by animals, together with all
available information necessary for rabies control.
(c) It shall be the duty of every veterinarian practicing in the city to report to the humane
officer or the health department the name and address of the owner of any animal treated for
bites or wounds inflicted by any other animal, together with all available information necessary
for rabies control.
351.25. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of Sections 351.18
through 351.24 shall be fined not less than one hundred ($100) dollars nor more than five
hundred ($500) dollars for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
351.26. Cruelty to Animals.
(a) Abuse. No person shall cruelly beat, frighten, overburden or abuse any animal or bird, or
use any device or chemical substance whereby pain, suffering or death may be caused, whether
belonging to himself or another, except that reasonable force may be used to drive off vicious or
trespassing animals.
(b) Abandonment. No person shall abandon any animal, bird or transport any animal or bird
in a cruel manner.
351.27. Food and Water. No person owning or having custody of any animal or bird shall
neglect or fail to provide it with necessary nourishing food at least once daily and provide a
constant supply of clean water to sustain the animal or bird in good health.
351.28. Shelter.
(a) Providing Shelter. No person shall fail to provide any animal or bird in his charge with
Page 351-7
shelter from inclement weather or to ensure the protection and comfort of the animal or bird.
(b) Overheating. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort to any animal or
bird, shade shall be provided by natural or artificial means to allow protection from the direct
rays of the sun.
(c) Animals Kept Outdoors. Dogs and cats kept outdoors for more than one hour at a time
must be provided with moisture proof and windproof shelter of a size which allows the animal to
turn around freely and to easily sit, stand and lie in a normal position and to keep the animal
clean, dry and comfortable. Whenever the outdoor temperature is below 40 degrees F, clean
bedding material shall be provided in such shelters for insulation and to retain the body heat of
the animals.
351.29. Leashes. If animals are kept leashed on their premises, there shall be provided at least
six feet of free untangled leash.
351.30. Licensing of Dog Kennels. The Clerk shall make, in triplicate, a list of the names of
persons owning and operating kennels and the number of dogs kept in each.
The term “kennel” means any establishment wherein or whereon more than two dogs or cats
over the age of five (5) months are kept for the purpose of breeding, sale or sporting purposes.
351.31. Kennel Licenses. Any person who keeps or operates a kennel may, in lieu of the license
fee for each dog required by this ordinance, apply to the City Treasurer for a kennel license for
the keeping or operating of such kennel. Such person shall pay for the license year a license fee
of $35 for a kennel of 12 or fewer dogs and an additional $3 for each dog in excess of 12. Upon
payment of the required kennel license fee and upon presentation of evidence that all dogs over 5
months of age are currently immunized against rabies, the City Treasurer shall issue the kennel
license and a number of tags equal to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel.
Prior to the issuance of a Kennel license, verification shall be made that the kennel is in
compliance with the city zoning requirements.
351.32. Kennel License Tags. Kennel license tags shall be made in a form so that they may be
readily distinguishable from the individual tags for the same year. The licensee of a kennel shall
at all times keep one such tag attached to the collar of each dog over five (5) months old kept by
him under kennel license. Such tags may be transferred from one dog to another within the
kennel whenever any dog is removed from the kennel. No dog bearing any tag shall be
permitted to stray or to be taken anywhere outside the limits of the kennel unless he is on leash
or temporarily for the purposes of hunting, breeding, trial or show.
351.33. Regulation of Kennels. Kennels shall be operated in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) All animals shall be maintained in a healthy condition or, if ill, shall be given appropriate
treatment immediately.
(b) The quarters in which the animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and in
Page 351-8
a good state of repair.
(c) Animal pens or enclosures shall be large enough to provide freedom of movement to the
animals contained therein.
(d) Food supplies shall be stored in rodent proof containers, and food and water containers
shall be kept clean.
(e) Litter and/or bedding materials shall be changed as often as necessary to prevent an odor
nuisance.
(f) Feces shall be removed from yards, pens and enclosures daily and stored in tightly
covered metal containers until final disposal.
(g) Yards, pens, premises and animals shall be kept free of insect infestations.
(h) No odor nuisances shall be permitted.
(i) Prior to the issuance of a Kennel license, verification shall be made that the kennel is in
compliance with the city zoning requirements.
351.34. Pet Shops. A pet shop shall mean a business establishment where domesticated
mammals, birds, or reptiles are kept for sale; provided, however, a kennel shall not be included
within this definition.
(a) Operation. Pet shops shall be operated in accordance with the requirements set forth in
Section 351.26.
(b) Dogs to be Immunized Against Rabies. No pet shop operator shall sell or offer for sale
any dog six or more months old unless the dog has been vaccinated against rabies by use of an
approved live, attenuated rabies virus vaccine administered by a licensed veterinarian. A
certificate of vaccination identifying the dog, including its approximate age, date of vaccination
and signed by the vaccinating veterinarian shall be given to the purchaser at the time the sale is
made.
(c) Record of Sale. Every pet shop operator shall keep a record of every dog or cat sold by
his establishment setting forth the date and source of acquisition, date of rabies vaccination, the
date of sale and the name and address of the purchaser. Such records shall be maintained on the
pet shop premises for at least one (1) year following the date of sale of each dog and cat, and
such records shall be open to the public.
(d) Sale of Bats, Foxes, Raccoons and Skunks Prohibited, Except De-scented Skunks. No
pet shop shall engage in the purchase, keeping, or sale of any species of bats, foxes, raccoons or
skunks, except descented skunks.
351.36. Penalties. The penalties for violating any of the provisions of this Chapter for which
Page 351-9
there is no specifically stated penalty, shall be a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$500.00.
351.37. Noise from Animals. Noise from animals shall be regulated by Chapter 202.
ADOPTED: 351 (963) 4/14/1981
AMENDMENTS: 351 (1076) 7/8/1986; 351 (1127) 4/12/1988; 351 (1231) 6/12/1990;
351 (1344) 3/14/1995; 351 (1357) 9/26/1995; 351 (1428) 2/24/1998;
351 (1449) 10/13/1998; 351 (1505) 11/28/2000; 351 (1535) 3/12/2002;
351 (1586) 12/16/2003; 351 (1696) 1/27/2009; 351 (1723) 3/30/2010;
351 (2016-1865) 1/12/2016; 351 (2019-1919) 10/08/2019; 351 (2020-
1924) 01/01/2020
Page 353-1
CHAPTER 353. NUISANCE DEER HUNT.
353.01. Permitting Nuisance Deer Hunt. Due to the nuisance deer problem in the City of
Ashland, there shall be permitted in the City of Ashland Archery Deer Hunting in the City of
Ashland subject to the following conditions:
(a) Conduction. The Nuisance Deer Hunt shall be conducted during the regular Wisconsin
Deer Archery season with all archery regulations applying to the Nuisance Deer Hunt.
(b) Obtaining Permit. The Archery Hunter shall obtain a Nuisance Deer Permit from the
Ashland Police Department.
(c) Land Owners. The land owner upon whose property the Nuisance Deer Hunting is to be
done shall obtain a Designation of Permitted Area for Shooting Arrows in the City of Ashland
Permit from the Ashland Police Department.
(d) Compliance. The land owner and archery hunter shall comply with all rules and
regulations adopted by the Common Council for the Nuisance Deer Hunt.
353.02. Enforcement. Violation of any of the foregoing shall be a violation of this Ordinance
which is punishable by a forfeiture not less than $100.00 and no more than $500.00, plus court
costs. The Ashland Police Department will enforce the provisions of this Ordinance to the use of
forfeiture citations.
353.03. Establishment of Rules. The Common Council of the City of Ashland shall by
Resolution establish rules and regulations for the Nuisance Deer Permit Hunt in the Ashland City
limits.
ADOPTED: 353 (1615) 9/13/2005
AMENDMENTS: 353 (1669) 1/15/2008
Page 354-1
CHAPTER 354. PROHIBITING THE FEEDING OF DEER.
354.01. Feeding of Deer Prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any person to place any feed such
as salt, minerals, grain, fruit, vegetable material, sunflower seeds, deer suckers, or any other type
of feed, on any public or private property for the purpose of enticing whitetail deer into any
specific area of anyone’s property in the City of Ashland except as provided in 354.03 herein.
354.02. Rebuttable Presumptions. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that either of the
following acts are for the purpose of feeding whitetail deer.
(a) The placement of salt, minerals, grain, fruit, vegetable material, sunflower seeds, or
deer suckers in an aggregate quantity of greater than one-half gallon at the height of less than six
(6) feet off the ground.
(b) The placement of salt, minerals, grain, fruit, vegetable material, sunflower seeds, or
deer suckers in an aggregate quantity of greater than one-half gallon in a drop feeder,
automatic feeder or similar device regardless of the height of the salt, minerals, grain,
fruit, vegetable material, sunflower seeds, or deer suckers.
354.03. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following situations:
(a) The placement of bait for the purpose of hunting whitetail deer subject to all other
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations governing hunting and the discharge of
hunting weapons.
(b) Naturally growing grain, fruit or vegetable material, including gardens and residue
from lawns, or gardens and other vegetable materials maintained as a mulch or compost pile.
(c) Unmodified commercially purchased bird feeders or their equivalent.
(d) Deer feeding may be authorized on a temporary basis by the Common Council for
specific public purposes determined by the Common Council.
354.04. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance and is found guilty
shall be fined not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
plus penalty assessments and costs.
354.05. Validity. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason of any decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof.
ADOPTED: 354 (1616) 9/27/2005
AMENDMENTS: 354 (1619) 1/10/2006; 354 (1760) 1/10/2012
Page 402-1
CHAPTER 402. DISPOSAL OF HOLDING TANK WASTE WATER.
402.01. Purpose. This chapter is intended to limit and discourage improper disposal of sewage
from holding tanks and to decrease health hazards created by improper sewage disposal.
402.02. Signing of Agreement Form. The agreement form as required by the Wisconsin
Administrative Code for acceptance of a $1,000 bond for holding tanks shall not be signed, nor
any construction permits granted by City officials unless the following conditions are met:
(a) A copy of a signed contract with a licensed pumper shall be filed by the property
owner with the Building Inspector. The contract shall be current and extend for at least one year.
A valid contract must be maintained for the life of the holding tank.
(b) As an alternative to subsection (a), the property owner may produce evidence that he
or she owns a pump truck certified by the DNR for the pumping of waste water.
402.05. Disposal of Waste Water. All holding tank wastes from within the City limits of
Ashland, shall be deposited in the sanitary sewer system. The amount of sewage deposited shall
be recorded with personnel at the treatment plant by the owner of the pump vehicle. Provided,
however, that the owner of a septic tank who has a minimum 40 acre homesite, within the city
limits shall be allowed to deposit his effluent upon his land, in conformance with State and
Department of Natural Resources requirements and permit.
402.06. Meter Requirements. All water lines servicing home with holding tanks shall have a
meter installed at a location deemed acceptable by the Building Inspector. The meter shall be
installed so as to record all water flowing to internal plumbing facilities. The Building Inspector
or designee may read the meter(s) to compare water use with the amount of disposed waste
water.
402.07. Penalties. Failure to comply with the above provisions may result in the issuance of a
citation by the Building Inspector or designee.
402.08. Forfeitures. Forfeitures shall be $50.00 per violation with each day that the violation
persists considered as a separate violation. Improper or unrecorded disposal of wastewater as
may be determined by comparison of water meter-sewage disposal records or on-site
investigation of disposal sites shall be subject to a forfeiture of $200.00.
ADOPTED: 402 (915) 2/13/1979
AMENDMENTS: 402 (975) 11/10/1981
Page 406-1
CHAPTER 406. MERCURY CONTAINING DEVICES.
406.01. Sale of Mercury-Containing Products Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any retailer
or commercial enterprise or proprietor to sell, offer to sell, or distribute any device containing
fifty or more milligrams of mercury, excluding dental amalgams.
406.02. Removal of Mercury-Containing Devices Before Demolition. All mercury containing
devices must be removed from properties before demolition.
406.03. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of this ordinance
shall forfeit not less than $100 and ot more than $500 for each offense, plus the cost of
prosecution.
ADOPTED: 406 (1541) 5/14/2002
CHAPTER 408. BANNING THE PRACTICE OF CONVERSION THERAPY FOR
MINORS IN THE CITY OF ASHLAND, ASHLAND CITY ORDINANCES
408.01 DEFINITIONS:
a. “Person” means any natural person, individual, corporation, unincorporated association,
proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock association, or other entity or
business organization.
b. “Conversion therapy” means any practices or treatments offered or rendered to consumers
for a fee, including psychological counseling, that seeks to change a person’s sexual
orientation or gender identity, including efforts to change behaviors or gender expressions or
to eliminate or reduce sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward individuals of the
same gender. “Conversion therapy” does not include counseling that provides assistance to a
person undergoing gender transition, or counseling that provides acceptance, support, and
understanding of a person or facilitates a person’s coping, social support, and identity
exploration and development, including sexual-orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or
address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices, as long as such counseling does not
seek to change an individual’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
408.02 CONVERSTION THERAPY PROHIBITED:
a. It is unlawful for any person to provide conversion therapy to anyone under 18 years of
age.
408.03 PENALTY:
a. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each violation. For purposes of this section, each day a
person is found to have practiced conversion therapy shall be considered a separate violation.
ADOPTED: 408 (1930) 03/31/2020
Page 450-1
CHAPTER 450. PUBLIC NUISANCE – DISTRIBUTION OR SALE OF SUBSTANCES
AFFECTING HEALTH.
450.01. Findings. The Common Council of the City of Ashland finds as follows:
(a) Synthetic drugs have become a serious public health problem in the City of Ashland. By
some reliable accounts, the drug abuse problem represented by synthetic drugs is second only to
the problem of alcohol abuse.
(b) The effects of synthetic marijuana use, in particular, are seen by health care providers,
mental health care providers, and law enforcement officers, far more frequently than the effect of
the abuse of other “legal” substances such as paint, glue, or aerosols.
(c) The use of synthetic marijuana can result in headaches, vomiting, confusion, agitation,
anxiety, aggressive behavior, paranoia, inability to speak, dystonia, short-term memory deficits,
seizures, hallucination, and loss of consciousness.
(d) For some individuals, the use of synthetic marijuana can be seriously destabilizing to
their mental health. The effects of synthetic drug use can sometimes be long-term.
(e) Members of the Ashland community have been incarcerated as a result of their behaviors
stemming from synthetic drug use, causing expense to them, their families, and the criminal
justice system, and causing heartache to their family members and friends.
(f) In one period of less than a year, the Behavioral Health Services unit of Ashland’s
Memorial Medical Center, managed 80 patients who admitted to the use of synthetic drugs.
(g) During the same period, eight patients were seen at Memorial Medical Center whose
primary reason for seeking hospital services was synthetic drug use. The cost of hospital care in
these eight cases ranged from $3,652.36 to $64,458.80. The total hospital cost for the eight cases
was $181,978.92, for an average per-patient average cost of $22,747.37. The hospital charges
represent only a portion of the total costs of care for each of these individuals.
(h) The Ashland Police Department reports that, even though it has only recently started
formally tracking synthetic drug cases, it has estimated that during the period from January 1,
2012, to September 12, 2013, no fewer than 26 cases requiring approximately 322 hours of
police time were attributable or partly attributable to the use of synthetic drugs. These cases
involve emergency (mental health) detentions, theft, operation while intoxicated, drug calls,
traffic accidents, fraud, bail jumping, probation hold, sexual assault, and warrants.
(i) At least some of the synthetic drugs used in the City of Ashland have been purchased
from local commercial sources.
(j) The Ashland City Council has received numerous oral and written statements, at two
separate City Council meetings, from individuals who have been negatively affected by synthetic
Page 450-2
drugs, and has received a petition bearing several hundred signatures seeking the control of their
sale.
450.02. Public nuisance prohibited. No person shall engage in, contrive, cause, permit,
maintain, or continue any public nuisance. Any such activity may be referred to as “creating a
public nuisance.”
450.03. Public nuisance declared. It is a public nuisance to maintain a place of business where
any substance, legal or illegal, that causes or contributes to causing any immediate, serious,
negative health effect, is sold or distributed.
450.04. Exceptions.
(a) Any prescription drug, properly prescribed and distributed by a person lawfully permitted
to do so.
(b) Any alcoholic beverage, sold or distributed pursuant to Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes,
or any ordinance adopted thereunder.
450.05. Definitions.
(a) Causes. A substance causes or contributes to causing an immediate negative health
effect if it is a probable contributing factor in the etiology of the health effect, even if it is not the
only contributing factor.
(b) Immediate. A negative health effect is immediate if it occurs within 24 hours of the
ingestion (by any means) of the substance.
(c) Serious negative health effect. Serious, negative health effects include, but are not
limited to, the non-trivial occurrence of headaches, vomiting, confusion, agitation, anxiety,
aggressive behavior, paranoia, inability to speak, dystonia, short-term memory deficits, seizures,
hallucination, loss of consciousness, and death.
450.06. Procedure.
(a) Any person creating a public nuisance shall be given a written warning, requiring the
person to abate the nuisance within fifteen calendar days. Any person receiving a warning under
this subsection may appeal the warning to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal
with the City Clerk no later than 4:00 p.m. five business days after the date of receipt of the
notice. No specific form of notice of appeal shall be required. Upon the filing of a notice of
appeal, the requirement to abate the nuisance shall be stayed until the City Council has
conducted a hearing on the appeal.
(b) Any person creating a public nuisance no fewer than fifteen days after receiving a
warning under subsection (a), or if the warning has been appealed and upheld by the City
Council no sooner than the day after the City Council decision on the appeal, shall be required,
Page 450-3
upon service of a citation, to abate the public nuisance immediately. Any person receiving a
citation under this subsection may appeal the citation to the City Council by filing a written
notice of appeal with the City Clerk no later than 4:00 p.m. two business days after the date of
receipt of the citation. No specific form of notice of appeal shall be required. The filing of a
notice of appeal shall not stay the requirement to abate the nuisance.
(c) A warning under subsection (a) may be given based upon any activity creating a public
nuisance before or after the effective date of this ordinance. No action shall be taken under
subsection (b) except upon the creation of a public nuisance after the effective date of this
ordinance.
(d) A citation under subsection (b) requiring the immediate abatement of a public nuisance
may be enforced by action in circuit court pursuant to sec. 823.02, Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) In addition to action taken under subsection (d), any person creating a public nuisance
who has received a citation under subsection (b) shall pay a forfeiture of no less than $500 and
no more than $1,000 for each day that the nuisance persists, plus court costs and reasonable
attorney fees.
ADOPTED: 450 (1816) 9/23/2013
Page 453-1
CHAPTER 453. REGULATING THE HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES AND TREES AND
THE USE OF PROPERTY IN THE VICINITY OF THE ASHLAND MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT.
453.01. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) “Airport” means the Ashland Municipal Airport located in sections 18 and 19, Town 47
North, Range 4 West, Ashland County, Wisconsin.
(b) “Airport hazard” means any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which
obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is
otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off.
(c) “Non-conforming use” means any structure, tree or use of land which does not conform to
a regulation prescribed in this ordinance or an amendment thereto, as of the effective date of
such regulation.
(d) “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint
stock association, or body politic, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar
representative thereof.
(e) “Structure” means any object constructed or installed by man.
(f) “Tree” means any object of natural growth, except farm crops which are cut at least once
a year, and except shrubs, bushes or plants which do not grow to a height of more than five feet.
(g) “Runway” means a level portion of an airport having a surface specially developed and
maintained for the land and take-off of aircraft.
453.02. Zones. All zones established by this chapter are as shown on the map entitled Zoning
Map, Ashland Municipal Airport, Ashland County, Wisconsin, which is attached hereto and
adopted as part of this ordinance.
453.03. Height Zones. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be
constructed, altered, located or permitted to remain after such construction, alteration or
location, and no trees shall be allowed to grow, to a height in excess of the height limit indicated
on the maps referred to in sec. 453.20.
453.04. Use Restrictions.
(a) Activities. Notwithstanding the provisions of sec. 453.02, no use may be made of land in
any zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between
the airport and aircraft, or make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others, or result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, or impair visibility, in the vicinity
of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft.
Page 453-2
(b) Exceptions. The restrictions contained in sec. 453.02 shall not apply to legal fences or to
farm crops which are cut at least once each year.
453.05. Non-conforming Uses.
(a) Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed in sec. 453.02 and 453.03 shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any non-conforming
use, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any non-conforming use, except as otherwise
provided by sec. 453.07 (b).
(b) Changes. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction,
alteration or intended use of any structures, if the construction or alteration of such was begun
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and if such is diligently prosecuted.
(c) Removal. This section shall not interfere with the removal of non-conforming use by
purchase or the use of eminent domain.
453.06. Administration. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to administer and enforce
the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the
Building Inspector upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector. Applications which are by
this chapter to be decided by the Building Inspector shall be promptly considered and granted or
denied by him.
453.07. Permits.
(a) Future Uses. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected or installed, or be
permitted to remain in any zone created by 453.02 of this chapter until the owner or owner’s
agent shall have applied in writing for a permit therefore and obtained such permit from the
Building Inspector, except structures more than 1/? mile from the nearest airport boundary and
less than 50' maximum height above ground level at the building site. Said permit shall be posted
in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the period of construction, erection,
installation or establishment. No trees may be planted without a permit, and any tree planted
without a permit or permitted to grow without planting may be ordered removed at any time by
the Building Inspector upon his finding that such tree violates or is about to violate the height
restriction for the zone. Application for such permit shall indicate the use with sufficient
particularity to permit the Building Inspector to determine whether such use would conform to
the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the Building
Inspector shall issue the permit applied for.
(b) Existing Uses. Before any non-conforming structure or tree may be replaced, altered, or
repaired, rebuilt or replanted, a permit shall be applied for and secured in the manner prescribed
by section 453.07 (a) authorizing such change, replacement or repair. No such permit shall be
granted that would allow the structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it
was on the effective date of this ordinance, or than it is when the application for permit is made.
453.08. Hazard Marking and Lighting. Any permit or variance granted under section 453.07
Page 453-3
or 453.10 may, if action is deemed advisable by the Building Inspector to effectuate the purpose
of this chapter and if such is reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or trees in question to permit the owner of the airport, at its own expense,
to install, operate and maintain such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to the
flyers the preserve of an airport hazard.
453.09. Board of Appeals. There is hereby created a Board of Appeals, which shall consist of
the members of the Board of Appeals established under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Ashland. The members of said Board of Appeals shall receive the sum of $25 for each meeting
attended by them.
453.10. Appeals and Review.
(a) Variances. Upon appeal in special cases, the Board of Appeals may after investigation
and public hearing grant such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter would
result in unnecessary hardship, and such relief will do substantial justice and be in accord with
the spirit of this ordinance, and does not create a hazard to the safe, normal operation of aircraft.
(b) Aggrieved Person. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision or action of the
Building Inspector made in his administration of this ordinance may appeal such decision or
action to the Board of Appeals.
(c) Procedure. Any appeal taken pursuant to this section shall be in conformity with the
procedure established by section 62.23 (7)(e) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
453.11. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, forfeit not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00 for such offense, together with the
costs of prosecution.
ADOPTED: 453 (681) 11/12/1959
Page 454-1
CHAPTER 454. PLANTING, MAINTAINING, AND REMOVING TREES AND SHRUBS.
454.01. Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Ashland, Wisconsin, to regulate
and control the planting, transplanting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in the
City in order to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons
using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or property of the City; to promote and enhance the beauty and
general welfare of the City; to prevent damage to any public sewer or water main, streets, sidewalk or
other public property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public areas from undesirable and unsafe
planting, removal, treatment and maintenance practices; and to guard all trees and shrubs within the City
against the spread of disease or pests. It is the intent of the Common Council that the provisions of this
ordinance shall apply to all trees, shrubs or plants growing or hereafter planted in or upon any public
right-of-way or other premises owned or controlled by the City.
454.02 Definitions. Whenever the following words or terms are used in this ordinance, they shall be
construed to have the following meaning:
(a) Person. The word “person” shall mean person, firm, association, or corporation.
(b) Public trees and shrubs. The words “public trees and shrubs” shall mean all trees or shrubs
located or to be planted on any park, playground or other property owned or controlled by the City or on
any public street, alley, sidewalk or highway within the public right-of-way.
454.03. Tree Management Advisory Committee. The Parks and Recreation Committee will also serve
as the Tree Management Advisory Committee which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City of
Ashland. This Committee shall function in accordance with City of Ashland Ordinance Chapter 47.
454.04. Director of Public Works or Designee. The Director of Public Works or the Director’s
designee shall direct, regulate and control the planting, care, and removal of all public trees and shrubs
within the City and shall cause the provisions of this ordinance to be enforced.
454.05. Private Planting on Public Property. No person shall plant any tree, shrub or plant of any kind
on any public property, including property between the lot line and curb or improved portion of any
street or alley, without first having consulted the Director of Public Works or his designee and obtaining
the applicable permit(s) from the Public Works Department.
454.06. Planting, Care and Removal of Public Trees and Shrubs.
(a) Permit Required. No person or public utility shall plant, transplant, move, treat, spray, brace,
trim, prune, cut above or below ground, disturb, alter or do surgery on a public tree or shrub within the
city, or cause such acts to be done by others without first consulting the Director of Public Works or
designee and obtaining the applicable permit(s) from the Public Works Department.
Page 454-2
(b) Requirements and Conditions of Permits.
(1) As a condition of granting the removal of a public tree or shrub, the Director of Public Works
or designee may require that the permittee plant one or more trees or shrubs in place of the one
removed, and no permittee under such a conditional permit shall fail, refuse or neglect to plant
trees or shrubs of the type, size, and in the location specified in their permit.
(2) If any public tree or shrub which is not a nuisance as defined in this ordinance, is to be
removed at the request of the owner of the abutting property, the City shall not be obliged to
effect such removal, but if the removal is made by the City, such owner of the abutting property
shall pay to the City the full cost thereof.
454.07. House Moving Permits. No person shall move any building, structure or object exceeding 13
1/2 feet in height or width upon, over or along any public right-of-way or other public place without first
obtaining written permission from the Director of Public Works or designee who may require the
applicant to furnish a bond or cash deposit in the amount of $1,500 to cover the cost of repairing or
replacing any public trees or shrubs which are injured as a result of the moving operations, specify the
route to be taken and impose any other conditions reasonably necessary for the protection of nearby
public trees from injury.
454.08. Injury to Trees and Shrubs Prohibited. No person shall, without the consent of the owner in
the case of a private tree or shrub, or without the consent of the Director of Public Works or designee in
the case of a public tree or shrub, does, or causes to be done by others, any of the following acts:
(a) Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire, sign, unprotected electrical installation or other device or
material to, around or through a tree or shrub.
(b) Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any
tree or shrub.
(c) Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, salt brine, oil or other injurious substance to seep, drain to
be emptied upon or about any tree or shrub.
(d) Erect, alter, repair or raze any building or structure without placing suitable guards around all
nearby public trees or shrubs which may be injured by such operations.
(e) Knowingly permit any unprotected electric service wire to come in prolonged contact with any
public tree or shrub.
(f) Remove any guard, stake or other device or materials intended for the protection of a public tree
or shrub or close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit
access of air, water and fertilizer.
Page 454-3
454.09. Obstruction of View at Intersection Prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
ordinance, no person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or public premises situated
at the intersection of two or more streets in the City any hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth which may
obstruct the view of the operator of any motor vehicle approaching such intersection to the extent that
such operator is unable to observe other vehicles or pedestrians approaching or crossing said
intersection. The Director of Public Works, or designee, shall have the authority to declare any such
hedge, tree, shrub, or growth to be a public nuisance.
454.10. Authority over Public Trees and Shrubs. The Director of Public Works or designee shall
have the authority to plant, trim, prune, spray, preserve, renew and remove public trees and shrubs or
cause such work to be done as may be necessary to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions
which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or property of the City; to
promote and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the City; to prevent damage to any public sewer
or water main, streets, sidewalk or other public property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public
areas from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance practices; and to guard
all trees and shrubs within the City against the spread of disease or pests.
454.11. Removal of Public Trees or Shrubs.
(a) Whenever the Director of Public Works or designee proposes planting, pruning or removal
of any living shade tree or shrub in the property between lot line and curb or improved portion of any
street or alley that, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works or designee, does not present a
hazardous condition posing imminent danger to public safety, he shall so notify the owner of the
abutting land or the owner’s agent in writing.
(b) In the event that the Director of Public Works or designee identifies a living shade tree or
shrub in the property between lot line and curb or improved portion of any street or alley that, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works or designee, presents a hazardous condition posing imminent
danger to public safety, he shall have the authority to trim, prune or remove the public tree or shrub
without notification to the owner of the abutting land or the owner’s agent.
(c) After receiving such notification, the owner of the abutting land or owner’s agent may appeal
the need for the specified work in accordance with Section 454.14.
454.12. Authority over Private Trees and Shrubs.
(a) The Director of Public Works or designee shall have the authority to trim and/or remove
private trees and shrubs or cause such work to be done as may be necessary to eliminate and guard
against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
property of the City; to prevent damage to any public sewer or water main, streets, sidewalk or other
public property; and to guard all trees and shrubs within the City against the spread of disease or pests.
Page 454-4
(b) The Director of Public Works or designee shall have the authority to enter upon private
premises after notifying the land owner for the purpose of examining any tree for disease located upon
or over such premises and carrying out any of the provisions of this section.
454.13. Removal of Private Trees or Shrubs.
(a) Whenever the Director of Public Works or designee shall find, on examination, that a
tree on private property is diseased, dead or damaged, he shall notify the owner or owner’s agent in
writing, or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, that the tree shall be
removed by the owner within 30 days, or the tree will be removed by the City and the land owner shall
pay to the City the full cost thereof.
(b) After receiving such notification, the owner or owner’s agent may appeal the need for the
specified work in accordance with Section 454.14.
454.14. Tree Removal Appeal. A land owner or owner’s agent who receives a notification from the
Director of Public Works or designee regarding the removal or alternation of a public or private tree or
shrub may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notification, advise the Public Works Director or
designee in writing of the nature of the objection and request a conference with the Public Works
Director or designee. The Director of Public Works or designee shall schedule such a conference within
ten (10) days of receiving the request. If the person objecting to the order wishes to further appeal the
results of the conference, that person may, within five (5) days of the conference, make a written request
to appeal the order by requesting a hearing before the Parks and Recreation Committee. The request for
a hearing before the Parks and Recreation Committee shall be made in writing to the Public Works
Director or designee. The Committee shall schedule a hearing of the appeal within fifteen (15) days of
receiving the appeal. Within ten (10) days of the hearing the committee shall notify the appellant of its
decision in writing. The committee may affirm, cancel, or modify the order, in its discretion, to best
conform such order to the intent of this ordinance. The decision of the Committee shall become final
after it is reviewed by the Common Council.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained within ordinance, in the event the Director of Public
Works indicates that his/her department is unable to comply with any provision of this ordinance he/she
shall notify the City Administrator, who may issue a waiver from any provision of this ordinance.
454.15. Interference with Director of Public Works Prohibited. No person shall prevent, delay or
interfere with the Director of Public Works or the Director’s agents or employees while they are
engaged in carrying out any work or activities authorized by this chapter.
454.16. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction
thereof forfeit not less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00 together with the costs of prosecution.
Unlawful action in respect to each separate tree or shrub shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
ADOPTED: 454 (2019-1916) 3/26/2019
Page 463-1
CHAPTER 463. POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR PARKS, FACILITIES, AND
RECREATION AREAS.
463.01. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage and enhance the public’s
recreational experience and use of City owned public parks, trails, plazas, facilities, recreation
and conservation areas within the corporate limits of the City of Ashland; while at the same time
establishing reasonable restrictions and limitations intended to preserve and protect these lands
and the people using them to allow the public to have a pleasurable recreational experience on
these shared multi-purpose lands.
463.02. Scope. Except when the context provides otherwise, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply in all lands, structures, and property owned, leased, or administered by the City of Ashland
including developed and undeveloped parks, lands, trail corridors, plazas, facilities, and
recreation and conservation areas within the present and future corporate limits of the City of
Ashland.
463.03. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this
chapter:
(a) Campground shall mean any portion of municipal lands designated for supplying nonpermanent
overnight accommodations for camping units.
(b) Camp Site shall mean a defined area within a campground designated for the placement
of a single camping unit or multiple camping units. A camp site may also be referred to as a
Group Camp Site.
(c) Camping Unit shall mean any portable device (tent, trailer, motor home, 5th wheel, tent
trailer (pop-up), van, bus, etc.) designed to be used as a temporary dwelling.
(d) Conservation Lands are those lands intended to exist primarily in a natural state.
Conservation lands are intended to support wildlife and native plants. They may also support
recreation and educational uses where such activities are compatible with their primary purpose.
(e) Motorized Vehicle shall mean any engine driven vehicle including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, go-carts, mopeds, motorcycles, scooters, ATVs, UTVs, and snowmobiles.
(f) Parks / Park Lands are public lands, leased public or private lands, trail corridors,
facilities, and recreation areas owned by the City and dedicated for park, recreation, or
conservation use. These lands are often, but not always, developed with recreation facilities and
landscaping. They also may have natural values and functions.
(g) Trails are publicly owned or leased public or private lands, or private lands for which the
City has obtained an easement for public purposes, which serve as corridors for recreation,
travel, and/or wildlife. Trails may be single use or multi-use as determined by the ordinances,
Page 463-2
policies and regulations adopted by the Common Council. The principal trail component within
the City of Ashland is the Ashland Rail Trail System (ARTS).
(h) Improved Park Lands shall mean publicly owned park and recreation areas with
buildings, structures, pavilions, roads, trails, landscaping and established regularly cut grassy
areas or lawns, or managed native vegetation. Generally an improved park, recreation or
conservation area will be dedicated as a named public area by ordinance or resolution of the
Common Council and named.
(i) Park Pavilion shall mean a roofed structure open on all sides.
(j) Picnic Shelter shall mean a roofed structure open on all sides generally not larger than a
single picnic table.
(k) Undeveloped Park and Recreation Lands as used within this chapter shall mean publicly
owned lands, open space, or green space within the City that have not been dedicated for a
specific use. Undeveloped park and recreation lands are generally not landscaped nor are they
improved with trails, roadways, structures, or recreational amenities. Undeveloped park and
recreation lands do not include designated conservation areas.
463.04. Park Descriptions.
(a) Prentice Park and Campground. Prentice Park consists of public owned land West of
Turner Rd to the Ashland/Bayfield County Line and north of Park Rd to U.S. Highway 2 and the
public owned land north of Junction Rd to Park Rd.
1. Parcel No. 201-04767-0000 lying south of the rights-of-way of USH 2 & STH
13;
2. Parcel No. 201-04778-0000 lying south of the rights-of-way of USH 2 & STH
13;
3. All of Parcel No. 201-04763-0000;
4. All of Parcel No. 201-04769-0000;
5. That part of Parcel 201-04773-0000 lying north of Gun Club Road.
(b) Maslowski Beach. The Maslowski Beach consists of that portion of Government Lots
three (3) and four (4) north of the right-of-way easement of U.S. Highway 2.
1. Parcel No. 201-04778-0000 lying north of the rights-of-way of USH 2 & STH
13;
2. Parcel No. 201-04767-0000 lying north of the rights-of-way of USH 2 & STH
13.
(c) Hodgkins Park. Hodgkins Park consists of three ball fields and is the public owned land
Page 463-3
South of Pufall Dr. and East from 11th Ave E to 14th Ave E.
1. Parcel No. 201-02434-0000;
2. Parcel No. 201-02438-0000;
3. Parcel No. 201-05088-0000.
(d) Kreher Park, Beach, Boat Launch, and RV Campground. Kreher Park, Kreher Park
Beach, and RV Campground consists of the public owned land west from the Willis
Avenue to Ellis Avenue and North of the Railroad right-of-way between the two avenues.
This park contains a pavilion, restroom facilities, RV Campground, a fee boat launch and
Marina boat storage.
1. Parcel No. 201-00997-0000;
2. Parcel No. 201-01002-0000; and
3. Undeveloped street rights-of-way.
.
(e) Bayview Park and Beach. Bay View Park consists of those publicly owned parcels
located North of Lake Shore Dr East (U.S Hwy 2 E), West from approximately 21st Avenue East
on the east to 13th Ave East on the west and includes the area commonly referred to as City
Dock; the tract consists of:
1. Parcel No. 201-03301-0000;
2. Parcel No. 201-01141-0000;
3. Parcel No. 201-01139-0000;
4. Parcel No. 201-01140-0000;
5. Easterly portion of Parcel 201-00976-1000 (C&NW RR rights-of-way);
6. Undeveloped street rights-of-way.
(f) Howard Pearson Plaza and Ed Griffiths Pedestrian Pass. The H. Pearson Plaza consists of
the public owned property by Ashland City Hall, the area North of Main St W to U.S. Highway
2, then under U.S. Highway 2 through Ed Griffiths Pedestrian Pass:
1. Parcel No. 201-04239-0000;
2. Parcel No. 201-04240-0000;
3. Northerly ½ of Parcel No. 201-04229-0000
4. 201-04231-0000
5. Undeveloped street rights-of-way.
(g) 6th Avenue Beach. A tract of publicly owned land lying between Lake Shore Drive West
and the shore of Chequamegon Bay, extending along the lakeshore 400 ft. east from the north
end of 6th Ave W. and including the following parcel numbers:
1. Parcel No. 201-04221-0000;
Page 463-4
2. Undeveloped street rights-of-way north of the Waterfront Trail.
(h) Central Railyard Park, Little League Fields & Skatepark. Central Railyard Park consists
of a tract of public and private lands generally bounded on the south by 6th Street West and
parcels containing Zipperers Mini Storage and Chequamegon Bay Engineering, bounded on the
west by Vaughn Avenue, bounded on the north by parcels containing the AADC Enterprise
Center, Bretting Community Center, Bay Civic Center, the historic Soo Line Depot; on the east
by commercial offices including the Chequamegon Clinic consisting of Parcels:
1. 201-01958-0000
2. 201-01959-0200
3. 201-01960-0000
4. 201-01952-0000
5. 201-01965-0000
6. 201-01948-0000
7. 201-01979-0000
8. Parking lot easement on Parcel 201-01945-0000
9. Parking lot easement on Parcel 201-01973-0000
10. Undeveloped street rights-of-way.
(i) East End Skating Rink. A tract of land bounded by 5th Street East on the north, 17th
Avenue East on the east, the alley between 5th Street and 6th Street on the south, and 16th Avenue
East on the west consisting of Parcel:
1. 201-03641-0000
(j) Ellis Park. Block 128, Ellis Division of the City of Ashland consisting of Parcel:
1. 201-01760-0000
(k) Penn Park. Block 264, Ellis Division of the City of Ashland consisting of Parcel:
1. 201-02692-0000
(l) Locomotive Park. Consists of the publicly owned land on Depot Drive including the
following parcel number:
1. 201-01671-0000
(m) Marina Park. Marina Park consists of those lands on the marina peninsula east of Ellis
Avenue comprising that portion of Parcel No. 201-01009-000 lying on the marina peninsula east
of Ellis Avenue.
(n) Menard Park. Consists of the public owned property on the corner of Chapple Ave and
Page 463-5
Main St W, consisting of Parcel:
1. 210-00015-0000
(o) Beaser Park & Martinsen & Bebeau Fields. Consists of the public owned property on
Block 71-72 of Ashland Proper off of Beaser Ave and 8th St W and consisting of Parcel:
1. 210-00564-0000
1. 201-00560-0000
(p) Hot Pond Boat Launch. An area of privately owned lands between Lake Shore Drive
(USH 2 & STH 13) and the shore of Chequamegon Bay at approximately Beaser Avenue outside
of the security fence of the NSPW Bayfront Power Plant for which the City has a license for
maintaining a boat launch consisting of a portion of Parcel:
1. 201-00726-0000
(q) Pig Iron Dock. An area of privately owned lands between Lake Shore Drive (USH 2 &
STH 13) and the shore of Chequamegon Bay at approximately 17th Avenue West outside of, and
west of, the security fence of the NSPW Bayfront Power Plant for which the City has a license
for permitting recreational access consisting of the westernmost portion of Parcel:
1. 201-00726-0000
(r) Ashland Rail Trail System. The Ashland Rail Trail System (ARTS) is described as a
linear corridor of varying widths and about 10 miles in length and includes public property and
private property where the City of Ashland has been granted easements or license for
recreational use. ARTS consists of several components including:
(1) 5th Street Corridor extending from the Tri-County Corridor at Sanborn Avenue on its
west end through Central Railyard Park to Lake Shore Drive at approximately 24th
Avenue East on the east;
(2) Waterfront Trail extending from the Prentice Park pavilion parking lot on the west
and extending along the waterfront through Maslowski Beach, 6th Avenue Landing,
Kreher Park, and Bayview Park to approximately 22nd Avenue East on the east where it
connects to the 5th Street Corridor; and
(3) East Side Connector extending from Bayview Park along the former C&NW railroad
rights-of-way to the 5th Street Corridor at the Public Works Shop.
463.05. Opening & Closing Dates Established.
Page 463-6
(a) Availability of Park Facilities. The facilities of Prentice Park, Maslowski Beach, Bay
View Park, Kreher Park, Howard Pearson Plaza and Central Railyard Park will open the first of
May and close Mid-October (depending upon weather).
(b) Campground Closure. The Kreher Park and Prentice Park Campgrounds shall be closed
from Mid-October (depending upon weather) until the first Saturday in May.
463.06. Park Hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be within any municipal
park lands between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and one-half hour before sunrise with the following
exceptions:
(a) A City sponsored or City approved event.
(b) A registered camper at either the Kreher Park Campground or the Prentice Park
Campground.
(c) Activities directly related to boat launching and trailer parking areas.
(d) Users of the City’s Waterfront Trail and 5th Street Corridor Trail provided trail users are
not congregating with others nor are they loitering in the use of the trail.
463.07. Fees, Charges, Deposits.
(a) Fee Schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to reserve any facility, shelter, pavilion,
or area for which a fee or charge has been approved by the Ashland Common Council, without
payment of such fee or charge. Fees and charges are incorporated within the City of Ashland
Comprehensive Fee Schedule and are reviewed and approved annually by the Common Council.
(b) Special Fees. Any park area, structure, or facility may be reserved or rented for special
purposes subject to approval by the Parks and Recreation Committee.
(c) Program Fees. Fees may be established for recreational programs including separate
resident and non-resident fees, subject to approval by the Parks and Recreation Committee.
(d) Reservations and Deposits. Reservation requests and deposits are handled through the
Parks and Recreation Office. Upon inspection of the premises and surrender of keys where
applicable, the deposit shall be refunded to the user. The deposit will be subject to retention, in
whole or part, by the City if the pavilion or facility used proves to have been subjected to abuse,
inadequately cleaned, or used in violation of current rules and regulations.
463.08. Reservations.
(a) Reservations for pavilions, picnic shelters, green spaces, recreation areas and month long
camping will be accepted on a first come – first serve basis beginning the first Monday in
Page 463-7
February for the calendar year at the Parks and Recreation Department office.
(b) Pavilion, park, and green space reservations must be made at least 24 hours prior to a
scheduled event. Reservations, fees, and charges must be paid at the time the reservation is
made at the Parks and Recreation Department office.
463.09. Personal Conduct and Nuisances.
(a) Personal Conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to indulge in violent, abusive,
indecent, profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud, or otherwise disorderly conduct under
circumstances in which such conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance, or to be so
intoxicated that he/she is unable to care for his/her own safety, upon any City park land.
(b) Property of Others. It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, disturb, molest, or
remove the property or personal effects of others upon any city park land.
(c) Unnecessary Noises. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate sound trucks, loud
speakers, motors, generators, power boats, motor vehicles, or any other mechanical devices that
produce undue or unnecessary noises without first obtaining a written permit from an authorized
agent of the Parks and Recreation Department. Unnecessary noise for the purposes of this
section is defined as any noise that disturbs a person of reasonable sensibilities.
(d) Glass Beverage Containers. It shall be unlawful to bring, or possess, any glass alcoholic
or non-alcoholic beverage container within City park lands, trails, beach or skatepark.
(e) Smoking. Is prohibited within the Purple Park and within 15 feet of all City park
playground structures, ballparks, public beaches, and the skatepark. The “Purple Park” is that
part of the Central Railyard Park, as defined in sec. 463(04)(h), that is bounded by Sixth Street
on the South, Vaughn Avenue on the West, the walkway bordering the Zipperer’s Mini Storage
parcel on the east (including the walkway itself), and the Fifth Street Corridor trail on the north
(including the paved portion of the trail itself).
(1) Smoking shall mean:
(A) Inhaling, exhaling, burning or holding any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form, or
(B) Inhaling or exhaling from, holding, or operating any lighted or activated
electronic device which produces and/or delivers nicotine in a vaporized form, or
is designed, advertised, or marketed to do so, including, but not limited to, devices
commonly known as electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes.
(2) Playgrounds shall mean the area set aside for recreation and play, especially those
containing equipment such as seesaws and swings, owned and maintained by the City.
Page 463-8
(3) Ballparks shall mean a facility, including bathrooms, concession buildings, bleachers
and dugouts in which baseball and softball games are played.
(4) Public beaches shall mean the areas covered with sand or small rock next to Lake
Superior and owned by the City; refers only to Maslowski, Kreher and Bayview Beaches.
(5) Skatepark shall mean the area of concrete with structures built and used for
skateboarding, BMX and aggressive inline skating in Central Railyard Park.
463.10. Destruction of Property, Disposal of Refuse, Cleaning.
(a) Destruction, Defacement, Removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, molest,
deface, remove, or destroy any native tree, shrub, plant, or other natural growth; to carve on or
deface any rock, archaeological feature, signs, walls, structures, barrier, barricade, or railing; to
drive nails in trees, or to move, injure or deface in any manner any structures including
buildings, signs, fences, tables, or other City property.
(b) Disposal of Refuse.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any garbage, sewage, bottles, tin
cans, or other waste material in any manner except by placing in receptacles provided for
such purposes. Discarding bottles, tin cans, garbage, sewage, or other refuse in the water
or on the ice of any river, stream, lake or along roads in any City park lands is prohibited.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person (registered campers excepted) to dispose of
household solid waste or yard waste on any City park lands or within waste receptacles in
City park lands.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, hunter, fisherman, or trapper to utilize a park
restroom, concession stand, pavilion for the gutting and cleaning of fish and game.
(4) Charcoal residue and wood coals shall not be disposed of within waste receptacles
until such time as they are cool to the touch.
(c) Cleaning, Washing. The washing of cars, pets, recreational vehicles, persons, cooking
utensils, or clothing in any river, stream, lake, playground, boat landing, parking lot, roadway or
within fifty feet (50’) of any well, fountain, artesian well, or drinking water outlet within any
City park land is prohibited. The washing of persons, cooking utensils, and clothing shall be
permitted at designated facilities and washing areas.
463.11. Vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate or park any motorized vehicle, except as
provided herein, upon any trail, pathway, beach area, playground, picnic area, athletic field, or
any area other than an established roadway, parking area, boat ramp, and service areas or
contrary to posted notice or within any park seasonally closed to vehicular traffic.
Page 463-9
(a) Vehicular Traffic.
(1) No person shall operate any vehicle in any park in a reckless manner contrary to the
provisions of sec. 346.62, Wisconsin Stats.
(2) It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles
per hour, or contrary to official traffic signs, on roadways and within parking lots within
any City park lands.
(3) It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle at a speed in excess of 5 miles
per hour within the access roads of any City of Ashland recreational vehicle park or
campground, unless otherwise stated.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, other than a government vehicle, to be within the
boundaries of any City of Ashland R.V. Park and Campground between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the person in control of the vehicle first having paid the
applicable R.V. Park or campground entry/user fee with the exception of guests of
campers.
(b) Parking.
(1) No person shall park, stop, or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, any
vehicle, obstruction, or watercraft in any manner as to block, obstruct, or limit the use of
any road, trail, parking lot, boat landing, waterway, or winter sport facility or contrary to
posted notice.
(2) No person shall park, stop or leave standing a motor vehicle within City park lands
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and one-half hour before sunrise except:
(A) Registered campers or their guests at Kreher and Prentice Park.
(B) Persons launching boats.
(C) Persons participating in special events approved by the City or its Parks and
Recreation Department.
(c) Use of Snowmobiles and Off Road Vehicles
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile, all terrain vehicle
(ATV), or utility terrain vehicle (UTV) within any City parklands except routes
designated and signed for snowmobile, ATV or UTV use.
Page 463-10
(2) Persons operating snowmobiles on approved designated routes within City parklands
shall abide by the provisions of Chapter 350, Wis. Stats. and Chapter 505, Ashland City
Ordinances.
(3) Persons operating ATVs or UTVs on approved designated routes within City
parklands shall abide by the provisions of Chapter 23.33, Wis. Stats. and Chapter 507,
Ashland City Ordinances.
463.12. Fires and Firewood.
(a) Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to start, tend, or maintain any fire, except at
designated fireplaces, fire rings, or grills within any City park, except:
(1) Fires for cooking or heating may be made in portable stoves, heaters, or grills at
designated camping and picnic areas.
(2) Special events approved by the City or its Parks and Recreation Department.
(b) Unattended Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a fire unattended.
(c) Burning of Refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn rubbish, trash, plastic,
glass, cans, or household garbage on City park lands.
(d) Collection of Firewood. The collection of firewood from City park lands is prohibited.
(e) Transport of Firewood. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport firewood onto
City parklands from a distance of more than 25 miles from the corporate limits of the City of
Ashland.
463.13. Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, fire, discharge, explode, or
set off any squib, crackers, or other explosive or pyrotechnic device containing powder, or other
combustible or explosive material within the limits of any City park, excepting the exhibitions of
fireworks given under the direction or by the permission of the City or its Parks and Recreation
Department.
463.14. Ashland Rail Trail System.
(a) Trail Use. The use of the Ashland Rail Trail System corridors are limited to pedestrian
activities such as walking and bicycling except as provided within Section 463.14 (c).
(b) Users Shall Share the Trail. All users of the Ashland Rail Trail System shall share the
trail with other users.
Page 463-11
(c) Motorized Vehicles. The operation of Motorized Vehicles on the Ashland Rail Trail
System is prohibited except:
(1) Snowmobiles are permitted on the length of the 5th Street Corridor from Sanborn
Avenue on the west to the south east corner of the Chicago Iron property during those
times in which Ashland County snowmobile trails are open for use in accordance with
Chapter 505, Ashland City Ordinances.
(2) ATVs are permitted on that portion of the 5th Street Corridor between Stuntz Avenue
and 11th Avenue East to permit utilization of the bridge to cross Bay City Creek,
however:
(A) ATVs are restricted to 10 mph when using this trail segment in accordance
with Chapter 507, Ashland City Ordinances.
(B) ATVs are prohibited from traversing or climbing the banks of Bay City
Creek or crossing Bay City Creek in any manner which avoids utilizing the 5th
Street Corridor Trail bridge.
(3) Motorized vehicles are permitted on that portion of the Waterfront Trail from the
access road to the western entrance of the Bayfront Power Plant (15th Avenue West) to
the unimproved trail accessing the private lands licensed for public recreational use by
NSPW known as the Pig Iron Dock.
(4) Municipal vehicles utilized for maintenance, operations, emergency, or enforcement
of municipal ordinances.
(d) Motorized Vehicles Shall Yield. Motorized vehicles are required, in all circumstances, to
yield to pedestrians and non-motorized traffic.
(e) Trail Closing.
(1) In an emergency, or when in the judgment of the Public Works Director and/or Parks
and Recreation Director, or their designees, that flooding, wet conditions, lack of snow,
construction, severe weather, high fire danger, or any other reason that the public interest
demands, may close sections of the trail system.
(2) Portions of the trail system may be closed by the Parks and Recreation Department
for authorized special events.
(3) Use of the portion of the trail system after it is posted “closed” under this section shall
be deemed as trespass.
Page 463-12
463.15. Ashland Skate Park.
(a) In addition to the prohibitions set forth herein, the Parks and Recreation Committee and
its designee may establish administrative and operating rules and policies applicable to the City
skate park when conditions or necessity require.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following conduct while present at
the City skate park:
(1) Skateboarding, inline skating, or otherwise being present at the City skate park
during hours when posted signs indicate that such skate park is closed and usage is not
allowed.
(2) Use of motorized bicycles, scooters, or vehicles on the skateable surfaces within the
City skate park.
(3) Placing or using ramps, tables, benches, or other objects not constructed as an
integral part of the skate park within the skate parks’ skateable surface areas.
(4) Using alcohol, tobacco, or unlawful drugs within any part of the skate park area.
(5) Allowing or possessing any animals within the skate park skate area.
(6) Littering within the skate park complex, adjoining parking lots, park lands, and
public street rights-of-way.
(7) Possessing any glass or ceramic container while on the skate park skateable surface
areas.
(8) Profane, obnoxious, boisterous, or rowdy behavior disturbing to others.
(9) Utilization of the skate park without wearing a properly fastened helmet that is
specifically approved and sold as a helmet for skateboarding or inline skating.
463.16. RV and Tent Camping.
(a) Camping.
(1) Occupancy of Kreher and Prentice Park campsites is first come – first serve except
for month long campers who may reserve sites at Kreher Park.
(2) APR may accept nightly reservations for groups of 10+ RVs. Reservations must be
Page 463-13
made at least four months in advance through the APR Office and are subject to the Parks
and Recreation Director’s approval.
(3) It shall be unlawful to camp or use a camping unit on any City park land other than
designated campsites within Kreher or Prentice Park.
(4) The Parks and Recreation Committee, and its designated agent, may provide
exemptions to City park camping restrictions for special events.
(b) After Hours Loitering.
(1) Parking of vehicles, congregating of individuals, or loitering at the Kreher Park beach,
restrooms, playground, pavilion, boat launch area or boat launch parking lot between the
hours 10:00 p.m. and one-half hour before sunrise by anyone other than registered
campers or individuals or parties launching boats is strictly prohibited.
(2) Parking of vehicles, congregating of individuals, or loitering at the Prentice Park,
restrooms, playground, pavilion, boardwalk between the hours 10 PM and one-half hour
before sunrise by anyone other than registered campers is strictly prohibited.
(c) Registration and Payment of Camping Fee. Self Registration is required of all parties
occupying a campground campsite for any purpose prior to occupancy.
(d) Tent camping is prohibited at Kreher RV Park. Family tents are allowed on a paid and
occupied RV site as an accessory use.
(e) Check-Out time is 11:00 a.m. Occupants of a site after 11:00 a.m. without permission of
the camp host or caretaker will be charged another night’s camping fee
(f) Occupation Limit. A site may not be occupied by more than eight (8) persons.
(g) Length of Stay.
(1) Kreher RV Park – no one may occupy the following lakefront RV campsites: 15, 18,
19, 20 and 23, continuously for more than 14 days. Sites 15, 18, 19, 20 and 23 are not
able to be reserved and are only available on a first come first serve basis unless approved
by special circumstance by Parks and Recreation Director: i.e. host site, medical reasons,
etc.
(2) Prentice Park - No one may occupy a tent campsite continuously for more than 14
days. RV sites with a recreational vehicle (RV) are available for month long rentals.
(h) Placement of Vehicles and Tents.
Page 463-14
(1) Camping units are restricted to the designated parking area on each campsite. No
more than two motor vehicles (or six motorcycles) are allowed on any one campsite.
(2) The number of tents allowed on any one campsite depends on the sizes of the tents
and of the site. Tents may not exceed the boundaries of the site. Tents must be placed on
a tent pad at the campsite. Tents are not allowed to be placed in the woods.
(i) Quiet Hours Established. Campground quiet hours are between 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(1) Any noise originating from campsites, camping units, the Waterfront trail, beach,
playground, restrooms, or pavilion bothersome to campers at the Kreher RV Park
Campground is prohibited.
(2) Any noise originating from campsites, camping units, boardwalk, slough, trails,
restrooms, playground, or pavilion bothersome to campers at the Prentice Park
Campground is prohibited.
463.17. Use of the Soo Line Ore Dock.
(a) Applicability. This section applies to the structure known as the Soo Line Ore Dock,
AKA Ashland Ore Dock, more specifically described as the structure that extends into Lake
Superior from the shore between Stuntz Avenue and Seventh Avenue East, or between Blocks 17
and 18, Ellis Division, City of Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin.
(b) Closures. City staff, as delegated by the City Administrator, may close the Ore Dock, or
a part of it, to the public for maintenance activities, during periods of inclement weather, during
special events authorized by the City, or to protect the public from any hazard to health, safety,
or welfare. The public shall be given notice of the closure of the Ore Dock through the
placement of signs or physical barricades or both sufficient to provide reasonable notice of the
closure to the public. It shall be a violation of this section to:
(1) Move or remove a sign or barricade providing notice of closure.
(2) Enter the Ore Dock, or any closed part of it, when it has been closed pursuant
to this section.
(c) Special events. The Parks and Recreation Department may authorize weddings and other
brief ceremonies (less than an hour) that are small enough to allow the public substantial access
to most of the Ore Dock during the ceremony. Any event that would require closure of the entire
Ore Dock or a substantial portion of it must be approved by the City Council.
(d) Children. No child under the age of ten years shall be on the Ore Dock unaccompanied
by an adult, and no parent or guardian shall allow a child under the age of ten years to be on the
Ore Dock unaccompanied by an adult.
Page 463-15
(e) Prohibitions. No person shall:
(1) Tamper with, remove, damage, or misuse any rescue ring, safety ladder,
navigational aid, light, or other safety device.
(2) Climb on, move, remove, or damage any fence or barricade.
(3) Remove, damage, or destroy any City property on the Ore Dock, such as but
not limited to picnic tables or trash cans.
(4) Draw or paint or otherwise place any graffiti on any portion of the Ore Dock,
or any fence or barricade or other structure on the Ore Dock.
(5) Jump or dive from the Ore Dock.
(6) Swim from the Ore Dock.
(7) Light, use, or maintain any fire on the Ore Dock or in or on any device on the
Ore Dock.
(8) Discharge any fireworks not specifically authorized by the City.
(9) Operate any motorized vehicle not specifically authorized by the City.
(10) Moor a vessel of any sort to the Ore Dock for more than four hours without
permission of the Marina Manager.
(11) Moor a vessel in any manner which interferes with the ingress or egress of
the RV Kiyi from the adjacent dock.
(12) Use or possess any glass container.
(13) Dispose of any trash or refuse of any nature on the Ore Dock or in the waters
or on the ice near the Ore Dock.
(14) Use any alcoholic beverage or possess any alcoholic beverage unless it is in
the container in which it was sold and the container is sealed as it was when sold.
(15) Be so intoxicated as to be a danger to himself or herself or others.
(16) Smoke. Smoking means:
(A) Inhaling, exhaling, burning or holding any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form, or
Page 463-16
(B) Inhaling or exhaling from, holding, or operating any lighted or activated
electronic device which produces and/or delivers nicotine in a vaporized form, or
is designed, advertised, or marketed to do so, including, but not limited to, devices
commonly known as electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes.
463.18. Beaches.
(a) Swimming Area Boundary Markers. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or
mistreat any swimming area buoy or marker at any public swimming beach.
(b) Swimming Area Limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to swim beyond the limits of
swimming area marker buoys where such buoys are provided.
(c) Lifeguards.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to ignore the instructions of a lifeguard in the
performance of his/her duties.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on unnecessary conversation with
lifeguards or falsely call for help or assistance; to stand, sit, or cling to any lifeguard
perches; or, except in emergency, to climb into or cling to any lifeguard boats.
(d) Bathing Dress. It shall be unlawful for any swimmer or bather to enter the water or onto
any bathing beach unless clothed in suitable dress or suit.
(e) Glass Containers. It shall be unlawful to possess or use any glass container on a beach
within City park lands.
463.19. Animals.
(a) Pets.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow pets to enter any public building,
swimming bathing beach, or playgrounds within City park lands with the exception of
service animals.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow pets to run at-large at any time within
City park lands except those areas specifically designated as pet runs. In those areas in
which pets are permitted, dogs shall at all times be kept on a leash not more than six (6)
feet long. All pets shall be effectively restrained and under the owner’s control at all
times. At-large pets are subject to seizure by animal control officers.
(3) No person shall tether a pet to a tree or plant.
Page 463-17
(4) No person shall permit any dog, cat or other pet to enter the Kreher Park, Bayview
Park, or Maslowski Park beach swimming areas.
(5) No off leash pets are allowed within the fences of the Beaser Park Baseball fields,
Central Railyard Baseball fields, Hodgkins Park Baseball fields, and Penn Park.
(6) No person shall allow his/her pet to deprive or disrupt the enjoyment or use of any
City park land by others.
(b) Horses.
(1) Horses are prohibited within all City parklands. Exceptions will be made for special
events approved by the City or Parks and Recreation Department.
(2) Should a special event be approved in which horses will be a part, it shall be
unlawful to ride a horse in a careless, negligent or reckless manner so as to endanger the
life, property or person of others on any City park roads, or designated trails, or to ride,
lead, or have a horse in any manner on the beaches, foot paths, picnic grounds, athletic
fields, or other similar special public use areas of any City park lands.
(c) Hunting and Trapping. No person shall intentionally kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any
manner disturb or cause to be disturbed any species of wildlife within City park lands, recreation
areas or conservation areas except:
(1) Fishing is permitted on park lands and recreation areas with the proper state
license.
(2) Hunts or trapping authorized by the City for the purpose of controlling or removing
nuisance animals.
(d) Animal Excreta. Any owner or person having the immediate care, custody, or control of
any animal shall promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, any excreta left or
deposited by the animal on City park lands.
463.20. Feeding Wildlife. No person shall purposely or knowingly feed, bait, or in any manner
provide access to food to any wild animal or waterfowl within City park lands.
463.21. Alcoholic Beverages.
(a) Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages within any
City park lands without first acquiring the appropriate license from the Ashland City Clerk’s
office. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall only occur in compliance with Wisconsin Statutes
and City Ordinance.
(b) Enforcement of Drinking Laws. The permit or license holder shall be responsible for
Page 463-18
complying with the alcoholic beverage laws of municipal ordinance, Wisconsin Statute, and the
policies of the Ashland Parks and Recreation Department.
(c) Violations. Violators of the alcoholic beverage provisions of this Ordinance will be asked
to leave City park lands and may be cited for the violation of Wisconsin’s alcoholic beverage
statutes and municipal alcoholic beverage ordinances.
463.22. Installation, Maintenance, & Replacement of Public, Private Utilities.
(a) Location. The location and placement of all public and private utilities serving City park
and recreation facilities or crossing City park lands shall be undertaken in conjunction with
discussions with the Parks and Recreation Department and Parks and Recreation Committee.
(b) Construction. All public and private utilities located within the boundaries of City park
lands, recreation areas, or conservation areas shall be placed underground. The reconstruction or
rebuilding of any existing above ground utility will include the placement of that utility line
underground.
463.23. Peddling and Soliciting. It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, or business
to peddle or solicit business of any nature whatever or to distribute handbills or other advertising
matter or to post unauthorized signs, posters, bills, or decorative matter on any vehicle,
structures, trees, light poles, sign posts, or property within City park lands or use such lands,
structures, or property as a base of commercial operations for soliciting or conducting of
business, peddling or providing services within or outside of such lands, structures, or property
unless first authorized in writing by the Parks and Recreation Department.
463.24. Additional Park Rules, Permits.
(a) Additional Rules. Rules, policies, and regulations may be made from time to time by the
Common Council governing the further use of and enjoyment of City park lands, playgrounds,
trails, beaches, conservation areas, and the facilities thereof provided that such rules may not
contradict or conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any person who shall violate such
rules, policies, or regulations, or who refuses to subject himself thereto, may be excluded from
the use of such facility.
(b) Permits. Any person, organization, company to whom a park use permit or special event
permit has been issued shall be bound by the provisions of all ordinances of the City of Ashland
and the rules, policies, and regulations of use of City park lands as fully as though the same were
inserted in each permit.
463.25. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or any
rule, policy, or order adopted hereunder, shall pay a forfeiture of not less than One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) nor shall more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a
separate offense be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
Page 463-19
463.26. Restitution. In addition to the foregoing, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter, or any rule, policy, or order adopted hereunder, shall be directly liable
to the City of Ashland for the actual cost of repair or replacement of any property owned or in
control of the City of Ashland which was damaged or destroyed by the said violation. The court
may order restitution to the City of Ashland for said costs in addition to the foregoing penalties.
Said restitution may be ordered in cash or labor under the direction of the Parks and Recreation
Director.
ADOPTED: 463 (1819) 12/10/2013
AMENDMENTS: 463 (1833) 9/30/2014; 463 (2020-1926) 02/11/2020
Page 464-1
CHAPTER 464. THE RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE OF THE
ASHLAND MARINA.
464.01. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use of
and conduct at the Ashland Marina.
464.02. Incorporation with Other Chapters. This chapter incorporates by reference Chapters
301 and 463..
464.03. Operation and Parking of Motorized Vehicles.
(a) Marina Breakwall or Boardwalk. No motor vehicle shall be operated or parked on the
marina breakwall or boardwalk.
(b) Unpaved Portions of Marina. No motor vehicle shall be operated or parked on any
unpaved portion of the marina premises.
(c) Speed Limit. The speed limit between the railroad tracks and the breakwall shall be 10
mph.
464.04. General Rules of Conduct.
(a) Open Fires. No open fires or grills are permitted on the boardwalk or docks.
(b) Swimming. Swimming or diving from the breakwall, docks, boardwalk or from any
portion of the marina is prohibited.
(c) Fishing. Fishing is permitted only from the breakwall.
(d) Trash. All trash must be placed in designated containers. Batteries, oil, and other wastes
cannot be placed in trash containers. These substances are considered hazardous and must be
discarded properly in containers so designated for hazardous wastes.
(e) Noise. It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made any noise or sound of such
volume or of such a nature as to cause annoyance to other individuals. Quiet time must be
observed after 10:00 p.m.
464.05. Club Members and Guest Only Access.
(a) Dock Access. Port of Ashland Marina and Yacht Club tenants, guests, authorized marina
personnel and transient boaters only are permitted on the docks.
(b) Late Hours Access. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., only Port of Ashland
Marina and Yacht Club members and their guests are permitted beyond the entrance to the
marina. Signs shall be erected establishing the location of the entrance to the marina for purposes
of this section.
Page 464-2
464.06. Boater Rules.
(a) No Wake. No wake must be observed inside the breakwall. Idle speed only shall be
permitted.
(b) Transient Boaters. Transient boaters for overnight or short term parking must tie up on
the breakwall. Slip assignment will be made by marina personnel only.
(c) Fuel Pump. Fueling and pump outs shall be performed by authorized marina personnel
only.
464.07. Penalty. Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a forfeiture of not less
than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 plus the cost of prosecution.
ADOPTED: 464 (1142) 8/9/1988
AMENDMENTS: 464 (1203) 8/8/1989
Page 465-1
CHAPTER 465. MOORING OR DOCKING ON WATERFRONT PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.
465.01. City Owned Waterfront Structure. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is
in control of any type of boat to moor, dock or tie-up to any waterfront structure or land owned
by the City of Ashland.
465.02. Exemptions. The ordinance does not apply to mooring, docking or tying of boats in the
City of Ashland Marina and the Sunset Park Boat Launch. The use of the City of Ashland
Marina and the Sunset Park Boat Launch areas are subject to all rules and regulations created by
the Harbor Commission, Park Board and/or the Common Council of the City of Ashland.
465.03. Penalties. A violation of this ordinance is punishable by a forfeiture of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to the forfeiture, the violator shall be obligated to pay the City of Ashland the costs of
prosecution, including reasonable attorney's fees.
ADOPTED: 465 (1143) 8/9/1988
Page 467-1
CHAPTER 467. SAFETY ZONE IN A PORTION OF CHEQUAMEGON BAY IN THE
CITY OF ASHLAND, WI.
467.01. Safety Zone Established. There shall be a safety zone established in that portion of
Chequamegon Bay offshore from the City of Ashland. Chequamegon Bay is part of Lake
Superior and borders the City of Ashland to the north. The safety zone is generally described as
a ten (10) acre area in Chequamegon Bay located east of the Ashland Boat Landing at the end of
4th Avenue East (also known as Prentice Avenue). The Ashland Marina Park Peninsula borders
the site to the southwest. The safety zone shall be as shown on the map which is attached hereto
on as Exhibit A.
467.02. Purpose of Safety Zone. The purpose of the safety zone is to protect the public from the
effects of soil sediments, surface water and groundwater within the safety zone which sediments
and water have been deemed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources as being
contaminated with tar products which contain high concentrations of polyacrylic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs). Sediments also contain elevated levels of heavy metals. PAHs include
phenanthrene, acenaphthene and fluoranthene. The Wisconsin Department of Health (WDH)
along with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has determined that the site is
a public health concern from possible exposure to hazardous substances via dermal contact,
ingestion or inhalation of contaminated soil or sediments. The Wisconsin DNR has determined
that swimming and wading in the designated areas is unsafe. In addition, the DNR has
determined vessel traffic through the area is unsafe because of the agitation of the bottom and
further spreading of contaminated sediments.
467.03. Prohibited Activities.
(a) Vessel Traffic. Vessel traffic in the safety zone is prohibited.
(b) Swimming. Swimming and/or wading in the safety zone is prohibited.
467.04. Signage. The City of Ashland has been advised by the DNR that the DNR will place, at
its expense, signage and floating markers which the DNR deems appropriate for public notice of
the safety zone. The City of Ashland approves said signage and floating markers.
467.05. Penalty. Violation of this ordinance shall result in a civil forfeiture of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each offense, plus the costs of prosecution, including
reasonable attorney's fees.
ADOPTED: 467 (1378) 6/25/1996

Page 469-1
CHAPTER 469. RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS GOVERNING PARCELS LOCATED
WITHIN THE ASHLAND INDUSTRIAL PARK.
469.01. Intent. In the interest of protecting the health, safety and welfare of all citizens, and to
preserve the value of property in the Industrial Park as well as property near or adjacent to,
certain restrictions shall hereafter govern the subdivision and use of parcels located within the
Ashland Industrial Park. These covenants apply to all parcels within the Industrial Park
boundaries. Boundaries of the Park are depicted on the attached map, labeled Exhibit A.
469.02. Restrictions, Covenants, and Conditions. Any new subdivision or development
occurring on parcels located within the Ashland Industrial Park shall be subject to the following,
regardless of ownership, and to the requirements and conditions of Section 5.3 A: Ashland
Industrial Park of the Unified Development Ordinance.
469.03. Uses Allowed. Parcels in the Ashland Industrial Park are intended for general industrial
uses only that are not in conflict with any law of the State of Wisconsin or any ordinance of the
City of Ashland. Allowable permitted and conditional uses are set forth in Part 4 and Sec.
5.3(A) of the Unified Development Ordinance.
469.04. Approvals Required. No development, building, or any improvement thereto, shall be
allowed on any parcel within the Industrial Park until approved by the Zoning Administrator,
Building Inspector, Plan Commission and/or City Council. The Zoning Administrator, Building
Inspector, Plan Commission, or City Council shall approve or disapprove applications for
permits with respect to conformity with the requirements and restrictions specified in Section 5.3
A: Ashland Industrial Park of the Unified Development Ordinance.
469.05. Parcel Requirements. No building or structure shall be constructed or erected within
the Industrial Park boundaries on parcels containing less than two (2) acres total land area.
469.06. Sale of Land.
(a) Land in the Industrial Park shall be sold in parcels no smaller than two acres, at a price of
$2,500 per acre, except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) below.
(b) The Council retains its discretion to sell or not sell land in the Industrial Park based upon
its determination of the best interests of the City.
(c) If more than one party is interested in a particular parcel, the Council may accept an offer
to purchase the parcel for more than $2,500 per acre, but is not required to accept the higher
offer. The Council shall select a purchaser based on its determination of the best interests of the
City, taking into account projected use, development, employment, and offered purchased price.
(d) A business acquiring land in the Industrial Park (the “Buyer”) shall be granted a rebate of
part or all of the purchase price for each “qualified full-time equivalent position” created after
the acquisition of the Industrial Park property, filled, and retained for a minimum of two years.
The rebate shall be provided to the purchaser upon request of the Buyer and the provision of
proof by the Buyer that all requirements for the rebate as set forth herein have been met. The
amount of the rebate shall be based on the jobs per acre created and the compensation level of
Page 469-2
each job, as set forth in the chart below:
Jobs/Acre Price/Acre
4.5 1
4.0 250
3.5 500
3.0 750
2.5 1000
2.0 1250
1.5 1500
1.0 1750
0.5 2000
0 2500
(1) A “qualified full-time equivalent position” shall be a position that is located in the
City of Ashland, that pays for at least 2,080 hours of work per year at no less than 150%
of the then-current federal minimum wage, and that includes some employee benefits
beyond those required by law.
(2) Each job for which a deduction from the purchase price is granted shall be created
and filled within six months of the closing date of the sale of the Industrial Park land to
the business, except as may be extended by the Council at the time of entering into the
agreement for sale, due to special circumstances, such as (but not limited to) the need to
construct a new building.
(3) The Buyer shall certify to the City its creation and filling of each position required
under this paragraph. Such certification shall include a summary statement by the Buyer,
made under oath, stating the total number of qualified full-time equivalent positions in
Ashland and elsewhere prior to purchase of the Industrial Park land and the total number
of qualified full-time equivalent positions in Ashland and elsewhere created after the
purchase of the Industrial Park land, together with a copy of such payroll records as the
City may require to establish the Buyer’s baseline employment before the creation of the
additional positions for which the deduction has been granted, and such payroll records
as substantiate the creation and filling of each new qualified position.
(4) During the 24 month period of time that the position is required to be filled, the
Buyer shall notify the City if the position is terminated or if it becomes vacant, within 30
days of either such event. The City shall have the right to audit the payroll records of the
Buyer for the period for which the position is required to last. The Buyer shall retain
such records for three years from the end of the 24 month employment period, and the
City’s right to inspect shall continue for that three year period. During this period of
time, the Buyer shall upon the City’s request and without requirement of legal process,
provide all payroll records as requested by the City or its employee or agent.
(5) If the Buyer does not create the number of qualified full-time positions within the
time required or if the Buyer fails to retain those positions for 24 months, then the Buyer
shall not be entitled to a full rebate, but may be entitled to a partial rebate based on the
Page 469-3
number of positions actually filled and the length of time the positions were filled.
469.07. Utilities.
(a) Water Service. Water service to the site shall be provided by the Ashland Water Utility
when water mains exist at parcel boundaries. Refer to Chapter 705, Ashland City Ordinances for
more information. Rates and hook-up fees are regulated by the Public Service Commission. For
current rates, contact the Water and Wastewater Utility.
(b) Sanitary Sewer Service. Sanitary sewer service is provided by the City of Ashland and is
regulated by Chapters 711 and 712, Ashland City Ordinances. For current rates, contact the
Water and Wastewater Utility.
469.08. Period of Development. All purchasers of land within the Ashland Industrial Park must
commence construction of improvements and buildings or structures on lands purchased under
the terms of these restrictive covenants within two (2) years of the date of purchase. If purchaser
fails to construct any improvements after two years have elapsed, title to said land will revert
back to the City of Ashland and the City shall refund the purchase price of land in full less
accrued taxes to the purchaser by the City. Conveyance of land back to the City shall be by
warranty deed, free and clear of all liens or encumbrances created by act or default of purchaser.
469.09. Easements. The City of Ashland shall retain easements necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance and installation of all utilities, storm-water drainage systems and public
rights-of-way.
469.10. Sale of Land By Purchaser
(a) Offer to City. In the event any purchaser of land from the City of Ashland elects to sell
any portion thereof which is not being used in connection with the business or industry of the
purchaser, or which purchaser desires to sell separate and distinct from any sale of the business
or industry being conducted by the purchaser, the same shall be offered for sale, in writing, to the
City of Ashland for an amount calculated at the original land sale price per square foot. The
transfer of land shall meet the minimum lot size established by this ordinance and the Unified
Development Ordinance.
(b) City Reply. The City of Ashland shall have ninety (90) days from the date of receipt of
such offer to accept or reject the same, unless an extension of time may be mutually agreed upon
and set forth in writing. Acceptance or rejection of such offer shall be indicated by resolution
adopted by the Common Council of the City of Ashland.
(c) Conveyance to City. In event of acceptance of such offer by the City of Ashland,
conveyance shall be by warranty deed, free and clear of all liens or encumbrances created by act
or default of the purchaser.
(d) Release. If the City of Ashland fails to act on such offer or sale within ninety (90) days
from receipt thereof, or rejects said offer, purchaser may sell said lands to any person, firm, or
corporation and the City shall have no further interest therein, except that any use of said lands
by any subsequent purchaser shall be subject to applicable zoning laws and any other restrictions
Page 469-4
and regulations of the City, relating to the use of said premises at the time of such sale.
469.11. City Obligation. The City of Ashland shall maintain in good repair all public streets,
and storm, water and sanitary sewer systems in the Industrial Park.
469.12. Penalties. Any person, corporation, or organization violating these restrictions shall be
liable to a forefeiture of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
ADOPTED: 469 (1766) 1/10/2012
AMENDMENTS: 469 (1824) 1/28/2014
Page 475-1
CHAPTER 475. ORDINANCE TO ANNEX LAND (TOWN OF GINGLES).
475.01. Acquisition.
(a) Pursuant to the powers vested in the City of Ashland pursuant to Wisconsin Statute
66.025, the City of Ashland is entitled to annex territories owned by and lying near but not
necessarily contiguous to the City of Ashland.
(b) The City of Ashland has acquired fee title to the following described parcels of real
estate:
Parcel 1. The Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (NE1/4 SE1/4) of Section Eighteen
(18), Township Forty-seven (47) North, Range Four (4) West, in the Town of Gingles, Ashland
County, Wisconsin, EXCEPT parcels described as follows:
(a) Commencing at the Southeast (SE) corner of said NE1/4 SE1/4. Thence North along the
East line of said NE1/4 of the SE1/4 a distance of 800 feet to a point; Thence West on a line
parallel with and 800 feet North of the South line of said NE1/4 of the SE1/4 a distance of 544.6
feet to a point; Thence South on a line parallel with the East line of said NE1/4 of the SE1/4 a
distance of 800 feet to a point; Thence East along the South line of said NE1/4 of the SE1/4 to
the Southeast (SE) corner and the point of beginning.
(b) Commencing at the Southwest (SW) corner of the said NE1/4 of the SE1/4. Thence N. 1°
06’ E., 599.94 feet along the West line of said NE1/4 of the SE1/4; Thence S. 49° 11’ E., 960.40
feet to a point on the South line of said NE1/4 of the SE1/4; Thence N. 87° 50’ W., 738.89 feet
on the South line of said NE1/4 of the SE1/4 to the Southwest (SW) corner and the point of
beginning.
(c) The right-of-way of State Trunk Highway No. 112 as described in Volume 208 of Deeds,
on page 94, as Document No. X150067. (Tax. I.D. No. 8-311-0300).
Parcel 2. The Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter (NW1/4 NE1/4), Section Eighteen
(18), Township Forty-seven (47) North, Range Four (4) West, Town of Gingles, Ashland
County, Wisconsin. There is excepted here from all lands previously deeded for Town Road
purposes along the above described West line. (Tax I.D. No. 8-303-0000).
Parcel 3. A parcel of land being a part of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of
Section 18, Township 47 North, Range 4 West, Town of Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin,
more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the North ¼ corner of Section 18,
Township 47 North, Range 4 West; thence S 1° 14’ W along the North-South Quarter line of
said Section 18, 1300.60’ to a point, being the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the
Northeast Quarter; thence S 88° 10’ E along the North line of the Southwest Quarter of the
Northeast Quarter, 655.50’ to a point being the place of beginning, and running: Thence
continue S 88° 10’ E along the North line of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter,
171.51’ to a point; Thence S 17° 57’ W, 593.36’ to a point; Thence N 1° 09’ E, 570.08’ to the
place of beginning. (Tax I.D. No. 8-304-0200)
Page 475-2
Parcel 4. A parcel of land being a part of the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter and the
Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, Section 18, Township 47 North, Range 4 West,
Town of Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the North ¼ corner of Section 18, Township 47 North, Range 4 West; thence S
1° 14’ W, along the North-South quarter line of said Section 18, 466.72’ to a point on said
quarter line, being the place of beginning, and running: Thence S 1° 14’ W along said North-
South quarter line, 833.88’ to a point, said point being the Southeast corner of the Northeast
Quarter of the Northwest Quarter; Thence N 87° 17’ W along the South line of said Northeast
Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, 16.90’ to a point; Thence S 21° 09’ W, 877.25’ to a point;
Thence N 68° 51’ W, 350.00’ to a point; Thence N 21° 09’ E, 200.00’ to a point; Thence N 24°
21’ E, 1468.83’ to the place of beginning. Excepting here from all land previously deeded for
Town Road purposes along the above described East line. (Tax I.D. No. 8-306-0400).
Parcel 5. A parcel of land in the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (SW1/4 NW1/4) of
Section Eighteen (18), Township Forty-seven (47) North, Range Four (4) West, and more
particularly described as follows: Commencing at the South-East corner of said Southwest
Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 18, Township 47 North, Range 4 West, thence
North 0° 59’ E along the 1/8 line 121.9 feet to an iron pipe at the point of beginning; thence
continuing N 0° 59’ E along said 1/8 line 651.2 feet to a iron pipe; thence S 40° 49’ W 500.0
feet; thence S 49° 11’ E 417.0 feet to the point of beginning. (Tax I.D. No. 8-306-0700)
Parcel 6. A parcel of land being part of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of
Section 18, Township 47 North, Range 4 West, Town of Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin,
more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the Southwest corner of the Northeast
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 18, Township 47 North, Range 4 West, Town of
Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin: Thence N 1° 06’ E 599.94 feet along the West line of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 18, to a point along a line parallel to
and 750 feet northeasterly of the centerline of runway 13/31; Thence S 49° 11’ E 960.40 feet
along a line parallel to and 750 feet northeasterly of the centerline of runway 13/31 to a point on
the south line of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 18; Thence N
87° 50’ W 738.89 feet along the south line of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of
said Section 18, to the point of beginning Parcel contains 5.09 acres. (Tax I.D. No. 8-311-0400).
Parcel 7. A parcel of land being a part of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter and
the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, Section 19, Township 47 North, Range 4 West,
Town of Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the West ¼ corner of Section 19, Township 47 North, Range 4 West and being
the place of beginning: Thence N 0° 42’ E along the West section line of said Section 19,
1328.20’ to a point, being the Northwest corner of said Southwest Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter; Thence S 88° 30’ 30” E, along the North line of the Southwest Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter and the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter, 1666.35’ to a point;
Thence S 21° 09’ W, 1412.25’ to a point on the South line of the Southwest Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter; Thence N 88° 25’ W along the South line of the Southwest Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter, 1172.91’ to the place of beginning. Excepting herefrom all lands previously
Page 475-3
deeded for Town Road purposes along the above described West line. (Tax I.D. No. 8-321-
0200).
Parcel 8. A parcel of land being a part of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter
(NW1/4 SW1/4) of Section Nineteen (19), Township Forty-seven (47) North, Range Four (4)
West, Town of Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the West ¼ corner of Section 19, Township 47 North, Range 4 West and being
the place of beginning; Thence S 88° 25’ E, along the East-West quarter line of Section 19,
1205.91 feet to a point; Thence S 21° 09’ W, 1408.10 feet to a point on the South line of the
Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; Thence N 88° 39’ 30” W along the South line of
the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, 682.76 feet to the Southwest corner of the
Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; Thence N 0° 47’ E along the West section line of
Section 19, 1329.80 feet to the place of beginning. (Tax I.D. No. 8-323-0200).
475.02. Annexation. The City of Ashland hereby annexes the above described territories and
said territories shall be detached from the Town of Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin.
475.03. Copies of Ordinances. The above described territories shall attach to the City of
Ashland upon filing five certified copies of this Ordinance in the office of the Secretary of State
of the State of Wisconsin, together with five copies of a plat showing the boundaries of the
territories attached. Two copies of the Ordinance and plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary of
State to the Department of Transportation, one copy to the Department of Revenue and one copy
to the Department of Public Instruction.
ADOPTED: 475 (1336) 12/13/1994
Page 476-1
CHAPTER 476. ORDINANCE TO ANNEX LAND (TOWN OF EILEEN).
476.01. The City of Ashland, pursuant to the authority granted by Wisconsin Statute 66.0223
hereby annexes the following described property owned by the City of Ashland located in the
Town of Eileen, Bayfield County, Wisconsin:
Parcel 1. A parcel of land being a part of the SE ¼-NE ¼, Section 24, Township 47 North,
Range 5 West, Town of Eileen, Bayfield County, Wisconsin, more particularly described as
follows: Commencing at the East ¼ corner of Section 24, Township 47 North, Range 5 West
and being the place of beginning. Thence N 88º 30’ W, along the East-West quarter line of
Section 24, 210.74’ to a point; Thence N 17º 57’ E, 710.58’ to a point on the East Section line of
Section 24;Thence S 0º 42’ W along the East section line of Section 24, 681.56’ to the place of
beginning. Excepting herefrom all lands previously deeded for Town Road purposes along the
above described East line.
Parcel 2. A parcel of land being a part of the NE ¼ - SE ¼, Section 24, Township 47 North,
Range 5 West, Town of Eileen, Bayfield County, Wisconsin, more particularly described as
follows: Commencing at the East ¼ corner of Section 24, Township 47 North, Range 5 West
and being the place of beginning; Thence S 0º 47’ W along the East Section line of Section 24,
1006.48’ to a point; Thence N 68º 51’ W., 500.00’ to a point; Thence N 17º 57’ E., 874.05’ to a
point on the East-West quarter line of Section 24;Thence S 88º 30’ E along the East-West quarter
line of Section 24, 210.74’ to the place of beginning. Excepting herefrom all lands previously
deeded for Town Road purposes along the above described east line.
476.03. Filing Copies. Following the passage and publication of this ordinance, the City Clerk
shall file seven (7) certified copies of this ordinance together with seven (7) copies of a plat
showing the boundaries of the territory annexed to the Office of the Secretary of State of the
State of Wisconsin.
ADOPTED: 476 (1584) 11/4/2003
Page 477-1
CHAPTER 477. ORDINANCE TO ANNEX LAND ADJACENT TO AIRPORT.
477.01. Property Annexed. The City of Ashland, pursuant to the authority granted by
Wisconsin Statute 66.0223 hereby annexes the following described property owned by the City
of Ashland located in the Town of Gingles, Ashland County, Wisconsin:
The Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (S.E. 1/4 - N.W. 1/4), Section 18, Township
Forty-Seven (47) North, Range Four (4) West, City of Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin,
less parcel described as follows: commencing at the center of Section Eighteen (18), Township
forty-Seven (47) North, Range Four (4) West, the point of beginning; thence North 87° 52' West
along the East-West quarter line a distance of 1309.8 feet to an iron pipe at the West One-
Sixteenth corner; thence North 00° 59' East 773.1 feet along the West One-Eight line to an iron
pipe; thence South 49° 11' East 579.7 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 21° 09' East 236.5 feet
to an iron pipe; thence South 68° 51' East 150.0 feet to an iron pipe; thence 21° 09' East 200.00
feet to an iron pipe; thence North 24° 21' East 572.06 feet to a point on the North One-Eighth
line; thence South 87° 17' East along said One-Eighth line 352.19 feet to an iron pipe on the
North-South Quarter line; thence South 01° 14' West along the said North-South Quarter line
1300.6 feet to the point of beginning. Recorded as Document No. X295556, Volume 599 on
Page 854-855, Ashland County Register of Deeds, January 5, 2005, more particularly described
as follows:
Part of the S.E. 1/4 of the N.W. 1/4 of Section 18, T47N, R4W, in the City of Ashland, Ashland
County, Wisconsin, commencing at the N.W. corner of said Section 18, thence South 00° 01'
18" West along the West line of the N.W. 1/4 of said Section 18, aforesaid 1329.14 ft., thence
South 87° 23' 49" East along the North line of the S.W. 1/4 of the N.W. 1/4 of said Section 18,
aforesaid 1289.42 ft. to the point of beginning of the parcel to be described, thence continuing
South 87° 23' 49" East along the North line of the S.E. 1/4 of the N.W. 1/4 of said Section 18,
aforesaid 964.77 ft., thence South 24° 05' 34" West 576.39 ft., thence South 21° 09' 00" West
200.00 ft., thence North 69° 23' 37" West 150.00 ft., thence South 21° 09' 00" West 236.50 ft.,
thence North 49° 11' 00" West 579.70 ft. to a point on the West line of the S.E. 1/4 of the N.W.
1/4 of said Section 18, thence North 00° 51' 18" East along said line 545.45 ft. to the point of
beginning. Said parcel contains 591,104.84 sq. ft., 13.569 acres, and is subject to all existing
easements and restrictions of record.
477.02. PersonS Residing. There are no persons residing on or occupying the subject parcel.
477.03. Survey Map. Attached hereto and incorporated by reference is a survey map reflecting
the location of the subject parcel.
477.04. Filing Copies. Following the passage and publication of this ordinance, the City Clerk
shall file seven (7) certified copies of this ordinance together with seven (7) copies of a plat
showing the boundaries of the territory annexed to the Office of the Secretary of State and the
State of Wisconsin.
Page 477-2
ADOPTED: 477 (1639) 9/26/2006
Page 478-1
CHAPTER 478. LAND ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSITIONS.
478.01. Intent. This chapter outlines the process by which the City of Ashland reviews and approves
land sales and acquisitions. This ordinance shall be consistent with State Statute 62.23 (5).
478.02. Property Inventory. The Department of Planning & Development shall maintain a detailed
Property Inventory of all City-owned parcels, including location, acreage, current use(s) and reasons for
City ownership, if applicable. All parcels inventoried shall be designated as either essential, essential
with conditions, or non-essential. The Plan Commission and City Council shall review the detailed
Property Inventory annually and approve the listing of essential, essential with conditions, and nonessential
City owned properties.
478.03. Essential Properties. Essential properties shall be kept in City ownership and not be available
for purchase. Essential properties are:
(a) Part of an existing or planned park, trail, or public open space;
(b) Necessary for public utility or stormwater management;
(c) Necessary for existing or future public rights-of-way (roadways, alleys, sidewalks); or
(d) Adjacent to or provides access to Lake Superior;
(e) Public Facilities.
478.04. Essential Properties with Conditions. Essential properties shall be kept in City ownership
until such time a proposal for redevelopment is approved. Properties listed as essential with conditions
are:
(a) Part of a planned redevelopment project; or
(b) Available in whole or in part when certain conditions are met; and
478.05. Non-Essential Properties. Non-essential properties are City owned parcels not deemed
necessary for use by the City of Ashland or for any current or future public purpose, are available for
purchase.
478.06. City-Initiated Land Sales. This section applies to the offering of parcels for sale initiated by
the City and not at the request of a purchaser. The City may use any of the three procedures described
in Sections (a), (b), and (c), below, for the sale of parcels owned by the City. Unless otherwise directed
by the Common Council, the Department of Planning and Development, under the general supervision
of the City Administrator, shall determine the appropriate procedure for the sale of any specific parcel,
provided that all sales must receive review by the Plan Commission and final approval by the Common
Council.
(a) Request for Proposals Procedure. This procedure will generally be used when the City has a
special interest in the particular use to which a property will be put.
(1) Staff shall develop a Request for Proposals (RFP), entertaining proposals from developers
and adjacent property owners for the parcel’s reuse. The RFP shall be written to reflect the goals
of the City’s 2004 Comprehensive Plan, as amended; goals as an Eco-Municipality; City of
Ashland ordinances; and other City-adopted requirements. The RFP shall be sent out to
Page 478-2
potential developers and adjacent property owners, posted, and advertised as a legal notice in the
City’s designated newspaper. Proposals shall be submitted to the Planning and Development
Department.
(2) Upon receipt of a proposal or proposals, City staff shall review and make a recommendation
to the Plan Commission. The offered purchase price, proposed future use, and other relevant
factors shall be considered in the recommendation. Parcels not meeting the minimum lot size of
the zoning district may only be (1) sold to adjacent property owners to be combined with another
parcel or (2) if the City rezones the parcel to place it in an adjacent zoning district where the
parcel would be in conformance.
(3) The Plan Commission shall review the proposal or proposals and forward a recommendation
to the Common Council for review and final action.
(4) The purchaser shall be responsible for all costs involved with the sale, as the particular
circumstances of the sale require, including but not limited to appraisal, title insurance, recording
fees, and Certified Survey Map preparation.
(5) If applicable, easements for continued access to utilities or for other purposes shall be
executed in conjunction with the land sale.
(6) Unless otherwise provided by the Common Council in its approval of the land sale, approval
of the land sale shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of such approval. The closing of
the sale shall occur within the period so provided unless an extension is granted by the Common
Council.
(b) Listing with Real Estate Broker Procedure. This procedure will generally be used when the City
does not have a special interest in the particular use to which a property will be put (beyond those
interests expressed in the Uniform Development Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, and other relevant
City policies), and when a parcel is deemed to be generally marketable.
(1) Staff shall develop a Request for Proposals (RFP) to accept proposals from local real estate
brokers for the listing of City properties that are for sale. The listing contract may be for one or
more parcels, and may grant exclusive listing rights for up to one year. The listing contract shall
specify that the listing broker shall inform any potential purchaser of the special costs and
procedures involved in the purchase of City property. The Common Council shall approve a
listing contract based upon the qualifications, experience, and sales record of the brokerage, and
the financial and other terms of the proposed contract. If more than one property is to be listed
for sale, the Council, in its discretion, may enter into different listing contracts for different
properties. Offers received by the listing broker shall be transmitted to the Planning and
Development Department.
(2) All offers shall be accompanied by the down payment and a non-refundable fee as
established in the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule Codification Ordinance 165. Upon
receipt of an offer to purchase, City staff shall review and make a recommendation to the Plan
Commission. The offered purchase price, proposed future use, and other relevant factors shall be
considered in the recommendation. Parcels not meeting the minimum lot size of the zoning
district may only be (1) sold to adjacent property owners to be combined with another parcel or
(2) if the City rezones the parcel to place it in an adjacent zoning district where the parcel would
be in conformance.
(3) The Plan Commission shall review the offer to purchase and forward a recommendation to
the Common Council for review and final action.
Page 478-3
(4) The purchaser shall be responsible for all costs involved with the sale, as the particular
circumstances of the sale require, including but not limited to appraisal, title insurance, recording
fees, and Certified Survey Map preparation.
(5) If applicable, easements for continued access to utilities or for other purposes shall be
executed in conjunction with the land sale.
(6) Unless otherwise provided by the Common Council in its approval of the land sale, approval
of the land sale shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of such approval. The closing of
the sale shall occur within the period so provided unless an extension is granted by Common
Council.
(c) Informal Sales Procedure. This procedure will generally be used when a parcel, for reasons of
size, shape, location, value, or otherwise, is not deemed to be generally marketable.
(1) Staff will negotiate a proposed sale with a proposed purchaser, and recommend the sale to
the Plan Commission. The proposed purchase price, proposed future use, the factors that make
the informal sales procedure appropriate for the parcel, and other relevant factors shall be
considered in the recommendation. Parcels not meeting the minimum lot size of the zoning
district may only be (a) sold to adjacent property owners to be combined with another parcel or
(b) if the City rezones the parcel to place it in an adjacent zoning district where the parcel would
be in conformance. Staff may recommend waiver of any of the costs provided for in subsection
(3), below.
(2) The Plan Commission shall review the proposed sale and forward a recommendation to the
Common Council for review and final action.
(3) Except as waived upon recommendation of staff and approval by the Common Council, the
purchaser shall be responsible for all costs involved with the sale, as the particular circumstances
of the sale require, including but not limited to appraisal, title insurance, recording fees, and
Certified Survey Map preparation. Upon recommendation of staff and approval by the Common
Council, the down payment and non-refundable fee as established in the City’s Comprehensive
Fee Schedule Codification Ordinance 165 may also be waived.
(4) If applicable, easements for continued access to utilities or for other purposes shall be
executed in conjunction with the land sale.
(5) Unless otherwise provided by the Common Council in its approval of the land sale, approval
of the land sale shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of such approval. The closing of
the sale shall occur within the period so provided unless an extension is granted by Common
Council.
478.07. Citizen-Initiated Purchase Request. If a party expresses an interest in a City-owned nonessential
property or essential with conditions property, the party shall submit the appropriate
application to the Department of Planning & Development indicating future use, offer price and other
relevant information. The party shall be required to submit with the request a down payment and a nonrefundable
fee as established in the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule Chapter 165.
(a) City staff (Director of Planning & Development, Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector,
Director of Public Works, Parks & Recreation Department, City Administrator, and City Attorney) shall
review the request and information about the proposed offer and land use. It may be necessary for
additional City Committees to review the request if applicable.
Page 478-4
(b) City staff shall provide a recommendation on the property’s highest and best use, considering
current uses and allowable uses according to City Ordinances and the 2004 Comprehensive Plan, as may
be amended, and forward the recommendation along with any conditions, to the Plan Commission.
(c) The Department of Planning & Development shall publish a Class I Public Hearing notice and
notify in writing all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the parcel/s under the request.
(d) The Plan Commission shall review the proposal and forward a recommendation to the Common
Council for review and final action to accept and transfer the land contingent on items established or to
deny the request.
(e) If the sale of the property is denied by the Common Council, the down payment shall be refunded.
The application fee shall not be refunded.
(f) The purchaser shall be responsible for all costs involved with the sale, as the particular
circumstances of the sale require, including but not limited to appraisal, title insurance, recording fees,
and Certified Survey Map preparation.
(g) If applicable, easements shall be drawn up and finalized in parallel to finalizing the closing
documents on the land sale.
(h) Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the Common Council and the purchaser, approval of the
land sale shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of such approval. The closing of the sale shall
occur within the period so provided unless an extension is granted by Common Council.
478.08. Sale of Land in the Industrial Park.
(a) City-owned lands in the Industrial Park shall continue to sell as currently regulated by Chapter
469.
(b) If a party expresses an interest in a City-owned property in the Industrial Park, the party shall
submit a written request to the Department of Planning & Development indicating future use and other
related information. The party shall submit a down payment and a non-refundable fee as established by
the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule Chapter 165 along with the request, for the purpose of public
notification expenses.
(c) Review of the offer to purchase request shall follow Section 478.31 (a – h).
478.09. Land Acquisition. The City of Ashland may seek parcels for purchase or receive parcels from
a tax deed transfer which would provide a public benefit.
478.10. Land Acquisition Through Purchase or Tax Deed Transfer. Properties that are identified by
the City of Ashland for acquisition shall fit with the goals of the Comprehensive Plan and be for Rightof-
Way or utility purposes, redevelopment, public recreation, or for another public purpose.
(a) The process for acquisition through purchase shall be as follows:
(1) City staff shall coordinate an offer to purchase on the property with the contingency that final
approvals of the purchase are necessary from the Plan Commission and Common Council.
(2) The land acquisition shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and
recommendation, and to the Common Council for final action.
(3) Upon Common Council approval, the property closing shall be finalized by City staff and the
City Attorney.
Page 478-5
(b) The process for acquisition through tax deed transfer shall be as follows:
(1) City staff shall work with Ashland County to acquire desirable land in the City of Ashland
when parcels arrive on tax deed.
(2) The land acquisition shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and
recommendation, and to the Common Council for final action.
(3) Upon Common Council approval, the property closing shall be finalized by City staff and the
City Attorney.
478.11. Land Donations. Property owners interested in offering a land donation to the City of Ashland
shall provide a written letter of offer to the Department of Planning & Development including all details
of the offer.
(a) City staff, including the Director of Planning & Development, Zoning Administrator, Building
Inspector, Director of Public Works, Parks & Recreation Department, City Administrator, and City
Attorney shall review information about the proposed land donation.
(b) City staff shall make a recommendation on the land acquisition, factoring in the property’s
highest and best use, current and allowable uses according to the City Ordinances and the
Comprehensive Plan, as well as the assessed value. The land donation offer shall be forwarded to the
Plan Commission for review and recommendation.
(c) The Plan Commission’s recommendation shall be forwarded to the Common Council for review
and final action.
(d) Upon Common Council approval, the property closing shall be finalized by City staff and the
City Attorney.
ADOPTED: 478 (1807) 6/11/2013
AMENDMENTS: 478 (2016-1866) 01/26/2016
Page 491-1
CHAPTER 491. REGULATION OF VEHICULAR TRAFFIC ON THE ASHLAND
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT.
491.01. Definition of Words and Phrases.
(a) Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
(b) Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting, unless specifically included, vehicles
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or any vehicle propelled by the use of electricity
obtained from overhead trolley structures.
(c) Emergency Equipment. Emergency equipment is defined as Ambulances, Crash Rescue
and Fire Fighting Apparatus and such other equipment as the City of Ashland may designate as
necessary to safeguard airport runways, taxiways, ramps, buildings and other property.
(d) Service, Maintenance and Construction Equipment. Equipment normally operated by the
City of Ashland and/or the Civil Aeronautics Administration on landing areas, runways,
taxiways and peripheral roads for the servicing, maintenance and construction of airport facilities
and services. This definition shall include equipment owned and operated by a contractor
performing work on the airport under a contractual agreement with the City of Ashland.
491.02. Operation of Vehicles on Runways, Taxiways and Ramps.
(a) Privately Owned Vehicles. No privately owned vehicle shall enter, be driven upon or
operated upon any airport runway, taxiway, or ramp or tie down area or any area posted by signs
prohibiting the entrance thereof.
(b) Official Duties. The provisions of this section shall not apply to Emergency Equipment
and/or service maintenance and construction equipment when engaged in performing official
duties.
(c) Aircraft Owners. Aircraft owners will be excluded from the provisions of this section
relating to tie down areas, when necessary, to reach their own aircraft but in doing so they shall
not pass over any runway, taxiway, or ramp and shall proceed through said tie down area at a
speed not to exceed 10 miles per hour. They shall not at any time park a vehicle on any area
used for the movement of aircraft.
491.03. Speed of Vehicles. No vehicle shall be driven upon any road within the perimeter of the
Municipal Airport, or upon other airport areas in excess of the speed limit posted at the entrance
of said airport or within the boundaries thereof if more than one speed limit shall be applicable,
nor shall the driver of any vehicle fail to adhere to any sign posted to regulate vehicular traffic on
or about any public airport for the public safety
491.04. Pedestrian Traffic on Airport. No pedestrian shall be allowed beyond the
administration area onto the apron or aircraft tie down area unless for the purpose of embarking
Page 491-2
in or disembarking from an aircraft, or unless authorized by the airport manager. Pedestrian
traffic is prohibited in the runway and outlying area of the airport except for those employees of
the City, County, State, Federal Government, or contractors engaged in airport construction or
maintenance work.
491.05. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Police and the Supervisor of the Municipal
Airport to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
491.06. Violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
upon conviction thereof forfeit not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00 together with the cost
of prosecution.
ADOPTED: 491 (653) 12/10/1957
AMENDMENTS: 491 (661) 4/8/1958
Pager 492-1
CHAPTER 492. AIRPORT OPERATION AND MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR THE
JOHN F. KENNEDY MEMORIAL AIRPORT.
492.01. Definition of Words and Phrases.
(a) “Airport” means the John F. Kennedy Memorial Airport.
(b) “Fixed-Based Operator” or “Operator” means any person, firm, corporation, or
association conducting any aeronautical business on the airport.
(c) “Manager” means the person employed by the Commission under Section II.
(d) “Owner” means the City of Ashland and the County of Ashland, Wisconsin.
(e) “Commission” means a group of three persons appointed by the owners, under Wisconsin
Statutes 114.14, which has jurisdiction for the construction, improvement, equipment,
maintenance and operation of the airport.
492.02. Airport Commission.
(a) Jurisdiction. The Commission shall have jurisdiction for the construction, improvement,
equipment, maintenance, and operation of the Airport.
(b) Regulations. The Commission shall adopt regulations and establish fees or charges for the
use of the Airport not inconsistent with this Ordinance. Such regulations, fees and charges will
become effective when approved by the Owner.
(c) Manager. The Commission may employ a Manager whose duties and responsibilities
shall be specified in writing and whose salary shall be approved by the Owner.
(d) Managerial Duties. The Manager, under the supervision of the Commission, shall have
the duty of administering and enforcing all airport ordinances, leases and agreements, and rules
and regulations.
(e) Meetings. The Commission and the Manager shall meet at the Airport at least once each
calendar quarter to inspect the Airport facilities, review Airport operations and financial matters,
and discuss proposed Airport development and other business.
(f) Accounting System. The Commission shall, in cooperation with the appropriate municipal
department, establish an airport accounting system of sufficient detail to enable the Commission
to accurately establish rates and charges, eliminating inefficient operation and maintenance
practices, and accomplish sound financial planning.
(g) Annual Report. The Commission shall prepare and submit an annual report to the Owner.
Such report shall include current information on aircraft operations, based aircraft, airport
expenditures and revenues, along with comparative figures for the past year and projections for
Pager 492-2
the coming year, and include other information deemed pertinent.
(h) Annual Budget. The Commission shall prepare and submit to the Owner an annual budget
setting forth anticipated revenues and expenditures, including capital improvements.
(i) Ordinances. The Commission shall prepare and submit for adoption by the Owner an
ordinance establishing minimum requirements for the conduct of aeronautical services on the
Airport and an ordinance regulating vehicle and pedestrian traffic on the Airport.
(j) Leases and Agreements. The Commission shall prepare and submit for adoption by the
Owner standard leases and agreements for the various types of airport activities and land uses
authorized in this Ordinance.
(k) Studies and Surveys. The Commission shall make studies and conduct surveys as
appropriate to assist in improving the operation of the Airport. It shall cooperate with the
Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration in airport and
system planning functions and other activities.
(l) Cooperation. The Commission shall cooperate with, and receive the cooperation of, all
municipal departments providing services or assistance to the airport.
492.03. Airport Operations Policies. The Commission, in carrying out its duties and
responsibilities, shall adhere to the following policies:
(a) The Owner shall refrain from engaging in any activity or providing any service,
excluding Airport maintenance, using public employees or funds that can be conducted or
provided satisfactory by private parties through proper lease agreements.
(b) The Owner shall encourage the development of the Airport, especially in those areas
where substantial building costs are incurred by lessees, by approving long-term leases which
provide for the re-examination and readjustment of rates and charges at specified periods of time
during the term of the lease.
(c) The Owner may provide or participate in the installation of utility service up to a
lessee??s property line. The lessee shall bear such costs on his leased property.
(d) No person shall engage in any business or commercial activity whatsoever on the
Airport except under the terms and conditions prescribed in a written agreement between the
lessee and the Commission. Lessee shall be selected on the basis of their qualifications,
financial capabilities, and services offered; and not solely be bid basis. In determining the use of
public building space, first consideration shall be given to public necessity and convenience.
The Commission will provide the Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics with one complete copy of
each current lease and agreement.
(e) Buildings to be constructed by lessees shall conform to all state and local building
codes, and the building plans shall be subject to the approval of the Commission; Wisconsin
Pager 492-3
Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations; Wisconsin Division of Aeronautics; and
the Federal Aviation Administration.
(f) No person shall engage in the activity of storing, transporting, or dispensing of
aviation fuels to the general public except those persons satisfying the requirements as set forth
below.
(g) No person shall engage in the activity of storing, transporting, or dispensing of
noncommercial aviation fuels except those persons holding a written agreement with the
Commission to do so.
(h) Aircraft ground access to the Airport property shall not be allowed without specific
authorization by the Commission.
492.04. Minimum Standards. The minimum standards for a person or persons, firm or
corporation based upon and engaging in one or more aeronautical services at the John F.
Kennedy Memorial Airport, Ashland, Wisconsin, shall be as set forth in sections 492.05-492.10.
492.05. Written Agreement. Each operator seeking to perform any of the following services
shall sign a written agreement with the Airport Commission prior to the commencement of said
service.
(a) Aircraft Sales. An aircraft sales operator is a person or persons, firm or corporation
engaged in the sale of new or used aircraft through franchises or licensed dealership or
distributorship (either on a retail wholesale basis) of an aircraft manufacturer or otherwise; and
provides such repair, services, and parts as necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty on new
or used aircraft sold by him.
(b) Airframe and Power Plant Repair Facilities. An aircraft engine and airframe
maintenance and repair operator is a person or persons, firm or corporation providing one or a
combination of airframe and power plant repair services, but, with at least one person currently
certificated by the Federal Aviation Administration with rating appropriate to the work being
performed. This category of aeronautical services shall also include the sale of aircraft parts and
accessories, but such is not an exclusive right.
(c) Aircraft Rental. An aircraft rental operator is a person or persons, firm, or corporation
engaged in the rental of aircraft to the public.
(d) Flight Training. A flight training operator is a person or persons, firm or corporation
engaged in instructing pilots in dual and solo flight training, in fixed or rotary wing aircraft, and
provides such related ground school instruction as is necessary preparatory to taking a written
examination and flight check ride for the category or categories or pilot' licenses and ratings
involved.
(e) Aircraft Fuels and Oil Dispensing Services. Line services shall include the sale and
intro-plane delivery of recognized brands of aviation fuels, lubricants, and other related aviation
Pager 492-4
petroleum products. The Operator shall provide servicing of aircraft, including ramp assistance
and the parking, storage, and tie down of aircraft within the leased area.
(f) Radio, Instrument, or Propeller, Repair Station. A radio, instrument, or propeller
repair station operator is a person or persons, firm or corporation engaged in the business of and
providing a shop for the repair of aircraft radios, propellers, instrument, and accessories for
general aviation aircraft. This category shall include the sale of new or used aircraft radios,
propellers, instruments, and accessories, but such is not an exclusive right. The Operator shall
hold the appropriate repair shop certificates issued by FAA.
(g) Aircraft Charter and Air Taxi. An aircraft charter and an air taxi operator is a person
or persons, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of providing air transportation (persons
or property) to the general public for hire, either on a charter basis (Commercial Operation) or as
an air taxi operator, as defined in the Federal Aviation Act.
(h) Specialized Commercial Flying Services. A specialized commercial flying services
operator is a person or persons, firm or corporation engaged in air transportation for hire for the
purpose of providing the use of aircraft for the activities listed below:
(1) Non-stop sightseeing flights that begin and end at the same airport.
(2) Cropdusting, seeding, spraying, and bird chasing.
(3) Banner towing and aerial advertising.
(4) Aerial photography or survey.
(5) Firefighting.
(6 Power line or pipe line patrol.
(7) Any other operations specifically excluded from Part 135 of the Federal Aviation
Regulations.
(i) Multiple Services. A multiple services operator shall be one who engages in any two (2)
or more or the aeronautical services described above.
492.06. Aircraft Liability Insurance.
(a) Required when performing the following services:
(1) Aircraft Sales
(2) Aircraft Rental
(3) Flight Training
(4) Aircraft Charter and Air Taxi
(5) Specialized Commercial Flying Services
Pager 492-5
(b) Limits.
(1) Bodily Injury (Each accident)
$100,000 each person
$300,000 each accident
(2) Passage Liability
$100,000 each passenger, each accident
(3) Property Damage
$300,000 each accident
492.07. Comprehensive Public Liability and Comprehensive Property Damage Insurance.
Required when performing any services at the airport.
(a) Limits.
(1) Bodily Injury (Each accident)
$100,000 each person
$300,000 each accident
(2) Property Damage
$300,000 each accident
492.08. Student and Renters Liability Insurance. Required when performing the following
services:
(a) Aircraft Rental
(b) Flight Training
492.09. Products Liability Insurance.
(a) Required when performing the following services:
(1) Aircraft Sales
(2) Airframe and Power Plant Repair Facilities
(3) Aircraft Fuels and Dispensing Service
(4) Radio Instrument or Propeller Repairs Station
(5) Specialized Commercial Flying Services
(b) Limits- $300,000 each accident
492.10. Insurance certificates required. Each operator must carry all insurance as required
under 492.06 through 492.-9 as determined by the respective services performed by said
operator. A certificate of the required insurance shall be filed with the Commission at the
Pager 492-6
inception of the operator’s agreement. Operator shall provide continuing certifications of the
continued existence of the required insurance throughout the term of the agreement.
492.11. Enforcement. The Commission shall have the power to suspend or revoke the contract
or agreement of any fixed base operator who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance. The Commission shall have the authority to conduct full investigation into alleged
violations.
492.12. Suspension/Revocation of Contract. The Commission shall have the power to suspend
or revoke the contract or agreement of any fixed base operator who fails to comply with any of
the provisions of this Ordinance. The suspension or revocation shall be effective 10 days after
written notice is given to the fixed base operator. The fixed base operator may request a hearing
on the revocation or suspension before the Commission during the 10 day period following
written notice and said hearing shall be held within the said 10 day period. The decision of the
Commission shall be final and binding.
492.13. Forfeiture. The Commission may impose a forfeiture of $500/day should an operator
continue to conduct business of any sort at the Airport after any suspension or revocation.
ADOPTED: 492 (933) 2/12/1980
AMENDMENTS: 492 (1526) 10/30/2001
Page 495-1
CHAPTER 495. AIRCRAFT PARKING AT JOHN F. KENNEDY MEMORIAL
AIRPORT.
495.01. Designation of Airport Ramp. The parcel of land that terminates airport taxiways,
immediately South of the Airport Terminal building, and incorporates all permanent in-ground
tie-downs.
495.02. Purpose of Lot. Airport Ramp shall be used for parking of aircraft, subject to the
conditions, limitations, and provisions of this policy.
495.03. Airport Ramp Designation and Fees. The Airport Commission shall designate parking
areas and tie-down fees. The parking policies and fee schedule shall be attached to this policy
“Addendum I” and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.
495.04. Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the City of Ashland
Police Department.
495.05. Penalties. Any citation or tickets issued for violation of this chapter shall carry
penalties as follows:
(a) Violations. The owner of any aircraft, determined to be in violation of the provisions of
this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of not less than Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars nor more than
One-Hundred ($100.00) Dollars.
(b) Daily Offense. Each day that the violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
(c) Court costs. Any person convicted of violation of this ordinance shall be responsible for
all court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City of Ashland in enforcing this
ordinance.
(d) Presumption. It shall be presumed for the purpose of this hapter that the registered owner
is the operator of the aircraft parked in violation of this chapter.
ADOPTED: 495 (1519) 6/26/2001
Page 495-2
ADDENDUM I
Ordinance # 495
Parking Regulations – Airport Ramp
General
Aircraft parking is available to any aircraft operator on a first-come, first-served basis.
Aircraft over 10,000 lbs gross take-off weight must park on the concrete pad, on the south side of
the ramp area.
Transient aircraft (overnight or less) may use the tie-downs located between the Airport
Terminal Building and the fuel pumps, or as directed by the Airport Manager.
Short Term Parking
Aircraft may be parked on the Ramp area for up to 14 days without a tie-down fee. The aircraft
may use the tie-downs to the West of the Airport Terminal Building, or on the concrete pad, or as
directed by the Airport Manager.
Long Term Parking
Aircraft may be parked on the Ramp area for greater than 14 days with the payment of a tiedown
fee and entering into an Airport Tie-Down Lease. Fees may be collected by the Airport
Manager. The aircraft may use the tie-downs to the West of the Airport Terminal Building, or
on the concrete pad, or as directed by the Airport Manager.
Monthly Fee: $40.00 plus tax.
Page 501-1
CHAPTER 501. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATION.
501.01. Intent and Purpose. In the interest of public safety and convenience, and the operation
and protection of City infrastructure, this ordinance regulates the use of and activities within all
public rights-of-way owned by the City of Ashland. This ordinance also governs the permitting
processes to allow in certain situations use of, and certain activities to occur within, public
rights-of-way.
501.02. Definitions.
(a) Alley. “Alley” means a public right-of-way shown on a plat, which provides secondary
access to a lot, block or parcel of land.
(b) As-Built Drawings / Record Drawings. Revised set of drawing submitted by
a contractor upon completion of a project or a particular job. They reflect all changes made in
the specifications and working drawings during the construction process, and show the
exact dimensions, geometry, and location of all elements of the work completed under
the contract.
(c) Awning. A roof-like cover of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework projecting
from and supported by the exterior wall of a building. An awning may be retractable.
(d) Canopy. A roof-like cover, permanent in nature, attached to and projecting from a
building.
(e) City – The City of Ashland.
(f) City Standards. Detailed Drawings and/or written specifications established by the City as
acceptable for use.
(g) Emergency. Emergency means any event which may threaten public health or safety, or
that results in an interruption in the provision of service, including, but not limited to, damaged
or leaking water or gas conduit systems, damaged, plugged, or leaking sewer or storm drain
conduit systems, damaged electrical and communications facilities.
(h) Encroachment. An intrusion into a public right-of-way including, but not limited to,
fences, buildings, or other structures.
(i) Excavate. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb any part of the public
right-of-way.
(j) Infrastructure. Assets owned by the City of Ashland for public use. These assets include,
but are not limited to, the following: water and wastewater systems, highways, streets, roads,
alleys, trails, storm sewer and drainage systems, sidewalks, boulevards, driveways, culverts,
bridges, street lights, airports and airways, parks, equipment, structures including signage, and
Page 501-2
property in the open.
(k) Obstruction. Any structure or object placed on, above or below a public right-of-way
which hinders free and open passage over that or any part of the public right-of-way.
(l) Permittee. Any person or entity to which a right-of-way permit has been granted.
(m) Person. Any person or group of persons, and any entity, including but not limited to a
partnership, corporation, or other limited liability entity.
(n) Planning Director. Includes any person designated or authorized by the Planning Director
to act on behalf of the Planning Director.
(o) Public Right-Of-Way. A public way or thoroughfare dedicated or platted for public use
which includes but is not limited to, a street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, bicycle path and
bridge. A public right-of-way includes that portion between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a
public way and the adjacent property lines (commonly referred to as a boulevard or shoulder).
(p) Public Works Director. Includes any person designated or authorized by the Public
Works Director to act on behalf of the Public Works Director
(q) Revocable Occupancy Permit. A permit issued and fully revocable by the City of Ashland
or other governmental entity which allows an existing encroachment into or within public rightsof-
way to continue for an indeterminate period of time
(r) Right-Of-Way Permit. A permit issued by the City of Ashland that sets conditions to
allow the use of or activities to occur within, including the placement of obstructions,
encroachment or excavation of the public right-of-way.
(s) Public Utility Right-Of-Way User. A person or company permitted access to or owning or
controlling utility lines, equipment structures or facilities within the public right-of-way for the
purpose of providing utility or telecommunication services.
(t) Structure. That which is built or constructed, including, without limitation because of
enumeration, buildings, fences, pergolas and arbors, canopies, signs, billboards, satellite dishes,
fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks, stairways,
tents, gas, electrical or telecommunication lines or structures and anything erected and framed of
component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the
ground.
(u) Utility. Any system of pipes, cables, wires installed for the purpose of providing services,
such as but not limited to, gas lines, communication lines, sanitary or water lines.
501.03. General Provisions.
Any person requesting a permit to use the public Right-of-way is encouraged to contact the
Page 501-3
Department of Public Works to discuss the proposed work.
(a) Any permit allowed or required under this chapter may be applied for and issued to only
the owner of the parcel, business, or activity to be benefitted by the permit, or to the agent of any
such person or entity. No permit shall be issued to a contractor performing services for another
person or entity except as the contractor is serving as the person’s or entity’s agent.
(b) The provisions of all applicable laws are incorporated by reference in any permit issued
under this chapter.
(c) Improvements and restoration shall be constructed to City standards, including any
sidewalk or street connections and landscaping or seeding within the time frame designated by
the Department of Public Works.
(d) Unless otherwise permitted, the holder of the permit shall have the sole responsibility to
restore the public right-of-way to its original condition upon completion of the work, activities,
or placement of the obstruction within the time frame designated by the Department of Public
Works in the permit.
(e) Permit fees shall be quadrupled for any work done, activity performed, or placement of
items in the right-of-way without first obtaining any required permit.
(f) Fees for the permits allowed or required under this chapter are set forth in the City’s
Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
501.04. Exceptions.
The requirements of this ordinance shall not apply to:
(a) Encroachment upon or work within public rights-of-way by the City or the City’s
designee, including utilities installed or maintained under ownership or control of the City,
and performed by the City or a City’s designee;
(b) Household items and rubbish intended to be picked up for disposal and complying with
Chapters 900 and 905: Recycling and Solid Waste Disposal, of the Ashland City Ordinances.
Except as provided in those ordinances, such items shall not be placed on a street, alley or
sidewalk or placed as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and shall not remain for more
than 48 hours.
(c) The planting, moving, pruning, cutting, or disturbing of any tree or shrub located in public
rights-of-way. Refer to Chapter 454: Planting, Maintaining and Removing of Trees and Shrubs,
of the Ashland City Ordinances for permitting and regulations.
(d) Seasonal maintenance of vegetation in public rights-of-way by adjacent parcel owners or
residents, including but not limited to, mowing and gardening;
Page 501-4
(e) Signs allowed or permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 of the Unified Development Ordinance
(781);
(f) Newspaper racks permitted pursuant to Chapter 934: Regulating Newspaper Racks,
Ashland City Ordinances.
(g) Emergency Right-of-Way Work. A right-of-way permit is required prior to all work
being performed within a public right-of-way, except for work performed under an emergency
situation. In an emergency situation, work in public rights-of-way may proceed without first
obtaining a permit. The owner or agent is required to obtain a permit within three business days
of commencing work within a public right-of-way under the emergency provision.
501.05. Permanent Right-Of-Way Permits.
(a) Except as provided in Sec. 501.04, any installation, repair, reconstruction, or removal of a
permanent fixture in the public right-of-way is prohibited without the approval and issuance of a
Permanent Right-of-Way Permit from the Department of Public Works. Examples of work or
activities requiring a Permanent Right-of-Way Permit include but are not limited to:
(1) Installation, repair, reconstruction, removal of:
(A) Driveways
(B) Sidewalks
(C) Culverts
(D) Private Utilities
(E) Landscaping
(F) Drainage systems
(G) Rural address signs
(b) Any person requesting permission to install, repair, reconstruct, or remove a permanent
obstruction within a public right-of-way shall obtain a Permanent Right-of-Way Permit from the
Department of Public Works. The application and all work, uses, or activities shall be consistent
with the following:
(1) The application shall be complete, signed and accompanied by:
(A) The name and contact information of the applicant, and the address of the
subject site;
(B) Name and contact information of contractor (if used);
(C) Reason for and a clear description of the proposed work, use, structure, or
obstruction, and the exact location of said work, use, structure or obstruction;
(D) The requested dates and hours of work or placement of obstruction;
(E) Other local, state or federal approvals, if necessary;
(F) Payment of fees as identified in the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule; and
(G) Any other information to adequately review the request for consistency with this
ordinance.
Page 501-5
(2) Improvements and restoration shall be constructed to City standards.
(3) Unless otherwise permitted, the holder of the permit and the permittee’s contractor, if
any, shall have joint and several responsibility to restore the public right-of-way to its original
condition upon completion of the work, activities, or placement of the structure or obstruction
within the time frame designated by the Department of Public Works.
(4) City infrastructure shall not be disturbed or altered, and shall remain operational,
unless otherwise permitted.
(5) Placement of structures or obstructions shall:
(A) Not present a public safety concern;
(B) Be sufficiently lit (if required by Right-of-way Permit) at night so as to be in
full view of the public from all directions;
(C) Be fenced or guarded (if required by Right-of-way Permit) in a manner which
insures public safety; and
(D) Be consistent with any limitations and conditions set forth in the permit.
(6) Drainage shall not be adversely affected.
(7) Whenever a permittee receives a Right-of-way permit that requires temporary traffic
control, the permittee shall have the sole responsibility to furnish, erect and maintain substantial
barricades and shall furnish, post and maintain warning signs prior to commencement of
activities in accordance with permit requirements.
(c) Any person requesting permission to obstruct a right-of-way by excavation to install,
reconstruct, or remove a permanent structure shall complete, submit and receive a Permanent
Right-of-way Permit under the following conditions:
(1) Any person requesting a permit to perform excavation work within the right-of-way
is encouraged to contact the Department of Public Works to discuss the proposed work.
(2) The Director of Public Works shall deny an application for a permit for excavation in
the Public Right-of-way if the request is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Any permanent structure installed, repaired or removed shall be constructed to
federal, state and local standards.
(4) Any person receiving a Permanent Right-of-way permit for excavation to install,
repair or remove a permanent structure is required to submit an “as built” drawing showing the
construction detail and location of the permanent structure.
(5) Any application for a Permanent Right-of-way permit issued for excavation to install,
repair or remove water or sanitary services shall be accompanied by an application for a water or
wastewater connection/repair permit issued by the Department of Public Works, Utility Division.
Page 501-6
(6) City inspections are required for all sanitary, storm water, or water system
improvements, removal or repairs within the Right-of-way. The City Public Works Department
shall be notified a minimum of 24 hours in advance to schedule required inspections. Any new
installations or repairs to any part of the City sanitary, storm water, or water systems must be
inspected before covering the work. Any sanitary, storm water, or water system work covered
prior to inspections, the City may order that the work be uncovered for inspection. The cost to
uncover such work will be at the permit holder’s expense.
(7) Any inspections that must be performed outside of normal working hours shall be
charged an additional fee as established in the comprehensive fee schedule.
(d) Suspension and revocation.
(1) The Public Works Director may suspend or revoke a permit if the permittee or
permittee’s agent, employee, or contractor is violating or has violated any provision of the permit
or of applicable law.
(2) The process for the suspension or revocation of a permit shall be as follows:
(A) The Public Works Director shall issue a written warning specifying the
violation and the allowable time to bring the violation into compliance.
(B) If the violation is not brought into compliance by the time allowed by the
Public Works Director, the permit may be suspended or revoked and may result in
no future permit being issued to the permittee. A suspension or revocation may
also result in no future permit being issued for work to be done by the permittee’s
contractor depending on the apparent responsibility for the violation.
(C) Under circumstances in which an obstruction of any kind, whether temporary
or permanent, presents an immediate public safety hazard, as determined by the
Public Works Director, the immediate removal of said obstruction/s may be
ordered. If the permit holder fails to remove the obstruction/s, the Public Works
Director may physically remove the obstruction, and charge the cost to the permit
holder. Upon removal of the obstruction, the permit holder shall be given thirty
(30) days in which to salvage the item upon payment of the removal cost and a fee
per day for storage. If not salvaged, the item may be disposed of as surplus city
property.
(D) Any person whose permit has been suspended or revoked may, within ten
days of the suspension or revocation, file a written appeal of the suspension or
revocation with the City Clerk. The appeal shall be considered and decided by
the Common Council within 45 days of the filing of the appeal.
501.06. Temporary Obstructions on Sidewalks.
(a) Except as provided in Sec. 501.04, any work or activity within the public right-of-way
Page 501-7
involving the temporary use of a right-of-way is prohibited without the approval and issuance of
a Temporary Right-of-Way Permit from the Department of Planning and Development.
Examples of work or activities requiring a Temporary Right-of-Way Permit include but are not
limited to the placement of temporary obstructions such as:
(1) Dumpsters, trash receptacles, and recycling receptacles;
(2) Barricades;
(3) Scaffolding;
(4) Sale display or bicycle rack;
(5) Outdoor restaurant or tavern seating or tables;
(6) Retractable/seasonal awnings;
(7) Bicycle racks.
(b) Sales racks, tables, chairs, or other items, other than outdoor restaurant tables or seating,
may be placed upon sidewalks located within the right-of-way with a Temporary Right-of-way
Permit issued under the following conditions.
(1) An application shall be submitted which includes the following:
(A) The name and contact information of the applicant, and the address of the
subject site;
(B) A clear description of the items to be placed and location on the sidewalk;
(C) The requested dates and hours of placement and display;
(D) Payment of fees as identified in the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule; and
(E) Any other information as required to adequately review the request for
consistency with this ordinance.
(2) The Department of Planning and Development shall deny an application for a permit
to temporarily place items on a sidewalk if the request is inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter. Reasons for denial may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(A)The size and placement of the proposed items would present a hazard to
vehicles and/or pedestrians.
(B)The size and placement of the proposed items would hinder adequate access to
the adjacent building.
(3) Standards for placement of temporary items on a sidewalk include, but are not
limited to:
(A) An unobstructed sidewalk clearance of 5 feet shall be maintained for
pedestrian traffic at all times.
(B) An unobstructed sidewalk clearance of twenty four (24) inches shall be
maintained between the face of the curbing and the item/s to be placed upon the
sidewalk.
(C) Placement of items and/or use of a seating area shall not obstruct any points
of building ingress and/or egress.
Page 501-8
(D) Items shall be sufficiently lit at night so as to be in full view of the public
from all directions.
(E) Placement of items and/or use of a seating area shall not obstruct or conceal
any fire hydrant, public bench, garbage receptacle, vehicular/bus stops, public or
government signs, or any other features legally allowed in the public right-ofway.
(F) On corner lots, items shall not be placed within the area bound by the
extensions of the corner building walls between the building and the curb.
(G) All items placed shall be securely stabilized and weighted so as to prevent
unintentional movement.
(H) All persons issued a permit to place items on a sidewalk for display and/or
for a seating area, shall maintain the sidewalk including the adjoining street, curb
and gutter in a neat, clean, sanitary and orderly condition at all times, regardless
of the source of the refuse and litter. All persons issued a permit shall be
responsible for removal of litter from adjoining properties which may have come
from the displayed items or seating areas.
(I) The bottom of a seasonal or retractable awning shall be at least on hundred
(100) inches above grade.
(4) A permit to temporarily place items on sidewalks shall be valid from the date of
issuance to December 31 of the calendar year in which the permit was issued unless otherwise
stated on the permit. A permit to temporarily place items on sidewalks must be renewed January
1 of each calendar year, prior to placement, regardless of the date of issuance.
(c) The Department of Planning and Development may suspend or revoke a permit if the
permittee or permittee’s agent, employee, or contractor is violating or has violated any provision
of the permit or of applicable law. Reasons for a revocation may include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
(1) The location, installation, or placement of the item presents a safety hazard or is
different than what was indicated on the application;
(2) The items being displayed are outside the allowable hours for display;
(3) The items are not appropriately stabilized or weighted.
(4) The items unduly interfere with the pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow within the
right-of-way.
(5) The activities associated with the permit create an undue obstruction or disturbance
(d) The process for suspension or revocation of a permit shall be as follows:
(1) The Department of Planning and Development shall issue a written warning
specifying the violation and the allowable time to bring the violation into compliance.
Page 501-9
(2) If the violation is not brought into compliance by the time allowed by the Department
of Planning and Development, the permit may be suspended or revoked and may result in no
future permit being issued to the permittee.
(3) Under circumstances in which an obstruction presents an immediate public safety
hazard, as determined by the Department of Planning and Development, the immediate removal
of the obstruction may be ordered. If the permit holder fails to remove the obstruction, the
Department of Planning and Development may physically remove the obstruction, and charge
the cost to the permit holder. Upon removal of the obstruction, the permit holder shall be given
thirty (30) days in which to salvage the item upon payment of the removal cost and a fee per day
for storage. If not salvaged, the item may be disposed of as surplus city property.
(4) Any person whose permit has been suspended or revoked may, within ten days of the
suspension or revocation, file a written appeal of the suspension or revocation with the City
Clerk. The appeal shall be considered and decided by the Common Council within 45 days of
the filing of the appeal.
(e) A permit for the placement of outdoor restaurant seating or tables shall be issued pursuant
to all of the conditions and regulations set forth in subsection (b), immediately above, and
(1) May be issued only to a:
(A) Bona Fide Cafe, or
(B) A community, non-profit, or charitable organization for a short-term event
not to exceed 72 hours.
(2) May be issued for:
(A) In the case of a Bona Fide Cafe, the sidewalk immediately adjacent to
the premises owned or occupied by the Bona Fide Cafe, or any street or
alley as approved by the Department of Planning and Development or
designee.
(B) In the case of a community, non-profit, or charitable organization, any
sidewalk where the owner or occupant has granted written permission., or any
street or alley as approved by the Public Works Director or designee.
(3) May be revoked pursuant to the process set forth in Section 501.06(d) immediately
above, for:
(A) Any permissible reason under Section 501.06(c) immediately above, or
(B) If the permitted premises is a source or location of, or a contributing factor to,
unreasonable noise, traffic, disturbance, or trash.
Page 501-10
(C) If any license issued under Chapter 125, Wisconsin Statutes, allows the sale,
serving, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the permitted right-of-way,
such license does not have to be revoked in order for the permit granted
hereunder to be revoked, however no license under Chapter 125 may be
exercised on a public right-of-way without a valid permit for the use of the
right-of-way issued under this section.
(D) Any establishment representing itself as a Bona Fide Café is required to
maintain that status throughout the existence of its permit under this section and
may be required to provide evidence substantiating its status as a Bona Fide
Cafe upon request of the City.
(E) Being classified as a Bona Fide Cafe does not mean that an establishment is
prohibited from operating a bar that serves alcohol beverages to patrons.
(4) A “Bona Fide Cafe” under this subsection means that the establishment’s principal
business is that of a restaurant, coffee house, or other establishment whose primary business is
the sale of food and/or non-alcoholic beverages. Whether an establishment’s principal business
is that of a restaurant or coffee house shall be determined by the Department of Planning and
Development, subject to appeal to the Common Council, based upon the following factors:
(A) The amount of capital, labor, time, attention, and floor space devoted to each
business activity;
(B) The sources of net income and gross income (i.e., revenues generated from
food, alcohol, and other items);
(C) The name, appearance, and advertising of the establishment; the hours of
operation; the frequency, duration, timing and magnitude of entertainment;
staff scheduling; and the use of security staff;
(D) An establishment holding a ‘Class B’ Combination alcohol beverage license
is presumed to be a tavern, not a Bona Fide Cafe. This presumption may be
rebutted by evidence. The burden is on the license holder to provide this evidence.
(E) Generally, an establishment licensed as a restaurant that generates fifty (50)
percent or less of its annual gross revenues from the sale of alcohol is
considered a Bona Fide Cafe.
501.07. Temporary Obstructions on Highways.
(a) Encroachment Prohibited. Except as permitted under this chapter no person shall place,
erect or allow any encroachment or obstruction of any highway right-of-way in the City of
Ashland.
(b) Permit required. An obstruction may be allowed under a written permit issued by the
Director of Public Works. No approval shall be given under this section for activities regulated
Page 501-11
under other sections of this chapter.
(c) Approval of Obstruction. In considering granting a permit for obstructions or
encroachments, consideration shall be given to factors including, but not limited to:
(1) Degree of interference with pedestrian and/or motor vehicle traffic;
(2) Enhancement or detriment to community aesthetics;
(3) Benefits to community through promotion of civic pride, neighborhood relations,
public celebrations, private employment, and commerce;
(4) Potential for public nuisance or blight factors from presence of the encroachment or
obstruction;
(5) Limitations and conditions which should be placed on permit to protect public
interest;
(6) Financial security of permittee to indemnify City from liability for obstruction or
encroachment.
(d) Fee. The Common Council shall, through the Comprehensive Fee Schedule, set fees for
permits for approved obstructions under this section. No fee shall be charged for a permit that
allows a block party or street fair where the permittee does not charge admission, rental, or
concession fees, or authorize others to charge such fees, and where the permittee does not sell
goods or services, or authorize others to sell goods or services, and where no city services are
required for the activity.
501.08. Revocable Occupancy Permit.
(a) A Revocable Occupancy Permit is required for any person who owns, occupies, or
controls an obstruction in a right-of-way, or a structure that encroaches upon a right-of-way.
Examples of when a Revocable Occupancy Permit is required include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Existing building or structures encroaching on the public right-of-way
(2) Existing signs
(3) Existing permanent awnings and canopies
(4) Existing lighting
(5) Existing parking lots
(b) The issuance of a Revocable Occupancy Permit shall be based upon the following:
(1) The application shall be complete, signed and accompanied by:
(A) Written letters of approval from any local, state or federal agency;
Page 501-12
(B) A clear description, exact location, and reason for the obstruction or
structure;
(C) Signatures of all owners of the obstruction or structure encroachment within
the public right-of-way, and the owners of any parcels containing the remaining
portion of the obstruction or structure;
(D) Payment of fees as identified in the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule; and
(E) Any other information required to adequately review the request for
consistency with this ordinance.
(2) Approval of a Revocable Occupancy Permit shall be as follows:
(A) Application, attachments and fees shall be submitted to the Department of
Public Works for initial review, and to determine application completeness.
(B) The Public Works Director or designee will submit all requests to the
appropriate City departments and staff for review, including but not limited to, the
Department of Planning & Development, Fire and Police Departments, the City
Administrator and the City Attorney.
(C) The Public Works Director shall also submit a request for review and
comment to the Historic Preservation Commission if the request affects or may
affect a historic structure, site, or district; and to the Parks and Recreation
Committee if the request effects or may effect park grounds or activities. The
Public Works Director shall forward the request, with a recommendation, to the
Plan Commission for review and recommendation to the Common Council.
(D) After review, the Plan Commission shall be forward the request to the
Common Council for final action.
(3) The following conditions shall be considered before the issuance of a Revocable
Occupancy Permit:
(A) Whether the issuance of the permit is in the public interest.
(B)Whether the issuance of the permit will interfere with the actual or projected
use by the City or the public in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to,
usage of the right-of-way for access, transportation, utilities, and drainage.
(C)Whether the issuance of the permit will cause an increase in public
expenditures.
(4) All Revocable Occupancy Permits shall be issued upon the following conditions:
(A) No property right is granted in the premises covered by a Revocable
Occupancy Permit, and the permit may be terminated for any reason whatsoever
upon a finding by the Common Council that such termination is in the public
interest. Until terminated, the permit is valid indefinitely.
(B) Unless otherwise specified in the permit, the owner/occupant shall have
exclusive use of the premises;
(C) Owner/occupant’s use of the premise shall be in compliance with all local,
state, and federal laws. Owner/occupant shall obtain all permits required by
Page 501-13
local, state, or federal authorities required for the use of the premises;
(D) Issuance of the permit shall not be construed as a waiver of the
owner’s/occupant’s obligation to comply with other or more restrictive City
ordinances;
(E) The owner/occupant shall agree to assume the premise in an “as is” condition
and shall be responsible for any improvements and maintenance;
(F) Any repair shall be consistent with all City ordinances and standards. The
Revocable Occupancy Permit does not grant permission to do any work or
conduct any activity in the right-of-way. No work shall commence without the
issuance of the appropriate permits under this Ordinance;
(G) Upon completion of any permitted work or activities in that part of the public
right-of-way not included in the Revocable Occupancy Permit, the right-of-way
shall be restored to its original condition, consistent with City standards and,
within the time designated by the Department of Public Works in the permit;
(H) Drainage shall not be adversely affected by any structure allowed under the
Revocable Occupancy Permit or any use thereon;
(I) If the permitted obstruction or structure encroachment is damaged from any
cause whatsoever, to the extent that repair costs would be equal to or greater than
fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the obstruction or structure
encroachment at the time of said occurrence, it shall not be repaired, re-erected
and/or replaced anywhere within the existing right-of-way;
(J) The City may revoke the Revocable Occupancy Permit upon thirty (30) days
written notice to the owner/occupant, and shall reserve the right to require
removal of the obstruction or structure encroachment. The owner/occupant shall
remove the obstruction or structure encroachment maintained under the permit
within the time specified in the written notice.
(K) The owner/occupant shall indemnify and hold the City harmless for any loss,
liability, or damage which the owner/occupant, its agents or employees may cause
during the occupancy, including but not limited to:
i. Theft or burglary in or about the premises;
ii. Interruption in any service from any cause;
iii. Fire, water, rain, snow, steam, sewerage, gas or odors, from any
source;
iv. Damage or injury of any sort not caused by negligence of the City
arising from owner/occupant’s use of the premise.
Subject to review or termination, the revocable occupancy permit is valid indefinitely, unless
specified in the permit.
501.09. Public Utility Right-Of-Way User Registration.
A Public Utility Right-of-Way User Registration is required for any person other than the City of
Ashland who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use a public right-of-way for placement of
any permanent utility lines, equipment or facilities for the purpose of providing utility or
telecommunication services. This includes any person with installation and maintenance
Page 501-14
responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment. A Public Utility Right-of-Way User
Registration must be made with the Department of Public Works. The Public Utility Right-of-
Way User Registration shall comply with the following:
(a) The application shall be complete, signed and accompanied by:
(1) Written letters of approval from any local, state or federal agency;
(2) Certificate of Insurance;
(3) Payment of fees as identified in the City’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule; and
(4) Any other information as required by the Public Works Director, other City
Department, or their Designated Authorized Agent to adequately review the request for
consistency with this ordinance.
(b) Approval of a Public Utility Right-of-Way User Registration shall be as follows:
(1) Application, attachments and fees shall be submitted to the Department of Public
Works for initial review, and to determine application completeness.
(2) The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent will submit all
requests to the appropriate City departments and staff for review, including but not limited to the
Department of Planning & Development, Fire and Police Departments, City Administrator and
City Attorney.
(3) The request shall also be submitted to the Public Works Committee for review and
comment, and if necessary, to the Plan Commission, Historic Preservation Commission and/or
Parks and Recreation Committee.
(4) After review by appropriate authorities a recommendation shall be forwarded for
action by the Common Council by the Public Works Department.
(c) The following shall be considered when reviewing a request for a Public Utility Right-of-
Way User Registration:
(1) Applicant shall have a non-exclusive use of the premise;
(2) Granting the request shall not contribute to public expense;
(3) Applicant’s use of the premise shall be in compliance with all local, state, or
federal laws. Owner shall obtain all permits required by local, state, or federal authorities
required for the use of the premises;
(4) Applicant shall not install any utility lines, equipment and/or facilities on private
property without written consent of the owner, and shall verify parcel boundaries.
Easement/access agreements shall be obtained for any City parcels not part of public rights-ofway;
(5) A Public Utility Right-of-Way User Registration shall not be construed as a waiver
of the owner’s obligation to comply with other or more restrictive City ordinances;
(6) City infrastructure shall not be disturbed or altered unless otherwise permitted, and
shall remain visible, accessible and operational. Any City infrastructure damaged shall be
immediately reported to the Department of Public Works, be repaired to City standards, and
inspected and approved by the Public Works Department at the expense of the owner;
(7) Any construction, reconstruction, improvements or restoration of the public rightPage
501-15
of-way after disturbance shall be consistent with City standards and all public rights-of-way shall
be restored to their original condition upon completion of the work, activities, or installation,
unless otherwise permitted;
(8) Drainage shall not be adversely affected due to the installation of any utility lines,
equipment or facilities;
(9) Placement of obstructions during installation and all work and activities shall:
(A) Not present a public safety concern;
(B) Be sufficiently lit at night (if required by permit) so as to be in full view
of the public from all directions;
(C) Be fenced or guarded (if required by permit) in a manner which insures
public safety; and
(D) Be consistent with any limitations and conditions set forth in the
approval.
(10) Owner shall provide the City with digital data documenting the locations of all
utility lines, equipment and facilities. This information shall be provided in a Geographic
Information System compatible format, and shall be referenced to the Ashland County
Coordinate system based upon the NAD83(96) datum.
(11) The owner/occupant shall indemnify and hold the City harmless for any
loss/liability, claims, or damage to any person or property arising from:
(A) Owner’s installation, maintenance and/or operation under the approved
registration;
(B) Vandalism;
(C) Interruption in any service from any cause; and
(D) Fire, water, rain, snow, steam, sewerage, gas or odors, from any source.
(d) The Public Utility Right-of-Way User Registration shall be valid for the lifetime of the
utility lines, equipment and/or facilities, however; it shall be subject to re-approval upon transfer
of ownership of the utility lines, equipment and/or facilities. Any repairs or maintenance to
permitted equipment and/or facilities shall require a right-of-way permit, unless otherwise
specified in the approved User’s registration.
(e) Whether there are any other conditions which should be adopted under Sec. 196.58, Wis.
Stats. and PSC 130, Wis. Admin. Code prior to approval of the registration.
(f) Any other information as required by the Public Works Director, another City Department,
their Designated Authorized Agents, a Commission, Committee or the Common Council, to
adequately review and approve the request.
501.10. Bond & Insurance.
(a) All commercial enterprises, including paving companies, general contractors,
subcontractors and landscapers, submitting an application or performing work under the
provisions of this ordinance shall also provide or have on file with the Public Works Department
Page 501-16
security in an amount determined by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent
to be sufficient to protect the City’s interests in the event of a failure of the commercial
enterprise to comply with all requirements under the law and under any applicable permit.
Unless otherwise specified by the Director of Public Works due to the specific circumstances of
a situation, the required security. The security shall be a $500 cash deposit for a single permit,
held for a one year period or a $5,000 bond for all permits obtained within a one year period.
(b) No permit, registration or agreement shall be issued for work to be performed by any
commercial enterprise as described in par. 501.10(a), immediately above, until the applicant or
commercial enterprise has filed with the Public Works Department proof of insurance, held
either by the owner or the commercial enterprise, for general liability, in an amount no less than
determined by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent to be sufficient to
protect the interests of the City and its residents. Unless otherwise specified by the Director of
Public Works due to higher or lower than ordinary risks, The limits of liability shall be no less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 cumulative for personal injury, death, and
property damage and shall be provided for on a certificate of insurance listing the City of
Ashland as additional insured.
501.11. Violations and Penalties
(a) Any work, use, or activities within or placement of any obstruction or structure
encroachment into or within any public rights-of-way owned or controlled by the City of
Ashland, not in strict adherence with this ordinance, is prohibited.
(b) Failure to comply with the provisions of the approval or permit shall give cause for the
City to terminate the registration or permit, and require the owner to take immediate action to
clear the right-of-way to a safe condition. If the owner or permittee fails to take action within the
time required by the City, or if the protection of public health or safety requires immediate action
to be taken, the City may take such action and charge the cost of such action to the permittee.
The cost thereof shall be a special charge on the property benefitted by the work allowed under
the permit and shall be added to the taxes levied against the property.
(c) All permit fees shall be quadrupled for any work, use, or activities within a public rightof-
way performed without the issuance of a permit. Such fee shall not release the applicant from
full compliance with this ordinance nor from prosecution for violation of this ordinance.
(d) Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation.
Each day that the violation exists shall be a separate offense. In addition, the violator shall pay
the City of Ashland the reasonable costs of prosecuting the action, including a reasonable
attorney’s fee.
(e) Failure to comply with the provisions of the approval or permit or applicable law shall
give cause for the City to prohibit issuance of additional permits to the person or contractor who
so violates.
Page 501-17
(f) Any failure by a permittee to fully perform the work required by the terms of a permit
shall give the City the right to complete the work on the permittee’s behalf, and charge the cost
thereof to the permittee. The cost thereof shall be a special charge on the property benefitted by
the work allowed under the permit and shall be added to the taxes levied against the property.
(g) The penalties and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative. The pursuit by
the City of one penalty or remedy does not preclude the pursuit of other penalties or remedies.
ADOPTED: 501 (2016-1882) 9/13/2016
Sequential Ordinance No. 708
Codification Ordinance No. 502
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF THE CITY STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
The Mayor and the Common Council of the City of Ashland do ordain as follows:
502.01
No person shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets or on the
public sidewalks, nor shall any person be permitted to obstruct any sidewalks nor to have
a stationary location upon any public streets, nor shall any vehicle be permitted to operate
in a congested area in a manner where such operation might impede or inconvenience the
public use of such streets. For the purpose of this ordinance, the judgement of a police
officer exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested and the public impeded and inconvenienced.
502.02
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a forfeiture of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and the cost of prosecution, and in default or payment of such
forfeiture and costs, shall be confined to the county jail until payment of such forfeiture and
costs of prosecution, but not exceeding thirty (30) days for each violation.
502.03
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Page 503-1
CHAPTER 503. CITY HEAVY TRAFFIC ROUTES.
503.01. Heavy Traffic Routes. Pursuant to Section 349.17, Wisconsin Statutes, the following streets
are designated as Heavy Traffic Routes:
(a) U.S. Highway 2
(b) State Highway 13
(c) 22nd Street West from STH 13 to Farm Road
(d) Farm Road from 22nd Ave. West to South end of Xcel Energy Property
(e) Old U.S. Highway 2
(f) North Prentice Avenue
(g) St. Claire Street between North Third Avenue East and North Prentice Avenue
(h) North Willis Avenue
(i) State Highway 137
(j) State Highway 112
(k) Sanborn Avenue
(l) 6th Street East from Ellis Avenue to Stuntz Avenue
(m) Beaser Avenue from U.S. Highway 2 to Binsfield Road
(n) Main Street West from Sanborn Avenue to 17th Avenue West
(o) 17th Avenue West from U.S. Highway 2 to 6th Street West
(p) Third Street West from Sanborn Avenue to Beaser Avenue MacArthur Avenue from U.S. Highway 2 to
4th Street West
(q) 3rd Street West from MacArthur Avenue to 9th Avenue West 4th Street West from MacArthur
Avenue to 9th Avenue West
(r) Stuntz Avenue from U.S. Highway 2 to 6th Street East
(s) North 11th Avenue East
(t) County Highway A
(u) Woodbury Lane
(v) Jones Road
Page 503-2
(w) Knight Road from Jones Road to site address 1901 Knight Road (i.e., City of Ashland Wastewater
Treatment Plant)
(x) 22nd Avenue East from U.S. Highway 2 to 7th Street
(y) 6th Street East from 22nd Avenue East to 26th Avenue East / Toll Road
(z) 26th Avenue East from U.S. Highway 2 to 6th Street East / Toll Road Toll Road from 6th Street
East/26th Avenue East to Sum Road
(aa) Industrial Park Road
(bb) Sum Road
(cc) Rail Drive
(dd) North 6th Avenue West
(ee) Binsfield Road
(ff) Maple Lane
Said descriptions of Heavy Traffic Routes may be changed as circumstances warrant upon action by
Council, appropriate notice thereof, and the erection of signs as provided for in Section 503.05 of this
chapter.
503.02. Definition. Within this ordinance, heavy traffic means a vehicle having a combined weight of
vehicle and load in excess of 20,000 pounds (ten tons).
503.03. Designated Routes. All heavy traffic shall operate only on the designated heavy traffic routes.
Heavy traffic is allowed off the heavy traffic routes only for the purpose of obtaining orders for supplies
or moving or delivering supplies or commodities to or from any place of business or residence which
has an entrance on any street or highway provided such heavy traffic uses the shortest and most direct
route to and from the City Heavy Traffic Routes for the above purposes. It is not intended by this
chapter to restrict use of routed state trunk highways by heavy traffic off the City Heavy Traffic Routes.
503.04. Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may reduce the
load on any of the streets on City Heavy Traffic Routes when the construction of the streets or the
condition thereof, in their judgment, warrants such action.
503.05. Heavy Traffic Routes to be Marked. Appropriate signs shall be erected to give notice of the
designation of streets listed in Section 503.01 as heavy traffic routes. Whenever the maximum load
shall be reduced, signs shall be erected indicating the maximum load permissible.
503.06. Vehicles Exempt. This chapter does not apply to vehicles owned by schools, federal, state, or
municipal government, or political subdivisions thereof, when actually engaged in governmental
functions nor to public and private service vehicles engaged in job function.
503.07. Permits. Two day permits may be purchased from the Department of Public Works for the
Page 503-3
purpose of allowing a vehicle over 20,000 pounds (ten tons) to travel on streets not designated as heavy
traffic routes. Permits shall be issued in the sole discretion of the Department of Public Works upon a
showing by the applicant that there is a substantial need for the permit. The permit holder shall be
responsible to the City for the full cost of repair for any damage done to the City streets or highways
caused by permitted use. Cost of said permit shall be set through the comprehensive fee schedule.
503.08. Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter may be fined not less than
$50.00 nor more than $200.00. In addition to any fines or penalties, the person violating this chapter
shall be responsible to the City of Ashland for the full cost of repair for any damage done to the City
streets or highways by said heavy traffic.
ADOPTED: 503 (1683) 5/13/2008
AMENDMENTS: 503 (1737) 11/16/2010; 503 (2015-1852) 9/29/2015
Page 504-1
CHAPTER 504. VEHICULAR TRAFFIC REGULATION.
504.01. State Traffic Forfeiture Laws Adopted. Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this ordinance, all provisions of Chapters 340 to 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes describing and
defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only,
including penalties to be imposed and procedure for prosecution, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or prohibited
by this ordinance.
Sections of Chapters 340 to 348 adopted by reference shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(a) 340.01 (Words and phrases defined)
(b) 341.11 (4) (Display of registration plates)
(c) 341.15 (Display of registration plates)
(d) 341.16(4) (Issuance of duplicate plates)
(e) 341.42 (4) (Reciprocity permits)
(f) 341.55 (Penalty for misuse of plates)
(g) 341.57(3) (Registration of finance companies and banks)
(h) 341.63 (When registration is to be suspended)
(i) 342.05 (4) (Certificate of title required)
(j) 342.15 (5), (6) and (7) (Transfer of interest in vehicle)
(k) 342.23 (Secured party's and owner's duties)
(l) 342.30, 342.31, 342.34 (Anti-theft and Anti-fraud provisions)
(m) 343.01(Words and phrases defined)
(n) 343.305 (Implied consent)
(o) 343.35(Surrender of licenses upon cancellation, revocation or suspension)
(p) 343.45 to 343.46 (Unlawful practices relative to licenses)
(q) 343.60 to 343.72 (Licensing of driver schools and instructors)
Page 504-2
(r) 343.73 (Penalty)
(s) 344.01 (Words and phrases defined)
(t) 344.45 to 344.47 (Penalties for violation of chapter)
(u) 344.51 (Financial responsibility for domestic rented vehicles)
(v) 345.01(Words and phrases defined)
(w) 345.20 to 345.53 (General provisions in traffic forfeiture actions)
(x) 345.55(Traffic officers not to profit from arrests)
(y) 346.01(Words and phrases defined)
(z) 346.02 (Applicability of chapter)
(aa) 346.03(Applicability of rules of the road to authorized emergency vehicles)
(bb) 346.04 (1) and (2), compliance 346.05 to 346.16 (Driving, meeting, overtaking and
passing)
(cc) 346.17 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.04 to 346.16)
(dd) 346.18 to 346.21 (Right of way)
(ee) 346.22 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.18 to 346.21)
(ff) 346.23 to 346.29 (Drivers and pedestrians)
(gg) 346.30 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.23 to 346.29)
(hh) 346.31 to 346.35 (Turning and stopping and required signals)
(ii) 346.36 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.31 to 346.35)
(jj) 346.37 to 346.42 (Traffic signs, signals and markings)
(kk) 346.43 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.37 to 346.42)
(ll) 346.44 to 346.48 (Required stops)
(mm) 346.49 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.44 to 346.48)
Page 504-3
(nn) 346.50 to 346.55 (Restrictions on stopping and parking)
(oo) 346.56 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.50 to 346.55)
(pp) 346.57 (2), (3) and (4) (a) to 8 (Speed restrictions)
(qq) 346.57 (4) (d), (5) and (6) to 346.595 (Speed restrictions)
(rr) 346.60 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.57 to 346.595)
(ss) 346.61 (Applicability of sections relating to reckless and drunken driving)
(tt) 346.62 (1) and (3) (Reckless driving)
(uu) 346.63 (1), (3) and (4) (operating under the influence of an intoxicant)
(vv) 346.64 (Employment of drunken operators)
(ww) 346.65 (1) and (2) (Penalty for violating ss. 346.62 to 346.64)
(xx) 346.66 (Applicability of sections relating to accident and accident reporting)
(yy) 346.68 and 346.69 (Duty upon striking unattended vehicle--upon striking property on or
adjacent to highway)
(zz) 346.70 (1), (2) or (3), 346.71, 346.72, 346.73 (Duty to report accident, etc.)
(aaa) 346.70 (4) (Police and traffic agencies to report)
(bbb) 346.70 (5) (Falsifying reports)
(ccc) 346.77 to 346.81 (Bicycles and play vehicles)
(ddd) 346.82 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.77 to 346.81)
(eee) 346.87 to 346.94 (Miscellaneous rules)
(fff) 346.95 (Penalty for violating ss. 346.87 to 346.94)
(ggg) 347.01 to 347.05 (General provisions)
(hhh) 347.06 to 347.29 (Lighting equipment)
(iii) 347.30 (Penalty for violating lighting equipment requirements)
(jjj) 347.35 to 347.49 (Other equipment)
Page 504-4
(kkk) 347.50 Penalty for violating ss. 347.35 to 347.49)
(lll) 348.01 to 348.02 (Size, weight, load - general provisions)
(mmm) 348.05 to 348.10 (Size and load)
(nnn) 348.10 (2) (Vehicles dropping loads)
(ooo) 348.11 (Penalty for violating size and load limitations)
(ppp) 348.15 to 348.20 (Weight)
(qqq) 348.21 (Penalty for violating weight limitations)
(rrr) 348.25 to 348.27 (Permits)
(sss) 348.28 (Permits to be carried - Penalty)
504.02. Other Laws Adopted. There are also hereby adopted by reference the following
sections of the Wisconsin Statutes but the prosecution of such offenses under this ordinance shall
be as provided in Chapters 340 and 348 of the Wisconsin Statutes and the penalty for violation
thereof shall be limited to a forfeiture.
(a) 941.01 (1) (Negligent operation of vehicle off highway)
(b) 947.045 (Drinking in motor vehicles on highway)
504.20. Speed Limits. The Common Council of the City of Ashland hereby determines that the
statutory speed limits on the following streets or portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe, or
imprudent and modifies such speed limits under authority granted by s. 349.11 of the Statutes as
provided in Sections 504.21 and 504.22.
504.21. Speed Limits Increased. The speed limits are increased as hereinafter set forth upon the
following streets between the limits designated:
(a) On U.S. Highway 2 (East).
(1) 35 miles per hour for all vehicles from Stuntz Avenue easterly to its intersection with
32nd Avenue East.
(2) The speed limit on all other portions of U.S. Highway 2 between the East corporate
limits and the 32nd Avenue East of the City of Ashland shall be 45 miles per hour as set
forth in Section 346.57, Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) The speed limit from Stuntz Avenue to Ellis Avenue (USH 13) shall be 25 miles per
Page 504-5
hour.
(b) On U.S. Highway 2 (West).
(1) 25 miles per hour for all vehicles from Ellis Avenue (USH 13) to Beaser
Avenue;
(2) 35 miles per hour for all vehicles from the West side of Beaser Avenue in the
City of Ashland, westerly to the intersection with Sanborn Avenue;
(3) 40 miles per hour for all vehicles from its intersection with Sanborn Avenue
in the City of Ashland, westerly to Turner Road;
(4) 45 miles per hour from Turner Road to the corporate limits.
(c) On State Trunk Highway 13.
(1) 35 miles per hour for all vehicles from 13th Street in the City of Ashland
southerly to the corporate limits.
(2) 25 miles per hour from USH 2 to the intersection of 12th Street.
(d) On State Trunk Highway #137.
(1) 35 miles per hour for all vehicles from its intersection with State Trunk
Highway #112 (Sanborn Avenue) in the City of Ashland, westerly to a point 0.20
of a mile west of the Golf Course Road.
(2) The speed limit on all other portions of State Trunk Highway #137 within the
corporate limits of the City of Ashland shall be 25 miles per hour as set forth in
Section 346.57, Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) On State Trunk Highway #112.
(1) 25 miles per hour from the intersection of USH 2 to the intersection of State
Trunk Highway #137;
(2) 40 miles per hour for all vehicles from its intersection with State Trunk
Highway #137 in the City of Ashland, southerly to the intersection of Maple
Lane;
(3) 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Maple Lane to the southern
corporate limits of the City.
(f). On Binsfield Road, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour for all vehicles.
Page 504-6
504.22. Speed Limits Decreased. With the approval of the State Highway Commission, the
speed limits as set forth in s. 346.57 (4), (e), (f) and (g),Wisconsin Statutes, are decreased:
15 miles per hour when passing a school house at those times when children are going to and
from
school or are playing within the sidewalk area at or about school.
504.30. Through Highways Designated. In the interest of public safety and pursuant to sec.
349.07, Wisconsin Statutes, the following streets or portions thereof are declared to be through
highways, and traffic signs or signals giving notice thereof shall be erected by the Police Chief.
(a) On U.S. Highway #2 from corporate limits to corporate limits.
(b) Main Street from the West curb line of Sanborn Avenue to and including the East curb
line of 16th Avenue East.
(c) Third Street from the West curb line of Sanborn Avenue to West curb of Ellis Avenue
and East curb of Ellis Avenue to the East curb line of Stuntz Avenue.
(d) Sixth Street from the East curb line of Sanborn Avenue to the West curb line of Ellis
Avenue, and from the East curb line of Ellis Avenue to and including the East curb line of Stuntz
Avenue and from the West curb line of 11th Avenue E. to the corporate limits;
(e) Eleventh Street from the West curb line of Beaser Avenue to West curb of Ellis Avenue
and the East curb of Ellis Avenue to East curb line of Stuntz Avenue.
(f) Chapple Avenue from the South curb line of Sixth Street to the North curb line of
Eleventh Street.
(g). Fourteenth Avenue East from the south curb line of Main Street to the North curb line of
6th Street.
(h) Twenty-second Avenue East from the North curb line of Sixth Street to the North curb
line of Lake Shore Drive.
(i) Beaser Avenue from the South curb line of Sixth Street to north curb of Binsfield Road
(j) Prentice Avenue from the south curb line of Sixth Street to the North curb line of
Eleventh Street.
(k) Eleventh Avenue East from the South curb line of Main Street to and including the
South curb line of Eleventh Street.
(l) Ellis Avenue from the South curb line of Main Street to City limits.
(m) Vaughn Avenue from the South curb line of Sixth Street to the North curb line of 11th
Page 504-7
Street.
(n) Sanborn Avenue from the South curb line of Lake Shore Drive to North curb of Sixth
Street and south curb of Sixth Street to City limits.
504.40. Parking Limits When signs are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than the period specified.
504.41. Location of Stop Signs. With the approval of the Common Council, the Chief of Police
can regulate the location of stop signs in the City of Ashland in accordance with the Uniform
Manual of Traffic Control Devices.
504.42. All Night Parking Prohibited. No person shall park any vehicles between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day on the following street: Main Street between Stuntz Avenue
and Beaser Avenue.
504.43. Winter Parking - November 1 to April 1.
(a) All Streets. Between November 1 and April 1, no person shall park any vehicles between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of any day on any streets or avenues in the City of
Ashland, except as allowed in Section 504.43(b).
(b) Streets Between Lake Shore Drive and Stuntz Ave. Between November 1 and April 1,
no person shall park any vehicles between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day on
any street or avenue in the area between and including: Lake Shore Drive, Main Street and Third
Street between 14th Avenue West and Stuntz Avenue.
(c) Odd/Even Parking. Unless otherwise signed or as designated in Section 504.11, parking
on residential streets and avenues during the period from November 1 to April 1 shall be allowed
on the odd numbered side of the streets and avenues on odd numbered days and on the even
numbered side of the streets and avenues on even numbered days between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight.
(d) Towing. Any vehicle parked on any City streets or avenues in violation of any of the
provisions of this article may be towed away, or removed upon the direction of the City Police
Department and impounded and no person shall recover any vehicle removed pursuant to this
section without first paying the cost of removal and the cost of storage. Any payments required
by this section shall not be construed as a penalty so as to preclude prosecution for violation of
any of the provisions of this section.
(e) Prosecution. In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or in a
condition in violation of any provision of this ordinance, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked or left in violation of a provision of this ordinance,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered
owner of such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person
who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this ordinance. The owner of the vehicle parked in
Page 504-8
violation of any subsection of this ordinance shall be liable for the violation.
(f) Suspension of Winter Parking Dates. If the Mayor finds it is in the best interest of the
City and the residents, he or she has the power to suspend the Winter Parking dates.
504.44. Exemptions from Restrictions. The following streets and avenues shall be exempt from
the restrictions contained in Section 504.43(c) as to odd-even parking.
(a) U.S. #2 (Lake Shore Drive) Between 10th Avenue West and Stuntz Avenue.
(b) Third Street between Stuntz Avenue and 14th Avenue West.
(c) Second Avenue East and Second, Third, Fourth, Vaughn and Sixth Avenues West
between Lake Shore Drive and Third Street and Seventh Avenue West between Lake Shore
Drive and Fifth Street.
(d) Ellis Avenue between Lake Shore Drive and 13th Street.
(e) Eleventh Avenue East south of U.S. #2 to the alley.
(f)The 100 block of Beaser Avenue.
(g) MacArthur Avenue from Lake Shore Drive to Third Street.
(h) Tenth Avenue West from Lake Shore Drive to Third Street.
(i) Ninth Avenue West from Lake Shore Drive to Fourth Street.
(j) Third Avenue East from Lake Shore Drive East to Third Street.
(k) Prentice Avenue from Lake Shore Drive to Main Street and the northern 150 feet of
Prentice Avenue from Main Street to Third Street.
(l) Fifth Avenue East from Lake Shore Drive to Main Street.
(m) Willis Avenue from Lake Shore Drive to Main Street.
(n) Seventh Avenue East from Lake Shore Drive to Main Street.
(o) Main Street between Beaser Avenue and Stuntz Avenue.
(p) The northern 150' of 15th Avenue West between Lake Shore Drive and Main Street
West.
The exceptions in this section may be changed from time to time upon action by the Common
Council and appropriate notice thereof.
Page 504-9
504.45. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of section 504.43
shall forfeit not less than $25.00 (twenty-five dollars) nor more than $100.00 (one hundred
dollars) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
504.50. Emergency powers.
(a) Mayoral prohibition. Whenever the Mayor or Mayor’s designee finds, on the basis of
falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather
Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet or freezing rain that weather conditions will make
it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city streets be prohibited
or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the Mayor or Mayor’s designee shall put into
effect a parking prohibition on the streets and avenues in the City as necessary by declaring it in
a manner prescribed.
(b) Automatic prohibition. The parking prohibition described in Section 504.13(a) shall
automatically go into effect on any part of any street or avenue on which there has been an
accumulation of snow and ice of four inches or more.
(c) Effect of prohibition. Prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until
terminated by announcement of the Mayor or Mayor’s designee. While the prohibition is in
effect, no person shall park, or allow to remain parked, any vehicle on any portion of any street
or avenue in the City.
504.51. Declarations by the Mayor. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall be entitled to
declare an emergency when weather conditions warrant it by doing the following:
(a) The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall prepare a signed, written declaration of the
emergency state, which shall indicate the reason for the declaration, and the date and time of the
start of the emergency period. The written declaration shall be filed with the office of the Chief
of Police.
(b) Notice of the declaration shall be provided to the local newspaper and local radio stations
and they shall be requested to provide public notification of the declaration.
(c) Compliance with this procedure shall constitute due notice to the public of the existence
of an emergency state.
504.52. Termination of Parking Prohibition. Whenever the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee
shall find that some or all of the conditions which give rise to a parking prohibition in effect
pursuant to this ordinance no longer exist, he or she may declare the prohibition terminated
effective immediately upon public announcement.
504.53. Provisions Temporarily Effective to Take Precedence. Any provision of this chapter
which becomes effective by declaration of the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee or upon the
Page 504-10
occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over
other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence
over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency
vehicles or emergency traffic directions by a Police Officer.
504.54 Towing. Any vehicle parked on any city street or avenue in violation of any of the
provisions of sec.504.50 may be towed away, or removed upon the direction of the City Police
Department and impounded and no person shall recover any vehicle removed pursuant to this
section without first paying the cost of removal and the cost of storage. Any payments required
by this section shall not be construed as a penalty so as to preclude prosecution for violation of
any of the provisions of this section.
504.55. Prosecution. In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in place or in a
condition in violation of any provision of this chaptere, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the compliant was parked or left in violation of a provision of this ordinance,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered
owner of such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person
who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this ordinance.
504.56. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of section 504.50 shall
forfeit not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
504.60. Class “B” Highway Designated. All streets and alleys within the City of Ashland,
Wisconsin except the following enumerated streets and alleys, are hereby designated Class “B”
highways and shall be subject to the weight limitations imposed by sec. 348.16, Wisconsin
Statutes.
(a) U.S. Highway #2
(b) State Highway #137
(c) State Highway #13
504.61. Special and Season Weight Limitations. The Police Chief shall have the authority to
impose special or season weight limits to prevent injury to the roadway of any highway, bridge
or culvert within the jurisdiction of the City of Ashland or for the safety of users of such
highway, bridge or culvert and shall be responsible for erecting signs giving notice thereof in
accordance with sec. 349.16 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
504.62. Compression Brakes Prohibited. No person shall use motor vehicle brakes within the
City limits of the City of Ashland which are in any way activated or operated by the compression
of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. The forfeiture for violation
of this subsection shall be not less than $100 nor more than $500.
Page 504-11
504.65. Truck Idling.
(a) The purpose of this section is to protect public health and the environment by
reducing emissions while conserving fuel and maintaining adequate rest and safety of all drivers
of diesel vehicles.
(b) A person that operates a motor vehicle operating on diesel fuel may not cause or
allow the motor vehicle, when it is not in motion, to idle for more than a total of 10 minutes
within any 60 minute period, except under the following circumstances:
(1) The motor vehicle has a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating of less than 8,000
pounds;
(2) The motor vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because of onhighway
traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or at the direction of a law
enforcement official;
(3) The motor vehicle idles when operating defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or
other equipment solely to prevent a safety or health emergency;
(4) A police, fire, ambulance, public safety, other emergency or law enforcement
motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle used in an emergency capacity, idles while in an emergency
or training mode and not for the convenience of the vehicle operator;
(5) The primary propulsion engine idles for maintenance, servicing, repairing, or
diagnostic purposes if idling is necessary for such activity;
(6) A motor vehicle idles as part of a government inspection to verify that all
equipment is in good working order, provided idling is required as part of the inspection;
(7) When idling of the motor vehicle is required to operate auxiliary equipment to
accomplish the intended use of the vehicle (such as loading, unloading, mixing, or processing
cargo; controlling cargo temperature; construction operations; lumbering operations; oil or gas
well servicing; or farming operations), provided that this exemption does not apply when the
vehicle is idling solely for cabin comfort or to operate non-essential equipment such as air
conditioning, heating, microwave ovens, or televisions;
(8) An armored motor vehicle idles when a person remains inside the vehicle to
guard the contents, or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded;
(9) A bus idles a maximum of 15 minutes in any 60 minute period to maintain
passenger comfort while non-driver passengers are on board;
(10) If the motor vehicle has a sleeping berth, when the operator is occupying the
Page 504-12
vehicle during a rest or sleep period and idling of the vehicle is required to operate air
conditioning or heating;
(11) When the motor vehicle idles due to mechanical difficulties over which the
operator has no control;
(12) The motor vehicle is used as airport ground support equipment, including,
but not limited to, motor vehicles operated on the air side of the airport terminal to service or
supply aircraft;
(13) The motor vehicle is (i) a bus owned by a public transit authority and (ii)
being operated on a designated bus route or on a street or highway between designated bus routes
for the provision of public transportation;
(14) The motor vehicle is owned by an electric utility and is operated for
electricity generation or hydraulic pressure to power equipment necessary in the restoration,
repair, modification or installation of electric utility service; or
(15) The outdoor temperature is less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit or greater than 80
degrees Fahrenheit.
(c) This section does not prohibit the operation of an auxiliary power unit or generator set
as an alternative to idling the main engine of a motor vehicle operating on diesel fuel.
(d) This section does not apply to the owner of a motor vehicle rented or leased to
another entity or person operating the vehicle.
(e) Any person found to be in violation of this section shall pay a forfeiture of $75 for the
first conviction and $150 for a second or subsequent conviction within any 12 month period.
504.70. Accident Reports. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall within ten
(10) days after such accident file with the City of Ashland Police Department a copy of the
report required by sec. 346.70 Wisconsin Statutes, if any. If the operator is unable to make such
report, any occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making such report shall
have the duty to comply with this section. Such reports shall be subject to the provisions and
limitations in sections 346.70 (4) (f) and 346.73 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
504.80. Personnel Authorized to Procure and Erect Signs and Signals. The Police Chief is
hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect and maintain appropriate standard traffic signs,
signals and markings conforming to the rules of the State highway division giving such notice of
Page 504-13
the provisions of this ordinance as required by State law. Signs shall be erected in such locations
and manner as the Police Chief shall determine will best affect the purpose of this chapter and
give adequate warning to users of the street or highway.
504.81. Removal of Unofficial Signs and Signals. The Police Chief shall have the authority
granted by sec. 349.09 of the Wisconsin Statutes and is hereby directed to order the removal of a
sign, signal, marking or device placed, maintained or displayed in violation of this ordinance or
sec. 346.41, Wisconsin Statutes. Any charge imposed on a premises for removal of such an
illegal sign, signal or device shall be reported to the Common Council at its next regular meeting
for review and certification.
504.90. Penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be a forfeiture
as hereinafter provided together within the cost of prosecution imposed as provided in sec.
345.20 to 345.53 of Wisconsin Statutes.
504.91. Uniform Offenses. Forfeitures for violations of any provision of chapters 341 to 348 of
the Wisconsin Statutes adopted by reference in this chapter shall conform to forfeitures for
violation of the comparable State offense, including any variations or increases for second
offenses.
504.92. Special Local Regulations. The forfeiture for any violation under this chapter for which
a forfeiture is not provided under state law, and for which a forfeiture is not specifically provided
in this chapter, shall be not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00.
(a) Stipulation of Guilt or No Contest. Stipulation of guilt or no contest may be made by
persons arrested for violation of this ordinance in accordance with s. 66.12 (1) (b), Wisconsin
Statutes, whenever the provisions of ss. 345.27 are inapplicable to such violations. Stipulations
shall conform to the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint under s. 345.11
of the Wisconsin Statutes and may be accepted within 5 days of the date of the alleged violation.
Stipulation may be accepted by the City Police Department.
(b) Deposits. Any person stipulating guilt or no contest under subsection (1) of this section
must make the deposit required under ss. 345.26, Wisconsin Statutes, or, if the deposit is not
established under such statutes, shall deposit a forfeited penalty as provided in the schedule
established by the Chief of Police and approved by the Common Council. Deposits may be
brought or mailed to the office of the Police Department as directed by the arresting officer.
Deposits for parking or non-moving violations shall be mailed or brought to the City.
(c) Notice of Demerit Points and Receipt. Every officer accepting a forfeited penalty or
money deposit under this ordinance shall receipt therefore in triplicate as provided in s. 345.26
(3) (b), of the Wisconsin Statutes. Every officer accepting a stipulation under the provisions of
this ordinance shall comply with the provisions of ss. 343.27, 343.28, 345.26 (1) (a) and 345.27
(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes, and shall require the alleged violator to sign a statement of notice
in substantially the form contained on the uniform traffic citation and complaint promulgated
under s. 345.11, Wisconsin Statutes.
Page 504-14
504.30. Reference to Statutes. Reference to specific statutory sections wherever used in this
ordinance shall mean the Wisconsin Statutes of 1979-1980 or subsequent amendments thereto.
504.31. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All ordinances regulating traffic upon the streets,
alleys and highways of the City of Ashland, Wisconsin, and all conflicting ordinances or part of
ordinances, specifically Ordinance 994, heretofore enacted by the Common Council of the City
of Ashland, Wisconsin, are hereby repealed.
504.32. Severability. The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed severable and it is
expressly declared that the Common Council would have passed the other provisions of this
ordinance irrespective of whether or not one or more provisions may be declared invalid and if
any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provisions to other
persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
ADOPTED: 504 (1037) 10/22/1984
AMENDMENTS: 504 (1042) 12/11/1984; 504 (1044) 1/15/1985; 504 (1119) 12/8/1987;
504 (1153) 12/13/1988; 504 (1167) 1/17/1989; 504 (1204) 9/12/1989;
504 (1209) 11/14/1989; 504 (1240) 8/14/1990; 504 (1255) 5/14/1991;
504 (1257) 6/11/1991; 504 (1302) 11/9/1993; 504 (1388) 2/11/1997;
504 (1446) 10/13/1998; 504 (1585) 11/4/2003; 504 (1694) 11/18/2008;
504 (2015-1862) 12/08/2015; 504 (2017-1893) 4/18/2017;
Sequential Ordinance No. 1043 (8/03)
Codification Ordinance No. 505
ORDINANCE REGULATING SNOWMOBILES AND DESIGNATING SNOWMOBILE
ROUTES AND TRAILS
The Common Council of the City of Ashland does ordain as follows:
505.10 Definitions
505.11
"Snowmobile" means any engine driven vehicle of a type which utilizes sled type
runners or skis; or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or other similar
means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but does not include such
vehicles which are either manually propelled or driven by a motor of 4 horsepower or
less and operated only on private property.
505.12
"Snowmobile Route" means a highway or street designated for use by snowmobile
operators by the City of Ashland.
505.13
"Snowmobile Trail" means a marked route on public property or on private lands
subject to the public easement or lease designated for use by snowmobile operators by
the City of Ashland but excluding highways except those highways on which the
roadway is not normally maintained for other vehicular traffic by the removal of snow.
505.20
The provisions of Wisconsin Statutes 350.02 to 350.05, 350.08 to 350.107, 350.11,
350.13, 350.135, 350.15 to 350.17, 350.19 and 350.99 and subsequent amendments
thereto are adopted by reference.
505.30 Snowmobile Routes and Trails
505.31 Ingress and Egress Routes
505.311A
The East-West Trail System for snowmobile ingress and egress to and through the City of
Ashland shall be as follows:
The Burlington Northern abandoned railroad bed, also known as the Tri-County Corridor Trail from the
western boundary of the City of Ashland city limits to Sanborn Avenue; also, a second trail from the Tri-
County Trail on the west boundary of city of Ashland to 22nd Avenue West; thence southeasterly upon 22nd
Avenue West to 3rd Street West; thence easterly to City owned lot 18 of Phillips Addition; thence south
Sequential Ordinance No. 1043 (8/03)
Codification Ordinance No. 505
along the easterly 25' of said lot and continue south through City owned lot 8 of Phillips addition to
Junction Road; thence east upon Junction Road to the junction of the Tri-County Trail and Sanborn
Avenue; whence it becomes the East/West Recreational Corridor from this point to the alley in Block 172,
Ellis Division along the 5th Street right-of-way; thence southerly along said alley to Lot 13, Block 172, Ellis
Division; thence easterly through Lot 13 to Stuntz Avenue; thence across Stuntz Avenue to the Mickelson
property (described as Lots 5, 6, & 7 of Block 173, Ellis Division) along a 25' wide path parallel to the
Wisconsin Central Railroad right-of-way; thence continuing in an easterly direction along said rail right-ofway
to City owned Lots 1, 2, 3, & 4 of Block 173, Ellis Division to the platted but unopened 6th Street East
right-of-way between Block 173 and Block 184, Ellis Division, thence northeasterly upon 6th Street East to
platted but unopened 7th Street East; thence northeasterly upon 7th Street East to Ball Park Road; thence
continuing northeasterly upon Ball Park Road to platted but unopened 7th Street East; thence continuing
northeasterly upon 7th Street East which veers due east to City owned Parcel #3768, Lake Shore Addition;
thence upon said Parcel to the Chicago and Northeastern abandoned railroad right-of-way to the east
boundary of the City of Ashland.
505.312
Spurs from the Snowmobile Trail to Lake Superior shall be described as follows:
1. Turner Road from the abandoned Chicago and Northwestern Railroad right-of-way north to
Maslowski Beach; and,
2. Prentice Avenue from the 5th Street East/West Recreational Corridor north to Sunset Park
3. Bayview Route from Bayview Park to the Main Trail
505.32 Routes to the Corridor and to Business District
All avenues, north and south alleys located north of the east-west recreation corridor
are open for snowmobile traffic to and from the business district and to and from the
corridor except as provided in Section 505.33.
505.33 Snowmobile Traffic Prohibited
Snowmobile traffic is prohibited on the following streets and avenues:
a) Second Street from 9th Avenue West to Stuntz
b) Beaser Avenue from Second Street to Binsfield Road
c) U.S. Highway 2
d) State Highway 13
e) Ashland County Highways 137 and 112
Sequential Ordinance No. 1043 (8/03)
Codification Ordinance No. 505
505.34 Residential Snowmobile Traffic Permits
505.341
Snowmobile traffic on City streets by residents south of the east-west recreation
corridor is prohibited except by permit.
All residents of the City of Ashland south of the east-west recreation corridor will be
required to obtain a written permit from the Ashland Police Department showing the
shortest route to the east-west recreation corridor on which they must travel to ingress
and egress to the trails or the business district.
505.342
The operator of the snowmobile must carry this permit with him/her at all times that
he/she is operating the snowmobile. The operator may be required to display this permit
to law enforcement officials. Permits are not transferable.
505.35
Signs shall be erected on each highway entering the City of Ashland describing the
snowmobile routes and those streets or highways not open to snowmobile traffic. The
signs shall conform to the regulations of the State of Wisconsin of Transportation and
Natural Resources.
505.351
The Ashland Snowmobile Club Inc. has sole responsibility to erect signs along trails and
routes in Ashland City limits. The signs shall conform to regulations of the State of
Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Department of Natural Resources, and the City
of Ashland.
Informational signs will be 6" tall and 24" wide. Lettering, figures and borders will be
reflective white. The background will be brown along trails, and green along routes.
505.36
Snowmobile routes or trails may be changed, amended or revoked by resolution of the
Common Council of the City of Ashland.
505.37
The State of Wisconsin, Department of Transportation, shall be sent a copy of this
ordinance and any resolution changing, amending or revoking any snowmobile routes
hereunder.
Sequential Ordinance No. 1043 (8/03)
Codification Ordinance No. 505
505.40
The provisions of the Agreement between the City of Ashland and the Ashland
Snowmobile Club, Inc. are hereby approved and incorporated herein, a copy of said
Agreement being attached hereto as Exhibit B.
505.50
Every person operating a snowmobile upon a snowmobile route in the City of Ashland
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable. "Roadway" for
purposes of this section means that portion of a road, street or highway which is
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic and including the berm or
shoulder.
505.51
Persons riding snowmobiles upon a snowmobile route shall ride single file.
505.52
Wherever a usable path for snowmobiles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
snowmobile riders shall use path and shall not use the roadway.
505.53
No person shall operate a snowmobile on any route designated by this ordinance in a
speed in excess often (10) miles per hour or as posted.
505.54
All snowmobiles shall be required to have running lights on at all times while operating
within the limits of the City of Ashland.
505.55
All snowmobiles shall stop prior to entering or crossing each and every intersection in
the City of Ashland.
505.56
All snowmobiles shall stop prior to crossing any street, avenue, sidewalk or highway in
the City of Ashland.
505.57 Age Restrictions/Snowmobile Safety Permits
No person under the age of 12 years may operate a snowmobile unless the person is
accompanied either by a parent or guardian or by a person over 18 years of age. No
person over the age of 12 years but under the age of 16 years may operate a
snowmobile unless he or she holds a valid snowmobile safety certificate or is
accompanied by a person over 18 years of age or by a person over 14 years of age
Sequential Ordinance No. 1043 (8/03)
Codification Ordinance No. 505
having a snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
Any person who is over the age of 12 and under the age of 16 who holds a snowmobile
safety certificate shall carry it while operating a snowmobile and shall display it to a law
enforcement officer on request. For purposes of this section, "accompanied" means
being on the same snowmobile as the operator.
505.58 Hours
1) Snowmobiles shall not be allowed to operate within the City of Ashland between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday.
2) Snowmobiles shall not be allowed to operate within the City of Ashland between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday.
505.59
Each snowmobile operator operating the snowmobile on the City of Ashland
snowmobile routes does so at his or her own risk and is advised to maintain adequate
liability insurance covering his or her snowmobile operation.
505.60
The penalties for violation of this ordinance shall be as provided by Wisconsin Statute
350.11 and any subsequent amendments thereto.
505.70 Severability
The several features, parts, provisions, sections and terms of this ordinance are hereby
declared independent and severable, and the invalidity, if any, of any feature, part,
provision, section or term thereof, shall not affect the remainder of this ordinance
inoperative or invalid. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
505.80 Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication.
505.90
Ordinance 999 is hereby repealed.
EXHIBIT B
AGREEMENT
The City of Ashland (hereinafter City) and the Ashland Snowmobile Club, Inc.,
(hereinafter Snowmobile Club), in consideration of the designation and
establishment of the 5th Street corridor trail in the City of Ashland and to
protect the interests of the public, agree as follows:
1. The Snowmobile Club shall erect and maintain all snowmobile trail signs'
required by the laws of the City of Ashland, State of Wisconsin, and
requirements of the State of Wisconsin, Departments of Transportation and
Natural Resources. The erection and maintenance of the signs shall be
done at the expense of the Ashland Snowmobile Club and at no cost to the
City of Ashland. The Snowmobile Club expressly assumes all liability
arising from the signing requirements of this paragraph.
2. The Snowmobile Club shall construct and maintain all snowmobile trails in
a safe condition. The construction and maintenance of the trails shall be
done at the expense of the Snowmobile Club and at no cost to the City. No
other organization, except the City of Ashland, shall be allowed to groom
or maintain trails covered under the terms of this agreement without the
written consent of the Snowmobile Club. The Snowmobile Club expressly
assumes all liability arising from the requirements of this paragraph.
3. The Snowmobile Club shall obtain and maintain all public easements or
leases for snowmobile trails on private lands. The Snowmobile Club shall
file copies of all written public easements or leases for snowmobile
trails on private lands in the office of the City Clerk. The Snowmobile
Club expressly warrants that the public easements and leases for the
snowmobile trails on private lands which are depicted on the "Map of
Ashland, Wisconsin Snowmobile Routes and Trails" are valid and that the
City shall sustain no liability or damage as a result of its designating
them as snowmobile trails. All costs of obtaining and maintaining all
public easements or leases for snowmobile trails on private lands shall be
borne by the Snowmobile Club.
4. The Snowmobile Club agrees to indemnify and hold the City of Ashland
harmless from any loss or liability from bodily injuries, property
damages, trespass or claims or causes of action of any sort, arising from
the designation, construction, maintenance, use, signing, and/or the
public easements or leases of the trails in the City of Ashland. The
Snowmobile Club agrees to indemnify and hold the City of Ashland harmless
from any loss or liability from bodily injuries or property damages
arising from the signing or failure to sign the snowmobile trail in the
City of Ashland.
5. The Snowmobile Club agrees to maintain, at its expense, a policy of public
liability insurance designating the City as a co-insured protecting the
City and the Snowmobile Club from liability for property damage or bodily
injury or other claims or causes of action arising from the designation,
construction, maintenance, use, signing and/or public easements or leases
of the snowmobile trails in the City of Ashland. The policy of insurance
shall have limits of at least S300,000.00 for bodily injury and 550,000.00
for property damage. A copy of the policy shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
Ashland Snowobile Club
Mike KinneyA President
City of Ashlan
"liois Lang, Secretary
'&42ZLasS
Witness
3-^/_^_
Date
. Monroe, Sr., Mayor
(fljwU* Wsv*—'
Carol A. Larson, City Clerk
Witness
Date
Sequential Ordinance No. 1282 (12/94)
Codification Ordinance No. 506
AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE SCHOOL BUS WARNING LIGHTS
The Mayor and the Common Council of the City of Ashland do ordain as follows:
506.10
The operator of a school bus equipped with flashing red warning lights as specified in
Wisconsin Statute 347.25 (2) shall actuate such lights when loading or unloading pupils
or authorized passengers at a location at which there are no traffic signals. This
provision shall not apply to school buses loading or unloading students at the Ashland
Middle School when it is not necessary for said students to cross the street.
506.20
This ordinance is being adopted pursuant to authority granted by Wisconsin Statute
349.21 (1).
506.30
This ordinance shall become effective upon passage and publication.
Sequential Ordinance No. 1691 (9/10)
Codification Ordinance No. 507
AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATVS)
AND UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES (UTVS) IN THE CITY OF ASHLAND
The Mayor and Common Council of the City of Ashland does ordain as follows:
SECTION 1:
The Mayor and Common Council of the City of Ashland adopts the following all-terrain
vehicle and utility-terrain vehicle ordinance for the operation of all-terrain vehicles and
utility-terrain vehicles upon roadways listed in Section III.
Following due consideration of the recreational value to connect trail opportunities and weighted
against possible dangers, public health, liability aspects, terrain involved, traffic density and history
of automobile traffic, this ordinance has been created.
SECTION II: Statutory Authority
All provisions of Wis. Stats. of 23.33 are adopted by this reference.
SECTION III: Routes
All public streets designated and signed as ATV routes shall be open to ATV and UTV traffic.
Routes shall be approved and designated by the Mayor and Chief of Police and signed by the Public
Works Department/or their designee.
SECTION IV: Conditions:
As a condition for the use of this route, the following conditions shall apply to all operators (and
passengers where applicable);
a) All operators shall possess a valid driver’s license.
b) All operators and passengers under the age of 18 shall wear a protective helmet.
c) ATVs and UTVs shall be operated on the far right side of the roadway surface.
d) ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated at speeds in excess of 10 miles per hour.
e) Routes must be signed in accordance with NR 64.12, and NR 64.12(7)c.
f) ATVs and UTVs operated on signed routes in the City of Ashland shall have
stock unmodified exhaust systems.
g) ATVs and UTVs shall not be allowed to operate within the City of Ashland
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday.
h) ATVs and UTVs shall not be allowed to operate within the City of Ashland
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday.
Sequential Ordinance No. 1691 (9/10)
Codification Ordinance No. 507
SECTION V: Enforcement
This ordinance shall be enforced by any law enforcement officer of the City of Ashland, Ashland
County, Wisconsin.
SECTION VI: Penalties
Wisconsin State All-Terrain Vehicle penalties as found in s. 23.33 (13)(a) Wis. Stats. are adopted
by reference.
Any violations of Section IV listed in this ordinance shall carry a $250 fine for first infraction and a
$500 fine for any subsequent violation.
SECTION VII: Severability
The provision of this ordinance shall be deemed severable and it is expressly declared that the City
of Ashland Common Council would have passed the other provisions of this ordinance irrespective
of whether or not one or more provisions may be declared invalid. If any provision of this
ordinance or the application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the
ordinance and the application of such provisions to other persons circumstances shall not be deemed
affected.
SECTION VIII: Effective Date
This ordinance becomes effective upon passage and publication.
Page 530-1
CHAPTER 530. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND USE.
530.01. Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to establish objectives, criteria, and procedures
for the construction and maintenance of sidewalks. These policies are designed to:
(a) Establish a policy for locating sidewalks in order to provide the citizens of Ashland with a
useful, consistent and safe pedestrian infrastructure while considering special circumstances of
neighborhoods;
(b) Establish a policy of assessments for the costs of constructing, maintaining and repairing
sidewalks
(c) Implement a plan of scheduled City maintenance and inspection of sidewalks;
(d) Establish design and construction standards;
(e) Establish a policy of individual responsibility and care;
(f) Provide a procedure for an orderly system of construction of sidewalks in existing
developed areas of the City based on established criteria.
530.02. Sidewalk Location Criteria. The Common Council of the City of Ashland shall
determine the location and configuration of sidewalks in the City. It shall be the general practice
of the Common Council to provide for sidewalks on all residential and commercial streets and
avenues in the City. However, the Common Council recognizes that sidewalks may not be
desirable in all circumstances and shall use the following criteria to guide the Common Council
and the Department of Public Works in determining whether to locate sidewalks on any
particular City street or avenue:
(a) Streets and avenues in traditional residential neighborhoods or residential neighborhood
with densities greater than 2 residential dwelling units per acre shall receive strong consideration
by the Common Council for construction of sidewalks.
(b) Streets and avenues that have a direct relationship with parks, schools, public facilities,
places of public assembly or commercial areas shall receive strong consideration by the
Common Council for construction of sidewalks.
(c) Streets and avenues that experience high traffic volume, high traffic speeds and high
volumes of pedestrian use that would indicate a safety need shall receive strong consideration by
the Common Council for construction of sidewalks.
(d) Due to the availability of sunlight on the north and east sides of roadways, streets and
avenues that are designated to receive a sidewalk on one side only shall have the sidewalk
constructed on the north or east side of the roadway.
(e) The location of sidewalks within the public right-of-way may be adjusted at the direction
of the Director of Public Works to accommodate the unique physical characteristics of the
Page 530-2
property and to better meet the needs or concerns of abutting property owners.
(f) The Common Council may exercise considerable discretion in determining the location of
sidewalks in the City and the Common Council recognizes the right of the City to build
sidewalks on any public right-of-way that they may determine appropriate.
530.03. Location of Sidewalks. The Department of Public Works shall prepare and maintain a
Sidewalk Location Map that shows where sidewalks will be constructed in the City. The
Sidewalk Location Map shall indicate the priority status of the street or avenue and whether a
sidewalk will be constructed on both sides, or one side only. The map shall be reviewed and
approved annually by a resolution of the Common Council and shall be included in the
“Comprehensive Sidewalk Policy” which is incorporated here by reference and shall be on file at
the office of the City Clerk.
530.04. Multi-Year Sidewalk Improvement Program. The Public Works Department shall
create and maintain a program for the replacement and/or construction of sidewalks. The
program shall be a component of the long-range capital improvement program of the City of
Ashland. The Public Works Department shall conduct annual inspections of sidewalks located in
the public right-of-way. The Department shall maintain a written record regarding the condition
of sidewalks in the City and document all removal, repair or replacement activity. In establishing
priorities, the Department shall consider the following:
(a) The condition rating given by the Department during the regular inspections of the
sidewalks;
(b) The estimated pedestrian use that is currently being experienced, or which can reasonably
be expected to be experienced, on a designated safe walking route;
(c) The traffic volume and speed on streets adjoining a designated safe walking route;
(d) The adequacy of existing safe walking routes to schools;
(e) The need for sidewalks for one or both sides of the street to establish a safe walking route;
(f) The capital improvement schedule of adjoining street and utility projects; and
(g) A property owner or a group of property owners may petition the City for consideration
for inclusion and priority status on the Sidewalk Improvement Program.
As part of the annual municipal budget process, the Public Works Director shall present
recommendations for the replacement and/or construction of new sidewalks in the City.
530.05. Sidewalk Construction, Maintenance and Repairs. The City of Ashland shall be
responsible for construction and physical maintenance and repairs of sidewalks located on the
public right-of-way. The City shall assess the costs of sidewalk construction, maintenance and
Page 530-3
repairs to abutting property owners in conformance with the Sidewalk Special Assessment
Policy. The Sidewalk Special Assessment Policy shall be reviewed and approved annually by a
resolution of the Common Council and shall be included in the “Comprehensive Sidewalk
Policy” which is incorporated here by reference and shall be on file at the office of the City
Clerk. The special assessment policy shall apply to all locations described in Section 530.030
with the following exceptions and criteria:
(a) The developer of any new residential, commercial, or industrial site shall present sidewalk
plans to the City for review and approval at the time building plans are submitted and prior to
any construction starting. The cost of installing new sidewalks at locations abutting new
residential, commercial or industrial construction shall be the responsibility of the developer.
(b) Where sidewalk construction or replacement is incidental to Federal or State highway
construction and the costs for the sidewalk construction are borne entirely by the Federal or State
Agency.
(c) Where a property owner chooses to construct, replace or repair sidewalk in the abutting
right-of-way. The work shall be performed by a pre-approved Contractor or an “experienced and
qualified individual” in good standing with the Public Works Department. The total cost of
construction, and removal where necessary, shall be borne entirely by the property owner.
(d) No one shall construct or replace sidewalk in the public right-of-way where it is not
provided for in section 530.030 of this ordinance.
(e) Funding for sidewalk construction, maintenance, replacement and removal shall be
considered each year by the City Council as part of their annual budget deliberations.
530.06. Abandonment of Sidewalks. The Department of Public Works will be responsible for
the removal of unsafe sidewalks in the City, where those sidewalks exist on roadways that are
not designated for sidewalks in this Ordinance. The Public Works Department shall remove and
dispose of the concrete from abandoned sidewalks at no cost to the abutting property owner.
Upon removal of the concrete, the Department shall repair improved driveways and/or walkways
damaged as a result of the sidewalk removal. The Department will place clean fill material and
plant grass seed in the remaining excavated area. Adjoining property owners shall be responsible
for the watering and care of the newly landscaped area.
530.07. Sidewalk Construction. All sidewalk construction, on public right-of-ways, shall be in
strict compliance with the Standard Specifications for Sidewalk Construction developed and
approved by the Public Works Department of the City of Ashland. The Standard Specifications
for Sidewalk Construction shall be included in the “Comprehensive Sidewalk Policy” which is
incorporated here by reference and shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk. The
Department shall provide a copy of this Ordinance and a copy of the “Comprehensive Sidewalk
Policy” to any person or contractor intending to complete sidewalk improvements in the City. In
addition to the construction requirements listed in the Standard Specifications, the following
construction requirements must be followed:
(a) A right of way permit issued under Chapter 501 must be obtained from the Public Works
Page 530-4
Department prior to digging, excavating, trenching, auguring, or jacking within any street right
of way.
(b) Anyone completing unapproved sidewalk construction shall be subject to a fine or
forfeiture as provided by these Ordinances and may be required to remove or replace the
unapproved sidewalk at their own expense if the sidewalk does not meet the standards of the
City.
(c) The person or contractor holding the right-of-way permit for sidewalk construction or
maintenance is responsible for the safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic in the immediate
area of the construction site.
(d) All sidewalks constructed within the City shall meet the requirements and provisions set
forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(e) Deviations from the normal placement of sidewalks may be approved by the Director of
Public Works/City Engineer after a complete review of the physical conditions of the property
and the impacts on the abutting property owners.
(f) It is the intent of this chapter to limit the construction of sidewalks in the City of Ashland
to the streets and avenues identified on the approved sidewalk map as referenced in Section
530.03. Changes to the approved sidewalk map may be made by the City Council after a
complete review of the public costs and public benefits that would be anticipated from the
proposed change.
530.08. Summer Sidewalk Maintenance. Summer maintenance of sidewalks shall be the
responsibility of property owners abutting the City sidewalk. Maintenance shall include, but not
be limited to:
(a) Removal of encroachments, hazards or obstructions such as grasses, weeds and vegetation
across the width and length of sidewalk abutting the property. It will also include sod, leaves,
branches, sand and rock.
(b) Overhanging vegetation, ornaments, decorations, or structures shall not hang below a
height of eight feet over the sidewalk grade.
(c) No vegetation, structures, ornaments, or decorations shall encroach upon the sidewalk
within a vertical line starting at the inner edge of the sidewalk.
(d) The Public Works Director may order the removal of grasses, weeds, vegetation and other
encroachments, hazards or obstructions. Removal shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of
the abutting property. If after adequate notification, the abutting property owner(s) fail to
remove the encroachments, hazards or obstructions, then the Public Works Director may arrange
for a contractor to undertake the removal. The bill for removal shall be provided to the abutting
property owner and if unpaid, a lien may be placed on the abutting property in accordance with
sec. 66.615, Wis. Stats.
Page 530-5
(e) The Public Works Director may order the removal of any tree that may be causing damage
to a sidewalk. Trees located on the public right-of-way shall be removed at the expense of the
City of Ashland. Removal of a tree located on private property causing damage to the sidewalk
shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of the abutting property. If after adequate notification
to remove a tree causing damage, the abutting property owner(s) fail to remove the tree, then the
Public Works Director may arrange for a contractor to undertake the removal. The bill for
removal of the tree shall be provided to the abutting property owner and if unpaid a lien may be
placed on the abutting property in accordance with sec. 66.615, Wis. Stats.
530.09. Winter Sidewalk Maintenance. The property owner abutting a public sidewalk shall be
responsible for the removal of snow from the sidewalk. Snow removal shall include the entire
width of the sidewalk and shall be completed no later than 48 hours after a snowfall of two (2)
inches or greater. In the case of a snow emergency declared by the City, snow removal shall be
completed within 48 hours after the City has declared an end to the snow emergency. Snow
removal shall be to the lowest level possible to allow safe travel by pedestrians. The Department
of Public Works will be responsible for the removal of snow from sidewalks in the following
situations:
(a) The Department may cause the removal of snow and ice from sidewalks that have not
been removed in the required time period by the responsible property owners. Failure to remove
snow and ice from sidewalks as provided by this Ordinance will result in a fine or forfeiture
levied against the abutting property owner as provided by these Ordinances. Also, the
Department shall bill the abutting property owner for the full cost of removing the snow and ice
and if unpaid a lien may be placed on the property in accordance with Wisconsin Statute
(66.615).
(b) The Department will remove snow from the Business District of the City in accordance
with the provisions and assessments of Municipal Ordinance Number 533.
(c) The City Council may, after a finding of compelling public safety concern and by formal
Resolution, direct the Department of Public Works to accept the responsibility for primary snow
removal on a designated sidewalk. In cases where the Department provides primary snow
removal services, the abutting property owner will be responsible for any and all secondary snow
removal activities, including the shoveling of spillage from City equipment and the scraping,
sanding and placing melting agents when appropriate.
(d) The Mayor of the City of Ashland may declare by formal Proclamation an extended
winter snow emergency and suspend the requirements for abutting property owners to remove
snow and ice from City sidewalks.
530.10. Prohibited Acts The following activities shall be prohibited on City sidewalks:
(a) No one shall damage City sidewalks. Anyone damaging a City sidewalk shall be subject
to a fine or forfeiture as provided by the Ashland city Ordinances and will be required to repair
or replace the damaged sections of sidewalk in accordance with City standards.
Page 530-6
(b) No one shall park motorized vehicles of any type on, or over, a City sidewalk unless for
purposes of temporary loading, or unloading, or those vehicles that are intended for the sole use
of a child or those vehicles are considered to be medical apparatus.
(c) No one shall allow an ongoing accumulation of toys, debris, bicycles, or any other item
that may be considered unsafe for pedestrian movement.
(d) No one shall place electrical cords, garden hoses, ropes, or cords, or unlighted barricades
across City sidewalks during hours of darkness.
(e) No person shall operate motorized vehicles of any type on City sidewalks. Motorized toys
used by children, as well as, medical apparatus are exempt from this chapter. Motorized vehicles
used for the sole purpose of snow removal are exempt while removing snow.
(f) No bicycles, skateboards, roller blades or roller skates shall be operated upon any sidewalk
in any portion of the Central Business District in the area described below. Bicycles,
skateboards, roller blades and roller skates may be operated on the sidewalks in public parks and
in residential districts, but in single file only. Under all circumstances, the users shall yield the
right-of way to pedestrians using the sidewalks, and due and proper care shall, at all times, be
exercised by the users for the pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on a sidewalk, the
speed of a bicycle or skate board shall be reduced to a speed which is no greater than necessary
to continue the operation of the bicycle or skateboard without the rider dismounting, and shall
not be increased until the pedestrian has passed. When approaching a pedestrian, roller blade and
roller skate users shall yield the right-of-way to the pedestrian and slow to a speed which allows
for safe, controlled passing of the pedestrian. “Central Business District” sidewalks are defined
as those sidewalks lying within the area between US Highway #2 and Third Street and bounded
on the East by Stuntz Avenue and on the West by Beaser Avenue.
530.11. Enforcement. Enforcement of these Ordinances shall be a cooperative effort between
the Ashland Police Department, Ashland Public Works Department and the City Zoning
Administrator. The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter related to
bicycles, roller blades, skateboards, roller skates or motorized vehicle violations. The Public
Works Department shall enforce the construction standards and maintenance sections of chapter.
The Zoning Administrator shall enforce the restrictions related to placement of items on the
sidewalk and property maintenance related violations.
530.12. Penalties.
(a) Anyone violating the provisions of these Ordinances shall forfeit not less than the
following:
(1) 1St Offense: $25.00
(2) 2nd Offense: $50.00
(3) 3rd and subsequent offenses: $100.00
Page 530-7
(b) Forfeitures shall be in addition to any bills issued by the City for work performed, either
by or under the direction of the City, to correct conditions leading to a violation of these
Ordinances.
ADOPTED: 530 (1629) 5/9/2006
AMENDMENTS: 530 (1692) 11/18/2008, 530 (2015-1853) 9/29/2015,
530 (2019-1913) 2/5/2019
Sequential Ordinance No. 1277 (8/92)
Codification Ordinance No. 534
AN ORDINANCE TO PROHIBIT PLACING SNOW FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY
ONTO CITY STREETS OR NEAR INTERSECTIONS
The Mayor and the Common Council of the City of Ashland do ordain as follows:
534.10
No person in the City of Ashland shall place, push or move snow from private property
onto a city street or place snow in such an area that would obstruct the view of
vehicular traffic at an intersection.
534.20
Violation of this ordinance is punishable by a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor
more than $500.00.
534.30
This ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication.
Sequential Ordinance No. 1082
Codification Ordinance No. 536
ORDINANCE REGULATING SALT USE ON STREETS IN THE CITY OF ASHLAND
The Mayor and Common Council of the City of Ashland ordains as follows:
536.01
The Common Council of the City of Ashland intends to minimize the harmful or
corrosive effects of salt upon motor vehicles, city streets, and vegetation, reduce the
pollution of the waters of the state and reduce the driving hazards resulting from salt on
windshields by regulating the application of salt to city streets and by promoting the use
of mechanical and other environmentally safe methods to provide for the treatment and
control of ice and snow.
536.02
The Department of Public Works shall maximize the use of mechanical and/or nonchemical
means to remove snow and ice from the city streets to promote the safety of
the traveling public.
536.03
For the winter driving period of November 1 to April 30, beginning in 1986, and
thereafter, the Department of Public Works may not apply salt to the city streets except
as follows:
A. If the air temperature is 10 degrees Fahrenheit or above, or the pavement
temperature is 20 degrees Fahrenheit or above:
(1) Highway salt consisting of sodium chloride may be applied to a highway at a
uniform rate of not more than 300 pounds per traffic lane, per mile of highway,
per application.
(2) Sand, or salt and sand mixture, shall be used whenever practical.
(3) The Department of Public Works may vary the rate of application within the
limit of paragraph (1) above in response to the amount of snow or ice on
the city street, traffic density and the weather conditions or forecast.
536.04
This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and publication.
Sequential Ordinance No. 893
Codification Ordinance No. 542
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING PARKING ON VARIOUS STREETS AND AVENUES
DESIGNATED AS EMERGENCY ROUTES IN THE CITY OF ASHLAND. WISCONSIN
The Mayor and Common Council of the City of Ashland, Wisconsin do ordain as
follows:
542.01
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on the following avenues in the City
of Ashland due to emergency vehicle traffic on said avenues:
1. West side of Ninth Avenue West from Front Street to Third Street.
2. East side of Stuntz Avenue from Second Street to Third Street.
542.02
Any violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and said fine shall be assessed against the
registered owner of the vehicle that is illegally parked.
542.03
Ordinances No. 874 and 879 are repealed in total and any other conflicting ordinances
are repealed, only to the extent of the conflict.
542.04
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by law.
Page 544-1
CHAPTER 544. VEHICULAR STOPPING AND PARKING.
544.10. Two Hour Parking on Certain Enumerated Streets. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle for a period of longer than two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, on any streets or avenues in the City of Ashland listed below:
All streets and avenues lying between the west line of 10th Avenue West to the east line of 3rd
Avenue East and between the north line of Third Street and south line of Lake Shore Drive; and
between Ellis Avenue and Third Avenue West on the north side of Lake Shore Drive; and on
Main Street from the east line of 7th Avenue East to the west line of the alley located in the 600
block of Main Street East.
544.11. Exception. The following streets shall be exempted from the two hour parking
provisions, except as designated:
(a) MacArthur Avenue. No parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. from 3rd Street to the alley located
between Main and 3rd Streets.
(b) MacArthur Avenue. No parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. parking on the west side
of the Avenue from Lake Shore Drive to Main Street West and 2-hour parking on the east side
of the Avenue. No parking anytime in one-way entrance from Lake Shore Drive south for
approximately 150’
(c) 10th Avenue West. no parking on the west side from Lake Shore Drive to Main Street and
2-hour parking on the east side from Lake Shore Drive to Main Street.
(d) Main Street West. No parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. parking on the north side of the street
from 9th Avenue West to 10th Avenue West.
(e) 9th Avenue West. Unrestricted parking on the west side of the Avenue from Lake Shore
Drive to Main Street West and 2-hour parking on the east side of the avenue.
544.12. Marking Places. The City shall have the authority to have markings painted or placed
upon the curb of the street for the purpose of designating the parking space and the angle at
which vehicles are parked to the curb. Each vehicle parking within any two hour parking zone
shall park within the line or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
across any such line or marking or to park said vehicle in such position that the same shall not be
entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings.
544.20. Disabled parking.
(a) The provisions of sec. 346.505, Wis. Stats. are hereby adopted by reference.
(b) Except for a motor vehicle used by a physically disabled person as defined under sec.
346.503 (1), Wis. Stats., no person may park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether
Page 544-2
attended or unattended and whether temporarily or otherwise, upon any portion of a street,
highway or parking facility reserved, by official traffic signs indicating the restriction, for
vehicles displaying special registration plates or a special identification card issued under
Wisconsin Statutes or another jurisdiction which designates the vehicle as a vehicle used by a
physically disabled person.
544.21. Disabled Parking Enforcement Assistance Council. The City of Ashland hereby
establishes a Disabled Parking Enforcement Assistance Council as permitted by sec. 349.145,
Wis. Stats. The members of the Council shall have the powers described in sec. 346.505, Wis.
Stats.
544.22. Reserved Parking Places. The City of Ashland specifically designates the following
parking spaces as reserved for parking for motor vehicles used by physically disabled persons:
(a) On the north side of Main Street West, west of its intersection with Tenth Avenue West.
(b) First space on the east side of 6th Avenue West south of the intersection of Main
Street West.
(c) One space on the west side of Sixth Avenue West, north of the intersection with Third
Street West.
(d) Two spaces on the west side of the 200 block of Vaughn Avenue; one north of the alley
and one south of the alley.
(e) On the east side of Fourth Avenue West, north of its intersection with Main Street West.
(f) On the east side of the 200 block of 3rd Avenue West.
(g) On the west side of the 100 block of Third Avenue West north of the intersection with
Main Street.
(h) On the north side of the 600 block of Main Street West west of the emergency exit of
City Hall.
(i) On the boulevard on the east side of the 100 block of Prentice Avenue adjacent to Country
Kitchen.
(j) On the east side of the 700 block of Beaser Avenue in front of the CESA building.
(k) On the east side of 10th Avenue West in the first space north of Main Street.
(l) On the east side of 3rd Avenue East in the 100 north block adjacent to the NSP building.
(m) On the east side of the 200 Block of Chapple Avenue.
Page 544-3
(n) On the South Side of the 100 Block of 10th Street East, adjacent to the Middle School.
(o) On the North Side of the 100 Block of 11th Street East, adjacent to the Middle School.
(p) Two spaces on the south side of Admiral Leahy Drive adjacent to the Sigurd Olson
Environmental Institute.
(q) On the south side of the 1300 Block of 7th Street West, adjacent to the Beaser Park Little
League Field.
(r) On the north side of the 1200 block of Main Street West.
(s) On the west side of the 200 block of 3rd Avenue East, south of the intersection with Main
Street.
(t) On the west side of the 200 block of 2nd Avenue West, south of the intersection with Main
Street.
(u) On the south side of the 800 block of Main Street West, east of the parking lot entrance.
(v) On the north side of the 400 block of Main Street East, east of the intersection with
Prentice Avenue.
(w) On the north side of the 400 block on Main Street East, west of the intersection of 5th
Avenue East
(x) In Central Railyard Park, closest to the entrance of the playground.
(y) One space on the northeast intersection of Main Street and Sixth Avenue West, adjacent
to the Golden Glow Restaurant.
(z) The first space on the intersection of Main Street and 2nd Avenue East.
(aa) One space in front of 220 6th Street East, on the west side of the stairway for Ashland
County Law Enforcement offices.
(bb) On the east side of the 300 Block of Third Avenue West, the third parking space north
of the intersection of 3rd Street.
(cc) On the east side of the 300 block of Beaser Avenue.
(dd) 311 Main Street East.
(ee) The first space west of the alleyway on the south side of the 800 Block of Main Street
West.
Page 544-4
(ff) The first space east of the driveway on the south side of the 700 Block of Main Street
West.
These locations may be changed from time to time upon Parking System recommendation by
Council action and appropriate notice thereof.
544.23. Reserved Parking in Residential Areas. In addition to the location identified in
Section 544.22, areas as reviewed and approved by the Disabled Parking Enforcement Council
are designated as reserved for motor vehicles used by and for physically disabled persons and
will be indicated by City issued signage in a reasonable location.
544.24. Application. The costs for placement of handicapped parking signs for spaces created
under Section 544.23 shall be paid by the individual making the application. Handicapped
parking spaces created under the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the following
provisions:
(a) Original Application.
(1) The applicant must make a request in writing to the Disabled Parking Enforcement
Assistance Council.
(2) The Disabled Parking Enforcement Assistance Council shall make a recommendation
to the City Council.
(3) The City Council shall determine if a handicapped parking space permit shall be
issued.
(4) Handicapped parking space permits shall expire on June 30 of each year.
(b) Renewal Application.
(1) Prior to the expiration date, the individual requesting handicapped parking sign permit
must make a renewal application.
(2) The Disabled Parking Enforcement Assistance Council shall review the renewal
application and make a report to the City Council.
(3) Additional Council action on handicapped parking space permits is only required for
revocation of permits.
544.30. Parking Prohibited in Certain Specified Places. No person shall stop or leave any
vehicle standing in any of the following places except temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers and while
vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may promptly be moved in case of an
emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic:
Page 544-5
(a) In a loading zone;
(b) In an alley in a business district;
(c) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, unless a greater distance is indicated;
(d) Within 4 feet of the entrance to an alley or private road or driveway;
(e) Closer than 15 feet to the near limits of a crosswalk.
544.31. Camper Parking Restriction. No person shall park a camper in the parking spaces
closest to the intersections in the Downtown Business District. These restricted parking areas
shall be posted.
544.40. Bus Stops; Regulation Use of Same. The following are designated as bus stops in the
City of Ashland to be used by buses and taxicabs in the loading and unloading of its passengers
at the curb of the streets:
(a) On the south side of Main Street E., east of the alley in the 100 block.
(b) On the south side of Main Street W., east of its intersection with 2nd Ave. West.
(c) On the north side of Main Street West, west of its intersection with 2nd Ave. West.
(d) On the west side of 2nd Ave. West, south of its intersection with Main Street West.
(e) On the south side of Main Street West, east of its intersection with 4th Ave. West.
(f) On the north side of Main Street West, west of its intersection with 4th Ave. West.
(g) On the south side of Main Street West, east of its intersection with Chapple Avenue.
(h) On the north side of Main Street West, west of its intersection with 6th Ave. West.
542.41. Loading. The said place of loading and space allowed for bus stops shall be designated
and defined by the painting of the curb yellow which shall be done by the City.
544.42. Bus Stops Signs or No Parking Signs. Signs may be placed reading “bus stop” or “no
parking.” Such signs will be furnished and installed by the City.
544.43. Use of bus stops by buses and taxis. Such places so designated herein as bus stops
shall be used by buses and taxicabs. No other vehicles shall at any time park within the spaces
hereby designated as a bus stop.
544.50. 15 Minute Zones in Certain Enumerated Areas. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle for a period longer than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except
Page 544-6
on Sundays and holidays, on any streets or avenues in the City of Ashland described below:
(a) U. S. Post Office, 615 West Main Street, from driveway in middle of block on north side
of Main Street to corner of Chapple Avenue.
(b) Ashland City Hall, 100 block, Sixth Avenue West, south half of block, west side.
(c) On the south side of the 800 Block of Main Street West, adjacent to 802 Main Street West.
(d) On the west side of the 200 Block of MacArthur Avenue, adjacent to 800 Main Street
West.
(e) On the north side of the 500 Block of 6th Street West, adjacent to 517 6th Street West.
(f) On the south side of the 800 Block of Main Street West, adjacent to 822 Main Street
West.
(g) On the north side of the 500 Block of Main Street East, adjacent to 511 Main Street East.
These locations may be changed from time to time by Council action and appropriate notice
thereof.
544.61. Enforcement. The City of Ashland Police Department shall be empowered to enforce
the provisions of this ordinance and may issue citations for any violation of this ordinance on the
form and in the manner prescribed by the City of Ashland.
544.70. Reserved Parking. It shall be unlawful to park any but appropriate identified vehicles
in spaces marked reserved parking.
544.80. Penalties. Any citations or tickets issued for violations of this ordinance shall carry
penalties as set forth in sections 544.81, 544.82, and 544.83.
544.81. Violation of Sections 544.10, 544.40, 544.41, and 544.50.
(a) If paid within 7 days from the date of its issuance, the forfeiture shall be $5.00.
(b) If paid after 7 days, but within 14 days from the date of its issuance, the forfeitures shall
be $10.00.
(c) If paid after 14 days from the date of its issuance, the forfeiture shall be $15.00.
(d) In addition to the above, the person convicted of any violation shall be responsible for all
court costs and attorney fees incurred by the City in enforcing this ordinance.
544.82. Violation of Sections 544.30, 544.31, and 544.70. The owner of any vehicle
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $20.00
nor more than $40.00 for each offense.
Page 544-7
544.83. Violation of Section 544.20. The owner of any vehicle found to be in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 for each
offense.
ADOPTED: 544 (1026) 4/10/1984;
AMENDED: 544 (1063) 2/11/1986; 544 (1147) 8/9/1988; 544 (1163) 12/13/1988;
544 (1198) 7/11/1989; 544 (1248) 2/12/1991; 544 (1250) 3/12/1991;
544 (1267) 11/21/1991; 544 (1272) 2/11/1992; 544 (1293) 7/13/1993;
544 (1319) 6/14/1994; 544 (1326) 8/9/1994; 544 (1366) 2/27/1996;
544 (1367) 3/26/1996; 544 (1373) 4/30/1996; 544 (1390) 3/11/1997;
544 (1397) 6/24/1997; 544 (1400) 7/8/1997; 544 (1421) 10/28/1997;
544 (1438) 6/16/1998; 544 (1440) 6/30/1998; 544 (1445) 9/8/1998;
544 (1448) 10/13/1998; 544 (1455) 12/29/1998; 544 (1472) 4/20/1999;
544 (1478) 8/10/1999; 544 (1483) 10/26/1999; 544 (1494) 5/30/2000;
544 (1497) 7/11/2000; 544 (1507) 12/12/2000; 544 (1513) 4/17/2001;
544 (1517) 6/26/2001; 544 (1523) 9/25/2001; 544 (1529) 12/11/2001;
544 (1547) 6/25/2002; 544 (1567) 4/15/2003; 544 (1573) 7/29/2003;
544 (1582) 10/28/2003; 544 (1591) 7/13/2004; 544 (1595) 9/28/2004;
544 (1600) 3/8/2005; 544 (1606) 6/14/2005; 544 (1631) 6/13/2006;
544 (1651) 4/17/2007; 544 (1652) 4/17/2007; 544 (1653) 5/8/2007;
544 (1664) 8/14/2007; 544 (1685) 6/24/2008; 544 (1687) 7/8/2008;
544 (1693) 11/18/2008; 544 (1736) 10/12/2010; 544 (1753) 8/9/2011;
544 (1795) 10/9/2012; 544 (1803) 3/12/2013; 544 (1809) 6/25/2013;
544 (1813) 8/13/2013; 544 (1815) 9/23/2013; 544 (1818) 10/29/2013;
544 (2015-1846) 6/30/2015; 544 (2015-1860) 9/29/2015;
544 (2017-1899) 9/26/2017; 544 (2018-1901) 2/27/2018;
544 (2018-1905) 6/26/2018; 544 (2018-1907) 7/10/2018;
544 (2019-1914) 2/18/2019; 544 (2019-1918) 6/11/2019;
Page 544-8
Page 601-1
CHAPTER 601. MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS.
601.01. Designation of individual parking lots.
(a) City Lot A. That parcel of land at 6th Avenue West and Front Street, described as Lots 23
and 24, Block 73, Vaughn's Division. The described parcel shall hereinafter be referred to as
City Lot A.
(b) City Lot B. That parcel of land at 2nd Street West and 6th Avenue in the City of Ashland,
more particularly described as Lots 13-18, inclusive, Block 114, Vaughn's Division. The
described parcel shall hereinafter be referred to as City Lot B.
(c) City Lot C. That parcel of land at 3rd Street West and 3rd Avenue West in the City of
Ashland, more particularly described as Lots 13-15, inclusive, including that part of Lot 8 lying
south of the alley in Block 111, Vaughn's Division, Block 111, Ellis Division. The described
parcel shall hereinafter be referred to as City Lot C.
(d) City Lot D. That parcel of land at 3rd Street West and 2nd Avenue West in the City of
Ashland, more particularly described as Lots 13-18, inclusive, and the West 40 feet of Lot 19,
Block 110, Ellis Division. The described parcel shall hereinafter be referred to as City Lot D.
(e) City Lot E. The parcel of land at 3rd Street West and 4th Avenue West more particularly
described as: The N 16' of Lot 6 and all of Lots 7-12, Block 119, Ellis Division; Lots 7-12, Block
119, Vaughn's Division; the east 33 feet of vacated 4th Avenue West and the west 10 feet of the
vacated alley adjacent to the above identified lots.
601.02. Motor vehicle use only. City Lots A, B, C, D and E shall be used exclusively for the
off-street parking of motor vehicles subject to the conditions, limitations, and provisions of this
ordinance.
601.03. Two hour parking. Portions of Lots B, C, D, and E may be limited to two hour parking.
Two hour parking restrictions shall be designated by posting signs.
601.04. Permit parking area.
(a) Restricted Areas. All of Lot A and portions of Lots B, C, D and E shall be restricted
permit parking areas.
(b) Posting of Signs. Permit parking areas in Lots B, C, D and E, shall be designated and in
effect by the posting of signs.
(c) Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in the permit parking
area unless said vehicle has a current City of Ashland lease parking permit or current employee
permit (Lot A only) attached to said vehicle in a conspicuous place, and that the number of said
permit be identical to the number marking the parking space so occupied.
Page 601-2
(d) Lease Parking Permits. The City shall prescribe the fees, number, term of sale, period
covered and other matters having to do with the lease parking permits.
(e) Towing Vehicles. Vehicles unlawfully parked in the permit parking area may be towed
away at the owner's expense.
601.05. Hours Parking is Prohibited.
(a) 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in Lots A, C,
and E between 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. unless said vehicle has a current lease permit or, in the case
of Lot A, said vehicle must have a current employee permit displayed in a conspicuous place.
(b) 8:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in Lots B and D
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless said vehicle has a current lease permit.
601.06. Handicap Parking Area.
(a) A portion of Lots B, C, D, and E, may be limited to Handicap parking.
(b) The Handicap parking areas shall be designated with the posting of signs.
601.07. Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the City of Ashland
Police Department.
601.08. Penalties.
(a) Any citations or tickets issued for violation of this ordinance shall carry penalties as follows:
(1) Section 601.02. Any person determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $200.
(2) Sections 601.03, 601.04.
(A) If paid within 7 days from the date of issuance, the forfeiture shall be $5.00.
(B) If paid after 7 days, but within 14 days from the date of its issuance, the
forfeiture shall be $10.00.
(C) If paid after 14 days from the date of its issuance, the forfeiture shall be
$15.00.
(3) Section 601.05. The owner of any vehicle determined to be in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00.
(4) Section 601.06. The owner of any vehicle determined to be in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 for each
Page 601-3
offense.
(b) Each 24 hour period in which a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation.
601.09. Court costs. Any person convicted of any violation of this ordinance shall be
responsible for all court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City of Ashland.
601.10. Presumption. It shall be presumed for the purpose of this ordinance that the registered
owner is the operator of any vehicle parked in violation of this ordinance.
ADOPTED: 601 (1017) 10/11/1983
AMENDMENTS: 601 (1155) 12/13/1988; 601 (1351) 7/11/1995; 601 (1379) 7/9/1996
601 (1497) 7/11/2000
Page 602-1
CHAPTER 602. REGULATIONS FOR PARKING LOT F (MARINA STORAGE).
602.01. City Parking Lot F. The parcel of land southeast of the intersection of Ellis Avenue
North and Marina Drive, described as Parcel #1009, Located in Block 31, Ellis Division.
602.02. Purpose of Lot. City Parking Lot F shall be used for off-street parking of motor
vehicles, boats and boat trailers, snowmobiles and snowmobile trailers, and for the storage of
boats and cradles, subject to the conditions, limitations, and provisions of this ordinance.
602.03. Parking Area Designations and Fees. Parking areas and fees shall be designated by the
Harbor Commission, with approval by the Common Council. The parking policies and fee
schedule shall be attached to this ordinance as Addendum I and incorporated as if fully set forth
herein. Signs showing the designated parking areas shall be posted. The parking provisions shall
be in effect upon posting of said signs.
602.04. Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the City of Ashland
Police Department.
602.05. Penalties. The owner of any vehicle, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile, snowmobile trailer,
or boat cradle determined to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall pay a
forfeiture of not less than Twenty-Five ($25) Dollars nor more than One-Hundred ($100)
Dollars. Each day that the violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person
convicted of violation of this ordinance shall be responsible for all court costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the City of Ashland in enforcing this ordinance.
ADOPTED: 602 (1433) 5/12/1998

Page 603-1
CHAPTER 603. REGULATIONS FOR VEHICULAR PARKING LOT G (JOHN F.
KENNEDY MEMORIAL AIRPORT).
603.01. City Parking Lot G. The parcel of land that terminates County Road K, immediately
north of the Airport Terminal building.
603.02. Purpose of Lot. City Parking Lot G shall be used for off-street parking of motor
vehicles, subject to the conditions, limitations, and provisions of this policy.
603.03. Parking Area Designation and Fees. The Airport Commission shall designate parking
areas and fees. The parking policies and fee schedule shall be attached to this policy
“Addendum I” and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. Signs showing the designated
parking area shall be posted. The parking provisions shall be in effect upon posting of said
signs.
603.04. Handicap Parking Area. A portion of Lot G may be reserved for parking of vehicles
used by persons with physical disabilities. The reserved for disabled parking area shall be
designated with the posting of signs.
603.05. Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the City of Ashland
Police Department.
603.06. Penalties. Any citation or tickets issued for violation of this ordinance shall carry
penalties as follows:
(a) The owner of any vehicle, determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance shall pay a forfeiture of not less than Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars nor more than
One-Hundred ($100.00) Dollars.
(b) Each day that the violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
(c) Any person convicted of violation of this ordinance shall be responsible for all court costs
and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City of Ashland in enforcing this ordinance.
(d) Vehicles unlawfully parked in the permit parking area may be towed away at the owner’s
expense.
(e) It shall be presumed for the purpose of this ordinance that the registered owner is the
operator of the vehicle parked in violation of this ordinance.
ADOPTED: 603 (1518) 6/26/2001
Page 603-2
ADDENDUM I
Ordinance #603
Parking Regulations – Parking Lot “G”
General
Vehicular parking is limited to airport users.
Any vehicle parking in the designated lot area must be legally licensed and registered. Vehicles
not licensed and registered will be treated as “Abandoned” vehicles under Ordinance #750, The
Property Maintenance Ordinance of the City.
Short Term Parking
Vehicles may be parked on the South side of the lot area for up to 14 days without a parking
permit.
Long Term Parking
Vehicles may be parked on the North side of the lot area for monthly parking (greater than 14
days) with valid parking permit. Permits may be obtained from the Airport Manager.
Monthly Fee: $15.00 plus tax.
Annual Fee: $150.00 plus tax if paid in January.
Page 611-1
CHAPTER 611. PERMITS FOR PLACING OR ALTERING DRIVEWAYS FOR
MOVEMENT OF TRAFFIC.
611.01 Permits. The Public Works Department shall issue permits under Chapter 501 for
placing, constructing, or altering driveways, or for otherwise making excavations or fills or
installing culverts or making other alterations in the public streets and alleys. No person shall
perform any such activity without a permit issued under Chapter 501.
611.02 Requirements. The location, design and construction requirements shall be in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the Wisconsin Highway Department.
611.03 Compliance. The commercial-urban driveways shall comply with the following:
(a) Width of Drive. No driveway shall have a width greater than that approved by the
Engineering Department measured at right angles to the centerline of the driveway except as
increased by permissible radii.
(b) Return Radii. The return radii projected between the line of face of curb of the highway
and the driveway shall be determined by the engineer, basing his decision on the type of
traffic and the restrictions given in subsections (a) and (d). In all cases, the entire flare
shall fall within the right-of-way.
(c) Angular Placement of Drive. The angle between the centerline of the driveway and the
curb line shall be not less than 45 degrees.
(d) Island Areas.
(1) When sidewalk is adjacent to curb, an island of a minimum length of 6 feet,
measured along the curb line, shall be placed between each entrance to the
highway. The curb shall be left intact for this length.
(2) When sidewalk is remote from curb, an island if required of a length approved
by the Engineering Department measured along the right-of-way line shall be
maintained between each entrance to the highway. All flares shall be tangent
to the curb line.
(3) A curb length approved by the Engineering Department shall be left undisturbed
if required adjacent to each property line to serve as an island area should the adjoining
property owner request a permit for an entrance.
ADOPTED: 611 (731) 7/14/1964
AMENDMENTS: 611 (2015-1855) 9/29/2015
Page 612-1
CHAPTER 612. STREET AND UTILITY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT POLICIES.
612.10. Policy and Purpose. This chapter is intended to be a guideline to establish:
(a) Minimum street construction standards to ensure an adequate base, good drainage and
durable surfaces.
(b) Minimum utility construction standards to provide for adequate sanitary sewer, water
service and storm sewer.
(c) Special assessment policies to ensure equitable distribution of project costs between the
City and property owners.
612.20. Street Construction Standards.
(a) The Public Works Department shall promulgate and have the power to enforce standards
for the construction and reconstruction of street and utilities.
(b) General.
(1) All street construction shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the State of
Wisconsin, Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.”
(2) The City shall establish street grades, have plans and specifications prepared for
street and utility improvements and provide for construction staking and inspection for
improvements. In new subdivisions, the developer must prepare plans and specifications in
accordance with standards established by the Department of Public Works and the Unified
Development Ordinance.
(3) All sanitary sewer, sanitary sewer services, watermain, water services, storm sewer,
natural gas, cable TV, telephone and underground electrical power shall be installed prior to
placing the final street surfacing unless exempted by special resolution by the City Council.
(4) No utility trenches shall be cut into newly paved streets within five (5) years from
date of final surfacing except in an emergency. However, the Mayor and the Director of Public
Works at their discretion, may jointly permit cuts into a new street and permits will be issued by
the Zoning Administration office.
(5) All private utilities and private contractors shall obtain a street cut permit issued
under Chapter 501 prior to digging, excavating, trenching, augering or jacking within any street
or alley right-of-way. The street cut permit process shall be as follows:
Page 612-2
(A) Permit Application. Said permittee shall obtain a street cut permit from the
Department of Public Works prior to beginning any work. The permit fee shall be
waived for sidewalk and driveway removal and replacement.
(B) Underground Locates. The private contractor or utility representative shall check
city sewer records in the Public Works Office and public and private utilities for the
location of buried utilities. Diggers Hotline notification shall be made to check for
other utilities in work zone.
(C) Notification.
(i) The permittee shall notify the Public Works Department 24 hours before
the cut is to be made so that a city representative may be on site during
excavation and filling. Backfill operations completed without City
supervision or approval may be ordered removed and redone to verify
compliance with specified backfill operations stated in this chapter. Where
the work will cause temporary closing of a street, the permittee shall notify
the Police and Fire Departments prior to beginning work. Failure to do so
will result in immediate citation - no exceptions.
(ii) The permittee shall submit plans and/or specifications a minimum of five
(5) days prior to starting a project. In the event of an emergency which
threatens the safety, health and/or welfare of residents, as determined by the
Director of Public Works, advance notification is waived and permits will be
issued immediately.
(iii) Work must be inspected during construction to ensure compliance with
City procedures and specifications. Failure to do so may result in the Director
of Public Works or his representative ordering re-excavation of project.
(6) The Common Council may upon recommendation of the Committee of the Whole
grant variances from the standards provided in this Chapter or adopted under this Chapter.
(c) Utility Construction Standards.
(1) All new subdivisions, developments, and newly opened streets shall include
installation of sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer services, watermain, water services and storm
sewer prior to issuance of a building permit; unless exempted by review of the City Planning
Commission or Water Utility, and approved by the City Council.
(2) All sanitary sewer construction shall conform to Chapter NR 110 and watermain
construction to Chapter NR 111 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Page 612-3
612.30. Policy for Special Assessments for Capital Improvements
(a) General. This policy shall provide the basis for special assessment to property owners for
sanitary sewer, watermain and utility service construction, sidewalk and driveway entrances.
(b) Definitions.
(1) Abutting Frontage - The part of a lot, parcel or property which abuts or fronts
on an improvement.
(2) Long Frontage - The long dimension of a corner lot regardless of the house
orientation.
(3) Short Frontage - The short dimension of a corner lot regardless of the house
orientation.
(4) Irregular Lot - A lot within a subdivision abutting a cul-de-sac or curbed street
approximately equal in area to other lots within the subdivision; however,
having unusually short abutting frontage in comparison to the other lots.
(5) Building Setback Line - A line 25 feet from the street right-of-way line.
(6) Remote Lots - Lots or parcels without abutting frontage which receive benefit from
the improvement.
(7) Subdivision - As defined in Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.
(8) Existing Street - Street or highway open to travel prior to January 1, 1985.
(9) Deteriorated Existing Bituminous or Concrete Surfaced Street - Street opened to
travel prior to January 1, 1985, where the surface has deteriorated to a stage requiring
new construction.
(10) Surfaced Street - Street or highway with existing bituminous or concrete pavement
surfacing.
(11) New Street - A platted or unplatted street or highway not open to travel prior to
January 1, 1985.
(c) Improvements to existing street open to travel prior to January 1, 1985.
(1) Existing unsurfaced or deteriorated bituminous or concrete surfaced residential street:
Street construction consisting of tree, curb and gutter and pavement removal, grading,
construction of base course, surfacing, curb and gutter, adjustments or manhole castings,
and boulevard restoration shall be completed and paid for by the City with no assessment
to the abutting frontage.
Page 612-4
(2) Any improvements required by the City as a result of new uses or development along
abutting frontage shall be installed and paid for by the owner or developer of the abutting
property to standards recommended by the City pursuant to plan review of the Public
Works Department and City Engineer.
(3) Bituminous overlay construction of existing bituminous or concrete surfaced
residential streets: Bituminous overlay construction including the necessary base
preparation, curb replacement and adjustment of manhole castings on these streets shall
be completed and paid for by the City with no assessment to the abutting frontage.
(4) Bituminous construction on existing unsurfaced rural roads: Tree removal, grading,
subbase, course, base course, and bituminous construction on rural roads shall be
completed and paid for by the City with no assessment to the abutting frontage.
(5) Bituminous overlay and reconstruction on existing bituminous or concrete surfaced
streets other than residential streets. Bituminous overlays or reconstruction of streets
other than residential as indicated in the Ashland Functional Street System Map shall be
constructed and paid for by the City.
(d) Construction of new streets or improvements to existing streets required as a result of
new development.
(1) 100% of the cost of street construction shall be paid for by the developer or
developers. Such improvements shall extend to the rear of the property line of the
abutting property being developed or to adjacent properties as directed by the City
Engineer or Public Works Director.
(2) All construction of new streets shall be in accordance with the standard set forth in
Section 612.20.
(3) The Common Council of the City of Ashland shall have the sole discretion to
determine whether or not construction of a new street will be permitted.
(e) Special assessments for new or replacement utilities.
(1) New utilities. 100% of the cost of new eight (8) inch diameter sanitary sewers and
sanitary sewer services and 100% of the cost of storm sewers and catch basins shall be
assessed to abutting frontage. Water and water service shall be assessed in accordance
with the current policy of the Ashland Water Utility. The City reserves the right to levy
additional assessments for projects having special needs.
(2) Replacement utilities. Replacement of existing utilities shall be assessed to the
abutting frontage at a rate equal to 100% of the current estimated cost of new utility
construction in accordance with Section 612.40(e)(1), above. The additional costs shall
be paid by the City general fund. Services will be assessed at 100% of the actual
Page 612-5
replacement cost.
(f).Sidewalk and driveway entrances. 100% of the cost for removals, construction and
boulevard restoration shall be assessed against the abutting frontage.
(g) Special assessments - general terms and conditions. The following formulas shall apply
to all of the aforementioned capital improvements projects to be assessed to property owners:
(1) Each of the capital improvements may be assessed separately or combined for
assessment purposes.
(2) The overhead costs for Public Works and construction staking and inspection shall be
included as a part of the total improvement cost and assessed against the abutting
property in accordance with the aforementioned policies. A charge equal to 15 percent of
the construction costs shall be made if it is not possible to determine the exact amount of
the overhead costs applicable to a particular improvement.
(3) The cost of improvements abutting an alley or street right-of-way and unassessable
frontage shall be included in the total project cost and assessed against the assessable
abutting frontage.
(4) Assessments are made hereunder pursuant to the City’s Police Powers.
(5) Assessments against property shall be subject to up to 12 percent annual simple
interest on the unpaid balance as established by the City Council. The following
schedule of payment of principal and interest shall apply to all assessments:
(A) Assessments less than $299.99 shall be paid within three (3) years.
(B) Assessments from $300.00 to $499.99 shall be paid within four (4) years.
(C) Assessments from $500.00 to $799.99 shall be paid within seven (7) years.
(D) Assessments over $800.00 shall be paid within ten (10) years.
(6) The following formula shall be used as the basis for levying special assessments for
sanitary sewer improvements:
(A) Interior Lots and Parcels - Assess on the basis of 100 percent of the abutting
frontage; except, the following exemptions shall be granted: Exempt that portion of
undeveloped or partially developed lots or parcels where additional building sites of
100 feet in width can be developed providing for a minimum 15 feet wide side yard
set back from existing buildings.
(B) Corner Lots and Parcels - Assess corner lots and parcels on the basis of 100
percent of the abutting frontage; except, the following exemptions shall be granted:
Page 612-6
(i) Exempt 100 percent of the short frontage, if the sanitary sewer improvements
abuts both frontages of a corner lot.
(ii) Exempt that portion of the long frontage of undeveloped or partially
developed lots or parcels where additional building sites of 100 feet in width can
be developed providing for a minimum 15 feet wide side yard and 75 feet wide
back yard set back from existing buildings.
(iii) Exempt the second frontage of a corner lot or parcel with existing sanitary
sewer along the other frontage; except where additional building sites of 100 feet
in width can be developed providing for a minimum 15 feet wide side yard and 75
feet wide back yard set back from existing buildings.
(C) Irregular Lots - Assess on the basis of frontage length at the building setback line,
the average abutting frontage of a regular interior lot, or on the basis of a standard
building site, whichever if most applicable.
(D) Remote Lots - Assess on the basis of a standard building site.
(E) General - The following shall apply to all special assessments for sanitary sewer
improvements.
(i) Adjacent lots or parcels under common ownership shall be considered as a
single parcel for assessment purposes.
(ii) The assessable frontage of lots or parcels 100 feet in width or greater shall not
be less than 100 feet.
(iii) All undeveloped lots or parcels shall be assessed for one building site. The
assessable frontage shall be determined in accordance with the previously
outlined
policies.
(iv) A standard building site for the purpose of this chapter shall have 100 feet
frontage and 140 feet lot or parcel depth.
(v) Side yard and back yard setback shall be defined as the distance between a
building or structure and the property line measured from the outer edge of the
roof overhang.
(vi) Special assessments shall be exempted for all unbuildable property such as
wetland areas and ravines, as determined by the City.
(vii) All property exempted from special assessment shall pay a “connection
charge in lieu of special assessment” to the City Treasurer at the time a building
Page 612-7
permit is issued for the exempt lot or parcel. The connection charge shall be equal
to the special assessment rate levied for the improvements adjusted by the
following factors:
(aa) A ratio of the Public Works New Record current construction cost
index to the construction cost index at the time the special assessments
were levied.
(bb) Depreciated on the basis of a 75 year life commencing at the time
the special assessments were levied.
(cc) The minimum connection charge shall be based on the standard
building site. The connection charge for a lot or parcel with frontage
greater than the standard building site shall be increased proportionately.
Connection charges for corner lots, irregular lots and remote lots shall be
governed by the same criteria as outlined for special assessments. The
City Treasurer shall maintain a map indicating the locations where
connection charges are due.
612.40. Special City Costs.
(a) Sanitary Sewers. 100% of the additional costs for sanitary sewers over eight (8) inches in
diameter.
(b) Water Services. Costs of watermains, water services, sewage pumping station, water
pressure booster stations, and siphons shall be paid for in accordance with the current policies of
the Ashland Water Utility.
(c) Replacements. 100% of the costs of replacement of culverts and fences that are properly
placed outside the street right-of-way line.
(d) Assessments. The cost of assessments for improvements abutting city property other than
streets or alley right-of-ways shall be paid by the City.
612.50. Federal, State or County Aid for Street and Utility Improvements. If financial
assistance is received from the Federal government, State of Wisconsin or Ashland County for
improvements and assessments are permitted by the assistance program, assessments shall be
made in accordance with Sec. 612.40 and the assessment amount equal to the grant portion shall
be placed in the City Capital Construction Fund.
612.60. Penalty for Violation. Any person, firm, or company violating any provision of this
chapter shall be liable for the payment of a forfeiture of fifty dollars ($50.00) to two hundred
dollars ($200.00). Each violation shall be considered as a separate offense. The City Building
Inspector shall have authority pursuant to Chapter 279 to issue citations for violations which
have been identified by the Director of Public Works.
Page 612-8
ADOPTED: 612 (1046) 4/9/1985
AMENDMENTS: 612 (1050) 8/13/1985; 612 (1098) 5/12/1987; 612 (1108) 8/26/1987;
612 (1165) 1/17/1989; 612 (1253) 4/16/1991; 612 (1409) 9/9/1997;
612 (1422) 10/28/1997; 612 (1539) 4/16/2002; 612 (1641) 11/1/2006;
612 (2015-1856) 9/29/2015
Page 612A-1
CHAPTER 612A. SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR THE PRENTICE HEIGHTS
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.
612A.10. Prentice Heights Development. The Common Council of the City of Ashland has
adopted an Ordinance to Approve a Planned Unit Development/General Development Plan in
agricultural zoning commonly known as Prentice Heights.
612A.11. Location. Prentice Heights is located in Government Lot Two (2), Section Six
(6),Township Forty-seven (47) North, Range Four (4) West, City of Ashland, Ashland County,
Wisconsin. A map of the Prentice Heights development is attached to Ordinance 806N (1391) as
an exhibit.
612A.12. Improvements. In connection with, and as a direct result of, the Prentice Heights
development, the City of Ashland will be installing and constructing public work and
improvements to serve the Prentice Heights development.
612A.20. Special Assessment for Improvements. Pursuant to its police powers and Wisconsin
Statute 66.62, the Common Council of the City of Ashland does hereby levy upon each of the
Units of the Prentice Heights development, a special assessment for the cost of installing and
constructing the public work and improvements done to benefit the Units in the Prentice Heights
development, said special assessments being on the following terms and conditions:
(a) Total Cost. The total cost of installing and constructing the public work and improvements
forming the basis of the special assessments are $207,940.25. An itemization of said costs is
contained on attached Exhibit B.
(b) Special Assessment. There are twenty-two (22) residential Units in the Prentice Heights
development. The principal amount of a special assessment in the amount of Nine Thousand
Four Hundred Fifty One and 83/100 Dollar ($9,451.83), (1/22nd of total construction cost), is
hereby levied upon each of said Units.
(c) Lien. Such special assessment shall be a lien against the Unit from the date of the levy.
(d) Principal Amount. The principal amount of the special assessment shall accrue interest at
the rate of five and one-half percent (5.5%) from August 1, 1997 until fully paid.
(e) Special Assessment Payments. The special assessment shall be paid in full on the earliest
of the following dates:
(1) Date of sale of the lot upon which the Unit is located, or
(2) The date of the issuance of a building permit for construction of the Unit, or
(3) August 1, 2007.
612A.30. Service of Notice on Developer. A copy of this Ordinance shall be served upon the
Prentice Heights developer and owner of the real property in the Prentice Heights development,
Page 612A-2
Prentice, Inc., at least ten (10) days preceding the date of a public hearing on this Ordinance and
the special assessment, which public hearing shall be held prior to the Common Council=s final
determination on the special assessments and this Ordinance.
612A.40. Appeal. Any person against whose land a special assessment is levied under this
Ordinance shall have the right to appeal therefrom in the manner prescribed in Wisconsin Statute
66.60(12) within forty (40) days of the date of the final determination and adoption of this
Ordinance by the Common Council of the City of Ashland.
612A.50. Record. A copy of this Ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the Ashland
County Register of Deeds following its effective date.
ADOPTED: 612A (1401) 7/29/1997
AMENDMENTS: 612A (1427) 1/27/1998

Page 612B-1
CHAPTER 612B. SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR THE SUPERIOR VIEW
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.
612B.10. Superior View Subdivision Development. The Common Council of the City of
Ashland has adopted an Ordinance to Approve a Planned Unit Development/General
Development Plan in agricultural zoning commonly known as "Superior View Subdivision".
612B.11. Location. Superior View Subdivision is located in the SE 1/4 - SE 1/4 of Section 6 &
the NE 1/4 - NW 1/4, NW 1/4 - NE 1/4 & NE 1/4 - NE 1/4 of Section 7, All in T. 47 N., R. 4 W.,
in the City of Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin. A copy of the recorded Superior View
Subdivision plat is attached as Exhibit A.
612B.12. Improvements. In connection with, and as a direct result of, the Superior View
Subdivision development, the City of Ashland will be installing and constructing public
infrastructure improvements to serve the Superior View Subdivision development.
612B.20.Special Assessment for Improvements. Pursuant to its police powers and Wisconsin
Statutes 66.62, the Common Council of the City of Ashland does hereby levy upon each of the
units of the Superior View Subdivision development, a special assessment for the cost of
designing, installing, constructing, and financing the public infrastructure improvements done to
benefit the Units in the Superior View Subdivision development, said special assessments being
on the following terms and conditions:
(a) Cost of Assessment. The total cost of designing, installing, constructing and financing the
public infrastructure improvements forming the basis of the special assessments is $1,013,000.
An itemization of said costs is contained on attached Exhibit B.
(b) Principal Amount of Assessment. There are fifty-seven (57) residential units in the
Superior View Subdivision Development (including the two (2) small lots along Highway 137).
The principal amount of a special assessment in the amount of $17,771.93 (1/57th of the total
construction cost) is hereby levied upon each of said units.
(c) Lien. Such special assessment shall be a lien against the Unit from the date of the levy.
(d) Interest Rate. The principal amount of the special assessment shall accrue interest at the
rate of four and 14/100 percent (4.14%), from October 1, 1999 until fully paid.
(e) Paid in Full. The special assessment shall be paid in full on the earliest of the following
dates:
(1) Date of sale of the lot upon which the "Unit" is located, or
(2) The date of the issuance of a building permit for construction of the "Unit", or
(3) October 1, 2008.
Page 612B-2
(f) Purchase Agreement. The developer/owner may enter into a purchase agreement with a
builder for purposes of building “spec” homes on lots in the Superior View Subdivision. The
City’s Special Assessment would be deferred until the “spec” home is sold or occupied, or for
nine (9) months from the date of issuance of a building permit for the “spec” home, whichever
comes first. The City agrees to sign an Inter-Creditor Agreement with the holder of the
developer’s/owner’s first mortgage lien and with the lending institution that is providing the
financing to the builder for construction of the “spec” home which provides that the City’s
Special Assessment Lien constitutes a priority security interest over any and all mortgage liens
on the property and that the City’s Special Assessment would be paid upon the sale of the
“spec” home, sale of the lot to any other person or entity, occupancy of the home by any party,
or nine (9) months from the date of the purchase agreement for said lot or the issuance of a
building permit for the “spec” home, whichever takes place first.
612B.30. Service of Notice on Developer. A copy of this Ordinance shall be served upon the
Superior View Subdivision developer and owner of the real property in the Superior View
Subdivision development, at least ten (10) days preceding the date of a public hearing on this
Ordinance and the special assessment, which public hearing shall be held prior to the Common
Council's final determination on the special assessment and this Ordinance.
612B.40. Appeal. Any person against whose land a special assessment is levied under this
Ordinance shall have the right to appeal therefrom in the manner prescribed in Wisconsin Statute
66.60(12) within forty (40) days of the date of the final determination and adoption of this
Ordinance by the Common Council of the City of Ashland.
612B. 50. Record. A copy of this ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Ashland
County Register of Deeds following its effective date.
ADOPTED: 612B (1480) 8/31/1999
AMENDMENTS: 612B (1556) 11/5/2002; 612B (1590) 6/29/2004

Page 612C-1
CHAPTER 612C. SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR DESIGNATED PROPERTIES
LOCATED NORTH OF CITY HEIGHTS ROAD.
612C.10. City Heights Sanitary Sewer. The City of Ashland has designed, bid and constructed
an 8” sanitary sewer to serve certain designated properties located north of City Heights Road.
612C.20. Location. The designated properties abutting and served by the sanitary sewer are
listed below:
Property ID #, Property Owner of Record, Acreage
201-4836-0000, David & Karen Saarinen, 7.10 acre
201-4842-1000, Jerry M. & Donna M. Anderson, 2.36 acre
201-4842-0000, Jon & Mary Bratley Trustees, 4.83 acre
201-4823-0000, Scott & Gail Brown, 2.53 acre
201-4824-0200, Bane & Dana Tyler, 1.25 acre
201-4824-0100, Gary & Kay LaPean, 1.65 acre
201-5167-0000, John & Sheila Schulz, 1.58 acre
201-5162-0000, Barbara & Alvin Bochler, 1.0 acre
201-5161-0000, George D. Anderson, 1.09 acre
201-4856-0000, Randy & Janelle Rust, 1.52 acre
201-4854-0000, Robert & Gail Larson 3.78 acre
201-4853-0000, Presbyterian Congregational Church, 1.72 acre
(see Exhibit C)
A map showing the designated properties abutting and served by the sanitary sewer is contained
on attached Exhibit A.
612C.30. Special Assessment for Improvements. Pursuant to its police powers and Wisconsin
Statute 66.0701, the Common Council of the City of Ashland does hereby levy upon each of the
properties listed in Section 612C.02, a special assessment for the cost of constructing an 8”
sanitary sewer to benefit the designated properties. Said special assessments being on the
following terms and conditions:
(a) Total Cost. The total cost of constructing an 8” sanitary sewer forming the basis of the
special assessments is $82,862.25. An itemization of said costs is contained on the attached
Exhibit B.
(b) Beneficiaries. There are twelve (12) residential properties that abut and benefit directly
from the sanitary sewer. The principal amount of a special assessment in the amount of Six
Thousand Nine Hundred and Five and 17/100 Dollars ($6,905.17), said amount being 1/12th of
the total construction cost, is hereby levied equally upon each of the designated residential
properties.
(c) Lien. Such special assessment shall be a lien against the property from the date of the
levy.
Page 612C-2
(d) Principal Amount. The principal amount of the special assessment shall be billed to
property owners over a Ten (10) year period. The unpaid portion of the principal amount shall
accrue interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum from October 31, 2000 until fully paid.
(e) Billing Notice. The City Treasurer shall send an annual special assessment billing notice
to each property owner by September 1 of each year. The amount of the annual billing shall
include the principal and interest amount owing.
(f) Annual Assessment. The annual special assessment shall be due and payable by October
31st of each calendar year. The first annual special assessment shall be due and payable by
October 31, 2001. Unpaid annual special assessments shall be listed on the annual property tax
bill for collection.
(g) Full Payment. The special assessment shall be paid in full by the property owner by no
later than October 31, 2010.
612C.40. Service of Notice. A copy of this Ordinance shall be served on the real property owner
of each of the designated properties listed in section 612C.02 at least ten (10) days preceding the
date of a public hearing on this Ordinance and the special assessment, which public hearing shall
be held prior to the Common Council’s final determination on the special assessments and this
Ordinance.
612C.50. Appeal. Any person against whose land a special assessment is levied under this
Ordinance shall have the right to appeal therefrom in the manner prescribed in Wisconsin Statute
66.0703(12) within forty (40) days of the date of the final determination and adoption of this
Ordinance by the Common Council of the City of Ashland.
612C.60. Connection Each assessed property shall be granted one lateral connection to the
sewer main with no connection fee charged. Additional connections from an assessed property
will be charged the applicable fee.
612C.70. Record. A copy of this Ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the Ashland
County Register of Deeds following its effective date.
ADOPTED: 612C (1503) 11/14/2000
Page 612C-3
EXHIBIT C
LEGAL DESCRIPTION FOR PARCELS LISTED
201-4836-0000 DAVID & KAREN SAARINEN
A PARCEL OF LAND IN THE E ¾ OF N ½ OF SE ¼ NE ¼ Section 7 T47N R4W Desc
In V266 P573 LESS THE E 200’ DESC IN V359 P325
201.4842.1000 JERRY & DONNA ANDERSON
A PARCEL OF LAND LOCATED IN THE W1/4 N1/2 SE1/4 NE1/4 SECTION 7 T47N R4W
V483 P599 2.36 AC M/L
201-4842-0000 JON & MARY BRATLEY TRUSTEES
PART OF W1/4 N1/2 SE1/4 NE1/4 DESC V 503 PGS 573 & 911, SECTION 7 T47N R4W
2.36A
201-4823-0000 SCOTT & GAIL BROWN
E1/2 NE1/4 SW1/4 NE1/4 LESS E1/2 SECTION 7 T47N R4W 2.5A V 506 PG 200
201-4824-0200 BANE & DANA TYLER
LOT 2 1.25A CERTIFIED SURVEY 296 V 494 PG 278 WITH EASEMENT A PT SW NE
SEC 7 T47N R4W
201-4824-0100 GARY & KAY LAPEAN
LOT 1 1.65A CERTIFIED SURVEY 296 A PT SW NE SEC 7 T47N R4W V 518 PG 77
201-5167-0000 JOHN & SHEILA SCHULTZ
THE N 218.80’ OF LOT 4 & THE N 90’ OF THE S 440’ OF THE E 126.35’ OF LOT 4
CERTIFIED SURVEY #83 EASEMENT INCL. PT. SW NE SECTION 7 T47N R4W V 440
PG 18 & V 497 PG 15
201-5162-0000 BARBARA & ALVIN BOCHLER
E 200’ OF LT 1 W/EASEMENT CERTIFIED SURVEY #83 LOCATED SEC 7-T47-R4W
201-5161-0000 GEORGE D. ANDERSON
W 218’ OF LT 1 W/EASEMENT CERTIFIED SURVEY #83 LOCATED IN SEC 7-T47-R4W
201-4856-0000 RANDY & JANELLE RUST
N1/2 OF EAST 200’ OF N1/2 OF SE1/4 NW1/4 & A 30’ EASEMENT DESC V 492 PG 653
SECTION 7 T47N R4W 1.51A
201-4854-0100 ROBERT & GAIL LARSON
PART OF THE N1/2 SE1/4 NW1/4 DESC V 519 PG 455 SECTION 7 T47N R4W 2.27A
201-4853-0000 PRESBYTERIAN CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH
W 150’ OF E 500’ OF THE N1/2 OF SE1/4 NW1/4 SECTION 7 T47N R4W V269 P242 &
V297 P53 & V484 P773





Page 613-1
CHAPTER 613. UNDERGROUND UTILITY STANDARDS.
613.01. Depth. All underground utility installations in public right-of-ways or on public property
shall be installed to a minimum depth of 24" unless applicable codes require a greater depth.
613.02. Utility Installation Types. Underground utility installations for purposes of this
ordinance shall include all telephone, cable television, electric, gas, or other utility cables, pipes
or transmission lines.
ADOPTED: 613 (1166) 1/17/1989
Page 614-1
CHAPTER 614. ABANDONED VEHICLES IN THE CITY OF ASHLAND,
WISCONSIN.
614.01. Abandonment of Vehicles Prohibited. No person shall leave unattended any motor
vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home on any public highway or private or public property,
for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear to have
been abandoned. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whenever any vehicle has been
left unattended without the permission of the property owner for more than 7 days, the vehicle is
deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance. A motor vehicle shall not be considered an
abandoned motor vehicle when it is out of ordinary public view, or when designated as not
abandoned by the Chief of Police.
614.02. Immediate Disposal. Any vehicle in violation of this ordinance shall be impounded
until lawfully claimed or disposed of under Section 614.03 and 614.04 except that if it is deemed
by the Chief of Police that the cost of towing and storage charges for the impoundment would
exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked or sold by the City prior to expiration
of the impoundment period upon determination by the Chief of Police that the vehicle is not
stolen or otherwise wanted for evidence or other reason. All substantially complete vehicles in
excess of 19 model years of age shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 614.04.
614.03. Owner Responsible. The owner of any abandoned vehicle except a stolen vehicle is
responsible for the abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Costs
not recovered from the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by the City against
the owner. Whether or not the City recovers the cost of towing and enforcement, the City shall
be responsible to the towing service for requisitional towing service and reasonable charges for
impoundment.
614.04. Sale. Any vehicle which is deemed abandoned by a duly authorized City representative
and not disposed of under Section 614.20 shall be retained in storage for a minimum period of
ten (10) days after certified mail notice has been sent to the owner and lienholders of record to
permit reclamation of the vehicle after payment of accrued charges. Such notice shall set forth
the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, the place where the
vehicle is being held, and shall inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle. The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their rights
to reclaim the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle. Each retained vehicle not
reclaimed by its owner or lienholder may be sold. The City may dispose of the vehicle by sealed
bid or auction sale as provide by ordinance. At such sale the highest bid for any such motor
vehicle shall be accepted unless the same is deemed inadequate by a duly authorized City
representative in which even all bids may be rejected. If all bids are rejected or no bid is
received, the City may either readvertise the sale, adjourn the sale to a definite date, sell the
motor vehicle at a private sale or junk the vehicle. Any interested person may offer bids on each
abandoned vehicle to be sold. If municipal or county ordinances do not state the procedure to be
followed in advertising or providing public notice of the sale, a public notice shall be posed at
the office of the City Police Department. The posting of the notice at the Police Department
shall be in the same form as the certified mail notice sent to the owner or lienholders of record.
Upon sale of an abandoned vehicle, the City shall supply the purchaser with a completed form
Page 614-2
designed by the Police Department enabling the purchaser to obtain a regular certificate of title
for the vehicle. The purchaser shall have 10 days to remove the vehicle from the storage area,
but shall pay a reasonable storage fee established by the City for each day the vehicle remains in
storage after the second business day subsequent to the sale date. Ten days after the sale, the
purchaser shall forfeit all interest in the vehicle and the vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned
and may be sold again. Any listing of vehicles to be sold by the City shall be made available to
any interested person or organization which makes a written request for such list. The City may
charge a fee for the list. Within 5 days after the sale or disposal of a vehicle as provided in this
section, the City shall advise the department of the sale or disposition on a form supplied by the
department.
614.05. Reclamation by Rightful Owner. Should the abandoned vehicle be reclaimed by the
rightful owner, the said owner shall pay all costs of towing and storage incurred by the City plus
a forfeiture in a sum not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.
ADOPTED: 614 (1018) 10/11/1983
Page 615-1
CHAPTER 615. UNATTENDED VEHICLES WHEN WHEELS ARE OFF THE
GROUND.
615.01. Wheels removed. No person shall leave unattended on any City street or City right-ofway,
any motor vehicle that has been raised off the ground with any of the vehicle wheels
removed.
615.02. Wheels off the ground. No person shall leave unattended on any City street or City
right-of-way, any motor vehicle with any of the wheels off the ground without the use of an
approved vehicle stand which will provide absolute stability to prevent the vehicle from falling
to the ground.
615.03. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to minimize the risk of injury to persons in
proximity to vehicles raised off the ground while being repaired, maintained or for other reasons.
615.04. Violation. Any person found violating this ordinance shall forfeit a sum of not less than
$100.00 nor more than $500.00.
ADOPTED: 615 (1256) 6/11/1991
Page 616-1
CHAPTER 616. SIXTH AVENUE WEST PEDESTRIAN MALL.
616.01. Creation of Pedestrian Mall. Pursuant to the powers granted under sec. 66.0905, Wis.
Stats., the following described portion of 6th Avenue West shall hereinafter be designated as a
pedestrian mall on which vehicular traffic shall be prohibited:
That part of 6th Avenue West to the south of the south right-of-way line of Highway 2/Lake
Shore Drive and to the north of the extended northerly right-of-way line of the alley in the 500
block of West Main Street.
ADOPTED: 616 (1658) 5/8/2007
Page 617-1
CHAPTER 617. NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES (NEV).
617.01 Definition of Neighborhood Electric Vehicle. “Neighborhood electric vehicle”
(“NEV”) means a motor vehicle that is propelled by electric power, and that conforms to
the definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the federal motor
vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles under 49 C.F.R. §§ 571.3(b) and 571.500.
Neighborhood electric vehicle does not include a golf cart.
617.02. Operation of Neighborhood Electric Vehicle. A person may operate a
neighborhood electric vehicle on any City street, including any connecting highway or to
an intersection where the roadway crosses a state trunk highway, within the City that has
a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less, subject to the following restrictions:
(a) Maintenance. The neighborhood electric vehicle must be maintained such that it
always satisfies the definition of a neighborhood electric vehicle set forth in 617.01 and
the requirements stated therein.
(b) Licensing. The person operating the neighborhood electric vehicle must hold a
valid Wisconsin operator’s license or a valid operator’s license from another state.
(c) Registration. The neighborhood electric vehicle must be registered pursuant to sec.
341.297, Wis. Stats.
(d) Highway Use. Operation on connecting highways shall be limited to the following:
(1) US 2 (Lakeshore Dr) from Beaser Avenue to Stuntz Avenue.
(2) STH 13 (Ellis Ave) from US 2 (lakeshore Dr) to 13th Street W .
(3) STH 137 (6th St W) from STH 112 (Sanborn Ave) to STH 13 (Ellis Ave).
(e) State Truck Highways. Crossing state trunk highways shall be limited to the
following:
(1) US 2 (Lakeshore Dr) from Sanborn Avenue to Industrial Park Road.
(2) STH 13 (Ellis Ave) from US 2 (Lakeshore Dr) to 18th Street.
(3) STH 137 (6th St W) from Club House Drive to STH 13 (Ellis Ave).
ADOPTED: 617 (1678) 3/11/2008
Page 618-1
CHAPTER 618. PROCESS FOR DISCONTINUING CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
618.01. Intent. This ordinance outlines the process by which the City of Ashland will review
and approve the discontinuance of City rights-of-way, including paved and unpaved streets,
avenues, and alleys. The ordinance identifies two processes, as outlined by State Statute, one for
a discontinuance requested by property owners and one for a discontinuance initiated by the City
of Ashland. The ordinance has been developed to be consistent with sec. 66.1003, Wis. Stats.
As this ordinance is an outline of the process, other applicable City ordinances and State Statutes
should be reviewed for each particular situation. If this ordinance is found to be in conflict with
State Statutes, Statutes shall govern. For the procedure to replat or vacate a plat, refer to sec.
236.36 through 236.445, Wis. Stats.
618.02. Process for Discontinuing City Rights-of-Way When Requested by Property
Owners. The following process shall be followed for the discontinuance of City rights-of-way,
including paved and unpaved streets, avenues, and alleys when initiated by property owners.
(a) Property Owners Petition. To begin the process of discontinuing a City owned right-ofway,
a paved or unpaved street, avenue or alley, a written petition shall be initiated and shall
include both:
(1) The signatures of all parcel owners whose parcel abuts the public right-of-way sought to
be discontinued; and
(2) The owners of more than 1/3 of the properties abutting on the portion of the remainder of
the public right-of-way which lies within 2,650 feet (½ mile) of the ends of the proposed
right-of-way discontinuance, or the owners of more than fifty percent (50%) of the parcels
abutting the unpaved alley to be discontinued. (Note, the beginning and ending of an
unpaved alley is considered to be within the block in which it is located.)
(b) Formal Request. A written formal request clearly identifying the right-of-way and the
reason(s) for the request must be submitted to the Department of Planning & Development. The
request shall include payment for the application fee as established by the City’s Fee Schedule.
Notice of the filing of the request must be recorded by the person filing the request at the office
of the Ashland County Register of Deeds.
(c) Site Plan. A measured, professionally drawn site plan must also be submitted with the written
request. The site plan, at a minimum, must show:
(1) proposed & existing uses,
(2) proposed & existing layout of buildings/improvements,
(3) existing and proposed utilities,
(4) adjacent land uses,
(5) topography at 2’ contour intervals, and
Page 618-2
(6) dimensions and locations of all rights-of-way and easements.
(d) Public Works Review. Public Works will review the formal request, document their findings,
and submit their findings to the Department of Planning and Development.
(e) Other Reviews. If applicable, the following agencies shall be notified and provided a copy of
the petition to discontinue a right-of-way:
(1) The Secretary of Transportation, if the City right-of-way is located within one-quarter
(1/4) mile of a state trunk highway or connecting highway.
(2) The Commissioner of Railroads, if a railroad highway crossing is located within the
portion of proposed right-of-way discontinuance.
(f) Planning Commission Agenda. City staff, including the Director of Planning & Development,
Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Parks and Recreation Department, City Administrator,
City Attorney and the Director of Public Works will review information about the proposed
discontinuance. City staff will make a recommendation on the highest and best use, considering
current uses and allowable uses according the City Ordinances and the Comprehensive Plan and then
forward this recommendation to the Planning Commission. The petition to discontinue a right-ofway
will be placed on a Planning Commission meeting agenda.
(g) Setting of a Public Hearing. The City Council shall set a Public Hearing to occur no sooner
than 40 days after receipt of the petition to discontinue a right-of-way.
(h) Notification. The Department of Planning & Development shall serve or mail notification of
a City Council Public Hearing to all property owners with frontage abutting the proposed section of
right-of-way to be discontinued. This notification shall be at least thirty (30) days prior to the Public
Hearing. At the discretion of the Public Works Director and the Zoning Administrator, notification
will also be made to any other affected parties that may have concerns, or that will be affected by the
discontinuance (e.g., properties within 200’, nearby homes, businesses, churches, etc. that may rely
on, or have future plans for a use of the public right-of-way in question).
(i) Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall act on the petition to
discontinue a right-of-way by a vote of approval or denial. The Planning Commission’s action is
then forwarded to the City Council as the Planning Commission’s recommendation.
(j) Notice Public Hearing. The Department of Planning & Development will publish and post a
Class 3 Notice of the Public Hearing to be held by the City Council.
(k) City Council Review. City Council will host the Public Hearing on the matter and take action
on the request. Wisconsin Statute dictates the criteria that City Council shall use to consider
discontinuing a right-of-way. If one property owner with abutting frontage to the portion of
discontinuance, or by more than one-third (1/3) of the owners with frontage abutting the remaining
right-of-way (with 2,650 feet of the portion to be discontinued), files a written objection and the
right-of-way is the only access to the property, the request cannot be considered. If there are other
right-of-ways that can be used to access the objector’s property, the discontinuance can be allowed
by a 2/3 vote of the Council. No discontinuance of an unpaved alley right-of-way shall be allowed if
Page 618-3
one owner with an abutting parcel objects, and has no other access to off-street parking.
(l) Recording of ROW Discontinuance. If approved by the City Council, the resolution is
witnessed by the Mayor, City Clerk and City Attorney. The applicant shall make payment to the
City, the sales price of the property, as identified in the City’s Fee Schedule. The discontinued ROW
will be divided into two equal parts and transferred to adjacent property owners, unless a written
agreement between the two property owners indicates otherwise. The City Attorney will draw-up
necessary transfer documents and easements for the property. Upon receipt of payment and the
finalization of the documents, the Resolution and easement documents will be recorded in the
Register of Deeds Office, Ashland County, Wisconsin.
618.03. Process for Discontinuing City Rights-of-Way Initiated by the City. The following
procedure shall be followed for the discontinuance of City rights-of-way, including paved and
unpaved streets, avenues, and alleys when initiated by the City.
(a) Introduction of Resolution. The City Council, if finding that in the best interest of the
public, a City right-of-way should be discontinued shall introduce a resolution declaring the
discontinuance. No discontinuance of City rights-of-way may result in land-locked parcels.
Notice of the introduction of the resolution must be recorded at the office of the Ashland County
Register of Deeds.
(b) Public Works Review. Public Works will review the resolution to discontinue City Rights-ofway,
document their findings, and submit their findings to the Department of Planning and
Development.
(c) Other Reviews. If applicable, the following agencies shall be notified and provided a copy of
the resolution to discontinue City Rights-of-way:
(1) The Secretary of Transportation, if the City right-of-way is located within one-quarter
(1/4) mile of a state trunk highway or connecting highway.
(2) The Commissioner of Railroads, if a railroad highway crossing is located within the
portion of proposed right-of-way discontinuance.
(d) Planning Commission Agenda. City staff, including the Director of Planning & Development,
Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Parks and Recreation Department, City Administrator,
City Attorney and Director of Public Works will review information about the proposed
discontinuance. City staff will make a recommendation on the highest and best use of abutting
parcels, considering current uses and allowable uses according the City Ordinances and the
Comprehensive Plan and then forward this recommendation to the Planning Commission. The
resolution to discontinue a City right-of-way will be placed on a Planning Commission agenda.
(e) Setting of a Public Hearing. The City Council shall set a date for a Public Hearing, the date to
be no sooner than 40 days after the introduction of the resolution.
(f) Notification. The Department of Planning & Development shall serve or mail notification of a
City Council Public Hearing to all property owners with frontage abutting the proposed section of
City right-of-way to be discontinued. This notification shall be at least thirty (30) days prior to the
Page 618-4
Public Hearing. At the discretion of the Public Works Director and the Zoning Administrator,
notification will also be made to any other affected parties that may have concerns, or that will be
affected by the discontinuance (e.g., properties within 200’, nearby homes, businesses, churches, etc.
that may rely on, or have future plans for a use of the City right-of-way in question).
(g) Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall act on the resolution to
discontinue a City right-of way by a vote of approval or denial. The Planning Commission’s action
is then forwarded to the City Council as the Planning Commission’s recommendation.
(h) Notice Public Hearing. The Department of Planning & Development shall publish and post a
Class 3 Notice of the Public Hearing to be held by the City Council.
(i) City Council Review. City Council will host the Public Hearing on the matter and take action
on the request. Wisconsin Statute dictates the criteria that City Council shall use to consider
discontinuing a right-of-way. If one property owner with abutting frontage to the portion of
discontinuance, or by more than one-third (1/3) of the owners with frontage abutting the remaining
right-of-way (with 2,650 feet of the portion to be discontinued), files a written objection and the
right-of-way is the only access to the property, the request cannot be considered. If there are other
right-of-ways that can be used to access the objector’s property, the discontinuance can be allowed
by a 2/3 vote of the Council. No discontinuance of an unpaved alley right-of-way shall be allowed if
one owner with an abutting parcel objects, and has no other access to off-street parking.
(j) Recording of ROW Discontinuance. If approved by the City Council, the resolution is
witnessed by the Mayor, City Clerk and City Attorney. The City Attorney will draw-up the
necessary transfer documents. The approved Resolution and any easement documents will be
recorded in the Register of Deeds Office, Ashland County, Wisconsin.
ADOPTED: 618 (1762) 1/10/2012
Page 702-1
CHAPTER 702. INTRODUCTION OF FLUORINE INTO THE CITY'S WATER
SYSTEM.
702.01. Fluoridation ordered. Upon receiving the consent and approval of the State Board of
Health and until further direction of the Council, the Water Department is hereby authorized and
directed to provide the means and to proceed with the introduction of approximately one part of
fluorine to every million parts of water being distributed in the water supply system of the City
of Ashland.
702.02. Use of water facilities. Insofar as the facilities, equipment, plant and employees, subject
to the jurisdiction of the Ashland Water Works Commission of the City of Ashland, may be
needed and used in connection with this health program, they shall be so used as facilities and
agents of and for the City of Ashland as a municipal corporation of the State of Wisconsin.
702.03. Cost. The cost of the materials, equipment and labor for such purpose shall be paid out
of the Water Department Fund of the City of Ashland by the proper officers upon the
presentation of itemized, verified claims therefor.
702.04. Reporting to Council. The Water Department is hereby directed to make periodic
reports to the Council as to the status, cost and progress of such service and to seek the
cooperation of educational and scientific institutions to conduct surveys and research as to the
beneficial effect of this program on the citizens of this community.
ADOPTED: 702 (512) 7/20/1949
Page 703-1
CHAPTER 703. BACK FLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION PREVENTION AND
REMEDIATION.
703.01. Cross connection. A cross connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from
the City of Ashland water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown
or questionable safety to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential
between the two systems.
703.02. Cross connection prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit
to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of City of Ashland may enter
the supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been
approved by the Ashland Water Utility and by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
in accordance with Section NR111.25 (3), Wisconsin Administrative Code.
703.03. Inspections. The Ashland Water Utility shall cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the public water
system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-inspections based on potential
health hazards involved shall be as established by the Ashland Water Utility and as approved by
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
703.04. Access for inspections. Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the
Ashland Water Utility shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any
property served by a connection to the public water system of City of Ashland for cross
connections. If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant
under s. 66.122, Wis. Stats. On request the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served
shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or
systems on such property.
703.05. Authorization. That the Ashland Water Utility is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this ordinance
exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger
or contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be discontinued only after
reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, except as
provided in Section 703.06. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross
connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
703.06. Endangerment of Public Health. If it is determined by the Ashland Water Utility that a
cross connection or any emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires
immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Utility Manager City of
Ashland and delivered to the customer's premises, service may be immediately discontinued.
The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, within
10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
Page 703-2
703.07. Adoption of State Plumbing Code. The City of Ashland adopts by reference the
Wisconsin Uniform Plumbing Code, SPS 381-382 and 384,Wisconsin Administrative Code.
703.08. Supplementation. That this ordinance does not supersede the Wisconsin Uniform
Plumbing Code and City Building Code, Chapter 748, but is supplementary to them.
ADOPTED: 703 (972) 10/13/1981
Page 705-1
CHAPTER 705. WATER UTILITY RULES, RATES, AND REGULATIONS.
705.01. Definitions.
(a) Available Utilities. Municipal utilities shall be deemed available when a water or
wastewater main exists within a Right-of-Way abutting a property line.
(b) Well Failure. Private or non-community water system producing water containing
contaminant levels in excess of the primary drinking water standards contained in ch. NR 809,
WI Administrative Code.
705.02. Management of Water System. The management, operation and control of the water
system for the City of Ashland, hereinafter “City,” is vested in the Common Council of said
City. All records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof shall be kept by the City Clerk of
the City. The Finance Director of the City shall keep all the financial records.
705.03. Construction of Water Lines. The Water Utility of the City shall have the power to
construct water lines for public use, and shall have the power to lay water pipes in and through
the alleys, streets, and public grounds of the City; and generally, to all such work as may be
found necessary or convenient in the management of the water system. The Common Council
shall have power by themselves, their officers, agents, and servants to enter upon any land for
the purpose of making examination or supervise in the performance of their duties under this
Chapter, without liability therefore; and the Common Council shall have the power to purchase
and acquire for the City all real and personal property which may be necessary for construction
of the water system, or for any repair, remodeling, or additions thereof.
705.04. Condemnation of Real Estate. Whenever any real estate or any easement therein, or
use thereof, shall in the judgment of the Common Council be necessary to the water system; and
whenever, for any cause, an agreement for the purchase thereof, cannot be made with the owner
thereof, the City Attorney shall proceed with all necessary steps to take such real estate,
easement, or use by condemnation in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes, and the Uniform
Relocation and Real Property Acquisition Policy Act of 1970, if Federal Funds are used.
705.05. Title to Real Estate and Personalty. All property, real, personal, and mixed, acquired
for the construction of the water system, and all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books,
and records connected with said water system, and all buildings, machinery, and fixtures
pertaining thereto, shall be the property of the said City.
705.06. User Rules and Regulations. The rules, regulations, and water rates hereinafter set forth
shall be considered a part of the contract with every person, company, or corporation who is
connected with the water system and every such person, company, or corporation by connection
with the water system shall be considered as expressing his or their assent to be bound thereby.
Whenever any of said rules and regulations, or such others as the said Common Council may
Page 705-2
hereafter adopt are violated, the service shall be shut off from the building or place of such
violation (even though two or more parties are receiving service through the same connection)
and shall not be re-established except by order of the Common Council , and on payment of all
arrears, the expenses and established charges of shutting off and putting on, and such other terms
as the Common Council may determine, and a satisfactory understanding with the party that no
further cause for complaint shall arise. In case of such violation, the said Common Council
furthermore, may declare any payment made for the service by the party or parties committing
such violation, to be forfeited, and the same shall thereupon be forfeited. The right is reserved to
the Common Council to change the said rules, regulations, and water rates from time to time as
they may deem advisable; and to make special rates and contracts in all proper cases, all subject
to the authority of the Wisconsin Public Service Commission.
705.07. Rules and Regulations. The following rules and regulations for the government of
licensed plumbers, water takers and other, are hereby adopted and established.
705.08. Plumbers. No plumber, pipe fitter, or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing
or pipe fitting work in connection with the water system without first receiving a license from
the State of Wisconsin.
705.09. Lateral Charges. “Street Laterals” will be installed by the Utility (on existing mains)
upon payment in advance according to the schedule of charges set by the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin Rate Schedule. If a request for an extension to the system is granted,
the cost for such extension, including laterals, will be paid for by the requestor. Upon inspection
and approval by the Utility, the extension will be dedicated to the Utility. There will be no
additional charge for laterals installed by this method. All plans and specifications must be
approved by the Utility before construction begins.
705.10. Tap Permits. After water connections have been introduced into any building or upon
any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions, or attachments, unless the party
ordering such tapping or other work shall exhibit the proper permit for the same from the City.
705.11. User to Keep in Repair. All users shall keep their own service pipes in good repair and
protected from frost, at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent any unnecessary waste of
water.
709.12. User to Permit Inspection. Every user shall permit the City Building Inspector or their
duly authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter their premises or building to
examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used, and they must at all
times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to them relative to its use.
709.13. Utility Responsibility. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against said
City by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or freezing of any service pipe; nor from any
damage arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other work that
Page 705-3
may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby reserved to cut off the service at any time for the
purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted or regulation to the
contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall become necessary to shut off the water service
within any district of the said City, the City shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every
consumer within said district, of the time when such service will be so shut off.
709.14. Meters. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises to provide a location for a
water meter, and to maintain such locations and passageway thereto, clean and sanitary and free
from any obstruction or any conditions of a hazardous nature. No connection for water meters
shall be installed in any location not easily accessible, or which is or may be, unclean,
unsanitary, or in any manner unsafe to utility employees in the discharge of their duties.
705.15. Excavations.
(a) Placement of removed pavement and earth. In making excavations in streets or highways
for laying service pipe or making repairs, the paving and earth removed must be deposited in a
manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public.
(b) Barricades and lights. No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or
highway open at any time without barricades; and during the night, warning lights must be
maintained at such excavations.
(c) Refilling. In refilling the opening, after the service pipes are laid, the earth must be laid in
layers of not more than nine inches in depth, and each layer thoroughly compacted to prevent
settling. This work, together with the replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, must be done so
as to make the street as good, at least, as before it was disturbed, and satisfactory to the City. No
opening of the streets for tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground is frozen.
705.16. Tapping the Mains.
(a) Tapping water mains. No persons, except those having special permission from the City,
or persons in their service and approved by them will be permitted, under any circumstances to
tap the water mains or distribution pipes. The kind and size of the connection with the pipe shall
be that specified in the permit or order from said City.
(b) Location of tap. Pipes should be tapped on the top half of the pipe, and not within six
inches (15cm) of the joint, or within 24 inches (60cm) of another connection.
705.17. Installation of House Laterals.
(a) Water lines on private property. All water lines on private property, whether underground
or within a structure, will be installed in accordance with State of Wisconsin Administration
Code.
Page 705-4
(b) Building water lines. The building’s water line shall be inspected upon completion of
placement of the pipe and before backfilling and, tested before or after backfilling.
705.18. Water Service Rates. So called standard rules published by the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin (small utility rules), and the rates as provided by the Public Service
Commission Finding of Fact, Certification, and Order are hereby adopted by the Common
Council, as applicable to the Water Utility.
705.19. Mandatory Hook-up.
(a) Connection to public water system. The Owner or Occupant of any building, used for
residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or other use that requires water, situated within
the City which is abutting to or having a permanent right of access to any street, alley, or right-ofway
in which there is located a Municipal Water System shall, if applicable, cease using any other
method of domestic potable water service and at the owner’s expense shall connect the Private
Water System to the Municipal Water System in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
within one hundred eighty (180) days after official notice from the City to do so.
(b) Annexed property. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirement, any Property annexed into the
City or adjacent to a new Water Main may request a delay in complying with the mandatory
connection provided for herein by means of application to the Public Works Director. Delayed
compliance shall be granted by the Public Works Director only if the applicant establishes to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director that the applicants’ existing water system functions
properly and meets all current health and safety requirements. To demonstrate the well meets health
and safety standards, the applicant shall submit laboratory test results from a state certified
laboratory indicating the well is free from Coliform Bacteria and the nitrate levels are below 5mg/l.
Any delay granted pursuant to this section shall be for a period of 6 (six) years. At the end of this
period, the applicant may request from the Public Works Director additional 6 (six) year extensions.
Each additional delay shall be granted so long as the applicant again establishes to the satisfaction
of the Public Works Director that applicant’s existing water system functions properly and meets all
current health and safety requirements as defined above. Any delay granted pursuant to this section
shall be automatically terminated if said property meets any of the provisions listed in subsection (d)
below.
(c) Failure to comply with the above requirements. The City may opt to impose a penalty for the
period the violation continues, after ten (10) days written notice to any owner failing to make a
connection to the water system in an amount equal to the average residential user cost (per
residential unit equivalent) per month plus 12% for administrative cost, for each residential unit
equivalent for the period in which the failure to connect continues, and upon failure to make such
payment said charge shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, all pursuant to
Section 144.06 Wisconsin Statutes.
Page 705-5
(d) Newly installed mains. Properties served by newly installed water main adjacent to the
property and which have been granted a delay in compliance per subsection 705.19 (b), need not
hook up to the City of Ashland water system until the occurrence of the earliest of the following
events:
(1) Failure of the private well or the inability to use the private well for human consumption;
(2) Sale, transfer, change in title, or subdivision of the subject property or any part
thereof
(3) Construction of a new dwelling on the property.
705.20. Maintenance of Services. All water services within the limits of the City from the
street main to the property line and including all controls between the same will be maintained
by the Water Utility without expense to the property owner, except when they are damaged as a
result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the property owner, a tenant, or an agent of the
owner, in which case they will be repaired at the expense of the property owner. All water
services from the point of maintenance by the Utility to and throughout the premises must be
maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of the
property.
705.21. Payment of Bills.
(a) Failure to Receive Bill No Penalty Exemption. Every reasonable care will be exercised in
the proper delivery of water bills. Failure to receive a water bill, however, shall not relieve any
person of the responsibility for payment of water rates within the prescribed period, nor exempt
any person from any penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment thereof.
(b) Billing. The property owner is held responsible for all water bills on the premises owned.
All water bills and notices of any nature, relative to the water service, will be addressed to the
owner and delivered to the premises referred to on such bill or notice.
705.22. Penalty for Improper Use.
(a) Pollution. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully pollute or otherwise injure any
water supplied by the water system.
(b) Cross-connections. Cross-connections are not permitted between the water utility system
and any other source of water as set forth in Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Private Wells. All private wells which are unused, unsafe, or do not comply with
appropriate Wisconsin Administrative Code must be abandoned in compliance with the Code.
Page 705-6
705.23. Damage Recovery. The utility shall have the right to recover from all persons any
expense incurred by said utility for the repair or replacement of any water pipe, curb stop, gate
valve, hydrant, or valve box damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any
work under their control, or by any negligent act. Owners or operators of motor vehicles will be
held liable for the cost of repair of any hydrant damaged by them and the utility will not be
responsible for the damage due the motor vehicle by reason of such accident.
705.24. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or rules or
regulations of the City of Ashland; or who shall connect a service pipe without first having
obtained a permit therefore; or who shall violate any provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or any other materials which are incorporated by reference,
shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $200 and the costs of
prosecution. This, however, shall not bar the City from enforcing the connection duties set out
in Section 705.19 for mandatory hookup.
705.25. Charges are a Lien on Property. All water services, charges, and special assessments
shall be a lien on a lot, part of a lot, or land on which water services were supplied. All sums
which have accrued during the preceding year, and which are unpaid by the first day of October
of any year, shall be certified to the City Clerk to be placed on the tax roll for collection as
provided by Section 66.069 (1) of Wisconsin Statutes.
705.26. Adoption of Other Rules. There are hereby adopted all the rules and regulations of the
State Plumbing and State Building Codes and the building rules of the Department of Safety and
Professional Services; and the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Wisconsin, and
the rules of the Public Service Commission, insofar as the same are applicable to the City of
Ashland. In the event of any conflict between any statute or administrative rule of the State of
Wisconsin and the provisions of this chapter, the state statute or rule shall control.
ADOPTED: 705 (1415) 9/30/1997
Page 705-7
AMENDMENTS: 705 (1559) 2/11/2003; 705 (1689) 10/28/2008;
CHAPTER 711. ORDINANCE FOR A POTW AND COLLECTION SYSTEM.
An ordinance establishing a sewer use and user charge system in the City of Ashland, County of
Ashland, State of Wisconsin, to provide procedures, safeguards and funds to operate and
maintain and meet WPDES permit limits at the City of Ashland wastewater collection system
and pay for wastewater treatment costs; and
Whereas, the City of Ashland Wastewater Utility, Wisconsin, owns and operates a wastewater
treatment works; and
Whereas, the Wastewater Utility must pay all the operation and maintenance expenses associated
with said treatment works and charge the users of said treatment works accordingly; and
Whereas the Wastewater Utility by accepting wastewater and septage assumes all risk for
treatment and meeting their WPDES permit but reserve the right to permit reasons; and
immediately discontinue acceptance of wastewater or septage for operational and
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Mayor and Common Council of the City of Ashland that
the following Sewer Use Ordinance be established.
SEWER USE ORDIANNCE
City of Ashland, Wisconsin
CONTENTS
ARTICLE TITLE
I Introduction and General Provisions
II Definitions
III Management, Operation, and Control
- Construction of Sewer Lines
- Maintenance of Services
- Condemnation of Real Estate
- Title to Real Estate and Personality
IV User Rules and Regulations
- General
- Plumbers
- Users
V Regulations
- General Discharge Prohibitions
- Limitations on Strength
VI Sewer User Charge System
VII Control of Industrial and Septage Wastes
- Industrial Discharges
- Control Manholes
- Waste Sampling
- Analyses
VIII Payment for Charges
IX Audit – (Charge System Review)
X Violations and Penalties
XI Validity (Repeal Conflicting Ordinances, Etc.)
XII Effective Date
ARTICLE I
INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
This Ordinance regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, discharge of septage
into the public sewerage system, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewerage
systems within the City of Ashland. It provides for and explains the method used for levying and
collecting wastewater treatment service charges, sets uniform requirements for discharges into
the wastewater collection and treatment systems and enables the City of Ashland to comply with
administrative provisions, and other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by the
State of Wisconsin or Federal law. Its intent is to derive the maximum public benefit by
regulating the characteristics of wastewater discharged into the City of Ashland sewerage
system.
This Ordinance provides a means for determining wastewater and septage volumes, constituents
and characteristics, the setting of charges and fees, and the issuing of permits to certain users.
Revenues derived from the application of this Ordinance shall be used to defray the costs of
operating and maintaining adequate wastewater collection and treatment systems and to provide
sufficient funds for capital outlay, debt service costs and capital improvements. The charges and
fees herein have been established pursuant to requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes. This
Ordinance shall supersede any previous Ordinance, Rules or Regulations; and shall repeal all
parts thereof that may be inconsistent with this Ordinance. If there is any conflict between this
Ordinance and any applicable Statute, the State Statute shall be controlling.
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Ordinance
shall be as follows:
APPROVING AUTHORITY shall mean the City of Ashland, or its duly authorized committee,
agent, or representative.
Ammonia Nitrogen (NH . –N) shall mean one of the oxidation states of nitrogen, in which
nitrogen is combined with hydrogen in molecular form as NH3 or in ionized form as NH4.
Quantitative determination of ammonia nitrogen shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in “standard methods” or Chapter NR 149 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Available Utilities: Municipal utilities shall be deemed available when a water or wastewater
main exists within a Right-of-Way abutting a property line.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BODE) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed
as milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of BOD shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard Methods.”
BUILDING DRAIN shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the wall of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER shall mean the extension from the public sewer or other place of disposal
beginning outside the inner face of the building wall.
CHEMICAL ELEMENTS AND COMPOUNDS that are typically found in wastewater and may
be regulated by this ordinance: These are as follows:
Aldrin C12HSC16
Ammonia Nitrogen NH3
Arsenic As
Benzene C6;
Benzo(a) Anthracene C6H4(CH2)C6H4(CH2)C6H4
Benzo(a) pyrene C2OH12
Beryllium Be
BIS(2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate(C3H7(C2H5)CHCH2OCO)2C6H4
Cadmium Cd
Carbon Tetrachloride CiC1
Chlordane C1H44 6C18
Chloroform CHC13
Copper Cu
Chromium Cr
Cyanide Cn
DDT (CiC;H4)2CHCC13
DDD (C1C6H4)2CHCHC12
DDE (C1C6H42)CCC12
Dieldrin C12H10OC16
3,3-Dichlorbenzidine C6H3CINH2C6H3CINH2
Dichloromethane CH2C12
2,4-D C6H3(OCH2 OOH)C12
Dimethyl Nitrosoamine (CH 3)2NNO
Endrin C12H10 O C16
Heptachlor C10H7Cl7
Hexachlorobezene C6C16
Hexachlorobutadiene C4C16
Lead Pb
Lindane C6H6C16
Malathion C10H1906PS2
Mercury Hg
Molybdenum Mo
Nickel Ni
Nitrogen N
PCB’s C12H10
C12H9C1
C12HBC12
C12H7 C13
C12H6C14
C12H5C15
C12H4C16
C12H3Cl7
C12H2C18
C12HICl9
C12Cll0
Pentachlorophenol C6C15OH
Phenanthrene C14H10
Phenol C6H5OH
Phosphorous P
Phosphate PO4
Radium Ra
Selenium Se
Tetrachloroethylene CC12CC12
Toxaphene C10H10C18
Trichloroethylene CHC1CC12
2, 4, 6-trichlorophenol C6H2Cl3OH
Vinyl Chloride CH2CHCl
Zinc Zn
COMBINED SEWER shall mean a sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm
sewer.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
phosphorus, ammonia, or pH, plus additional pollutants identified in the WPDES permit for the
publicly owned treatment works receiving the pollutant if such works were designed to treat such
additional pollutants to a substantial degree.
Failing Private Sewage System: System defined under § 145.245 (4), Wisconsin Statute. A
holding tank which discharges sewage to the ground surface, including intentional discharges
and discharges caused by neglect, shall be considered a failing private sewage system.
FLOATABLE OIL shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by
gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater or
septage shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly treated and the wastewater does
not interfere with the collection or treatment system.
GARBAGE shall mean the residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and
from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
GROUND GARBAGE shall mean the residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such degree that all particulates will no greater than one-half (1/2)
inch in any dimension and will be carried freely in suspension under normal flow conditions in
sewers.
HOLDING TANK SERVICE AREA shall mean the area outside the POTW’s sewer service
area, but inside or equal to the POTW’s planning area where a contract has been developed for
holding tank wastewater to be treated at the Wastewater Treatment Facility.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS OR WASTEWATER shall mean wastewater or septage with
pollutants of such a strength that will adversely affect or disrupt the wastewater treatment
processes or effluent quality or sludge quality if discharged to the sewerage system facility.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE shall mean the wastewater from industrial process, trade, or business, as
distinct from sanitary sewage, including cooling water and the discharge from sewage
pretreatment facilities.
LICENSED DISPOSER shall mean a person or business holding a valid license to do septage
servicing under NR 113.
MAY is permissible.
MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER shall mean the wastewater of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system.
NATURAL OUTLET shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers, into a water course, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
“NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER OR NDSW” – Wastewater that is
primarily introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 250 mg/l, a
suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 250 mg/l and a phosphorous (P)
concentration not greater than 10 mg/l.
“OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS” – Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
PARTS PER MILLION shall mean a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value
multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
PERSON shall mean any and all persons, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or
private corporations, association, society, institution, enterprise, government agency, or other
entity.
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal or hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration
is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a
pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10”7.
PUBLIC SEWER shall mean any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City of
Ashland Wastewater Utility. It shall also include sewers within or outside the corporate
boundaries that serve one or more personnel and ultimately discharge into the City of Ashland
sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with City of
Ashland Wastewater Utility funds.
REPLACEMENT – Obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which
are necessary during the design or useful life of the treatment works, whichever is longer, to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT COSTS – Expenditures for replacement.
SANITARY SEWAGE shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged
from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with such ground, surface, and storm
waters as may have inadvertently entered the sewerage system.
SANITARY SEWER shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with small
quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SEPTAGE shall mean the wastewater or contents of septic or holding tanks, dosing chambers,
grease interceptors, seepage beds, seepage pits, seepage trenches, privies or portable restrooms.
SEWAGE is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is “municipal wastewater”.
SEWER SERVICE AREAS are the areas presently served and anticipated to be served by a
municipal wastewater collection system. State regulations (NR 121.05) require that water
quality management plans delineate sewer service areas of urban areas with a population of over
10,000. Approved facility plans contain less detailed sewer service areas for communities under
10,000 population.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE is a service charge levied on users for the wastewater collection
and treatment facilities for payment of use-related capital expenses as well as the operation and
maintenance costs, including replacement of said facilities.
SEWER SYSTEM means the common sanitary sewers within a sewerage system which are
primarily installed to receive wastewaters directly from facilities which covey wastewater from
individual structures or from private property, and which include, service connection “Y” fittings
designed for connection with those facilities. The facilities which convey wastewater from
individual structures, from private property to the public sanitary sewer, or its equivalent, are
specifically excluded from the definition of “sewerage collection system”; except that pumping
units and pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures may be included as
part of a “sewer system” when such units are cost effective and are owned and maintained by the
sewerage owner.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM means all structures, conduits and pipes, by which sewage is collected,
treated, and disposed of, except plumbing inside and in connection with buildings served, and
service pipes, from building to street main.
“SHALL” is mandatory.
SLUG LOAD shall mean any substance release at a discharge rate and/or concentration which
cause interference to wastewater treatment processes or plugging or surcharging of the sewer
system.
STANDARD METHODS shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and Industrial
Wastes” published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water
Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed “storm sewer”) shall mean drain or sewer for conveying
surface water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
STORM WATER RUNOFF shall mean that portion of the rainfall that is collected and drained
into the storm sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension
in, water, wastewater, septage, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in “Standard Methods” and is referred to as nonfilterable residue.
USER – Any person who discharges, or causes or permits the discharge of, wastewater into the
City’s wastewater treatment works.
USER CHARGE – A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment works for the user’s
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, store, and treat domestic and industrial waste and septage and dispose of the
effluent and sludge.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, septage, industrial waste, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with waste treatment.
WATERCOURSE shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either
continually or intermittently.
WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES) PERMIT is a
document issued by the Wisconsin State Department of Natural Resources which establishes
effluent limitations and monitoring requirements for the municipal wastewater treatment facility.
ARTICLE III
Management, Operation and Control
1. The management, operation and control of the sewer system for the City of Ashland
vested in the Wastewater Utility; all records, minutes and all written proceedings thereof
shall be kept by the Wastewater Utility; the City Finance office shall keep all the
financial records.
2. CONSTRUCTION. The City of Ashland Wastewater Utility shall have the power to
construct sewer lines for public use, and shall have the power to lay sewer pipes in and
through the alleys, streets, and public grounds for the City of Ashland; and generally, to
do all such work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of the
sewer system. The City of Ashland shall have power by themselves, their officers,
agents, and servants, to enter upon any land for the purpose of making examination or
supervise in the performance of their duties under the Ordinance, without liability
therefore; and the City of Ashland shall have power to purchase and acquire for the
Wastewater Utility all real and personal property which may be necessary for
construction of the sewer system, or for any repair, remodeling, or additions thereto.
3. MAINTENANCE OF SERVICES
The Owner shall maintain sewer service from the street main to the house and including
all controls between the same, without expense to the Wastewater Utility, except when
they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the City of
Ashland. All sewer services must be maintained free of defective conditions, by and at
the expense of the Owner or occupant of the property. When any sewer service is to be
re-laid and there are two or more buildings on such service, each building shall be
disconnected from such service and a new sewer service shall be installed for each
building.
4. CONDEMNATION OF REAL ESTATE. Whenever any real estate or any easement
therein, or use thereof, shall in the judgment of the City of Ashland be necessary to the
sewer system, and whenever, for any cause, an agreement for the purchase thereof,
cannot be made with the Owner thereof, the City of Ashland shall proceed with all
necessary steps to take such real estate easement, or use by condemnation in accordance
with the Wisconsin Statutes and the Uniform Relocation and Real Property Acquisition
Policy Act of 1970, if Federal Funds are used.
5. TITLE TO REAL ESTATE AND PERSONALITY. All property, real, personal, and
mixed, acquired for the construction of the sewer system, and all plans, specifications,
diagrams, papers, books and records connected therewith said sewer system, and all
buildings, machinery, and fixtures pertaining thereto, shall be the property of the City of
Ashland.
ARTICLE IV
USER RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL. The rules, regulations, and sewer rates of the City of Ashland Wastewater Utility
hereinafter set forth shall be considered a part of the contract with every person, company or
corporation who is connected to or uses the City of Ashland sewer system or wastewater
treatment facility and every such person, company or corporation by connecting with the sewer
system or wastewater treatment facility shall be considered as expressing their assent to be bound
thereby. Whenever any of said rules and regulations, or such others as the Wastewater Utility
may hereafter adopt, are violated, the use or service shall be shut off from the building or place
of such violation (even though two or more parties are receiving service through the same
connection) and shall not be re-established except by order of the Wastewater Utility and on
payment of all arrears, the expenses and established charges of shutting off and putting on, and
such other terms as the Wastewater Utility may determine, and a satisfactory understanding with
the party that no further cause for complaint shall arise. In case of such violation, the
Wastewater Utility, furthermore, may declare any payment made for the service by the party or
parties committing such violation, to be forfeited, and the same shall thereupon be forfeited. The
right is reserved to the City of Ashland to change these said rules, regulations, and sewer rates
from time to time as they may deem advisable; and make special rates and contracts in all proper
cases.
The following rules and regulations for the government of licensed plumbers, sewer users and
others, are hereby adopted and established.
PLUMBERS. No plumber, pipe fitter, or other person will be permitted to do any plumbing or
pipe fitting in connection with the sewer system without first receiving a license from the State
of Wisconsin and obtaining permission from the City of Ashland. All service connections to the
sewer main shall comply with State plumbing code.
(1) MANDATORY HOOK-UP. The owner of each parcel of land adjacent to a waste water
main on which there exists a building usable for human habitation or in a block through which
such system is extended, shall connect to such system within 180 days of notice in writing from
the City. Upon failure to do so, the City may cause such connection to be made and bill the
property owner for such costs. If such costs are not paid within 30 days, another said cost shall
be assessed as a special tax lien against the property pursuant to Wisconsin Statute 281.45
provided, however, that the owner may, within 30 days after the completion of the work file a
written opinion with the City Clerk stating that he or she cannot pay such amount in one sum and
ask that the property owner be levied in not to exceed equal annual installments, and the amount
shall be so collected with interest at the rate not to exceed 15% per year from the completion of
the work, the unpaid balance to a special tax lien.
In lieu of the above, the City of Ashland at its option may impose, after ten (10) days written
notice to any owner failing to make a connection to the sewer system, a penalty in the amount of
$1,000 for the period that the violation continues. Upon failure to make such payment, said
charge shall be assessed as a special tax lien against the property, all pursuant to Section 144.06.
This ordinance ordains that the failure to connect to the sewer system is contrary to the minimum
health standards of the City of Ashland and fails to assure preservation of public health, comfort,
and safety of the City of Ashland.
SEPTIC TANK PROHIBITED. The maintenance and use of septic tanks, holding tanks and
other private sewage disposal systems within the area of the City of Ashland serviced by its
sewer system are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a health hazard. The use of septic
tanks, holding tanks or any private sewage disposal system within the area of the City of Ashland
serviced by the sewerage system shall be prohibited.
INFLOW CONNECTIONS PROHIBITIED. No person(s) shall make connection of roof
downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal system.
APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE. Every person desiring to connect or alter an existing
connection to the sewer system shall file an application in writing to the Wastewater Utility on
such forms as is prescribed for that purpose. Blanks for such applications will be furnished at the
office of the Wastewater Utility. The application must state fully and truthfully all the wastes
which will be discharged. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the written consent
of the owner must accompany the application. Persons connected to the sewer system of the
City of Ashland are referred to herein as “Users”.
Any new connection(s) to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity
is available in all downstream facilities including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BODS,
and TSS, as determined by the Superintendent.
If it appears that the service applied for will not provide adequate service for the contemplated
use, the Wastewater Utility may reject the application. If the Wastewater Utility approves the
application, it shall issue a permit for services as shown on the application.
APPLICATION FOR SEPTAGE DISPOSAL. Between August 1 and September 1 of each year
every licensed disposer wishing to discharge septage to the City of Ashland sewer system shall
file a nonrefundable filing fee and an application in writing to the Wastewater Utility on such a
form as is prescribed for that purpose. During the months of July and August, forms for such
application will be furnished at the office of the Wastewater Utility. The application must state
fully and truly the type, frequency, quantity, quality and location of generated septage to be
disposed in the City of Ashland sewerage system.
During the month of September, the Wastewater Utility will evaluate the applications and make
a determination as to the amount and conditions of septage disposal in the City of Ashland
sewerage system. The Wastewater Utility shall approve or reject all applications by October 1 of
each year. If the WWTF cannot accept all the proposed septage disposal then consideration shall
be given first to those generators of septage that are within the sewer service or holding tank
service areas [see NR 205.07(2)(h)].
All Wastewater Utility approvals for septage disposal shall have the conditions that anytime the
sewerage system has operational problems, maintenance problems, or threat of WPDES permit
violations that are indirectly or directly related to septage disposal, the Wastewater Utility may
immediately restrict septage disposal until such time as corrective action or mitigative measures
have been taken.
CONNECTION CHARGE.
A. Persons attaching to a sewer main shall have the lateral from the sewer main
installed at their own expense.
B. In addition to all other fees and service charges, every person attaching a lateral to
a sewer main shall pay the City of Ashland a one-time connection charge in the
amount of $800 if any of the following conditions apply:
1. The sanitary sewer was constructed with City funds and special
assessments were not levied.
2. The sanitary sewer was constructed with City funds and special
assessments were levied against the property more than twenty (20) years
prior.
3. The property was not identified to be serviced by a sanitary sewer which
was constructed and paid for by a private individual or developer.
TAP PERMITS. After sewer connections have been introduced into any building or upon any
premises, no plumber shall make any alterations, extensions or attachments, unless the party
ordering such tapping or other work exhibits the proper permit for the same from the Wastewater
Utility.
USER TO KEEP IN REPAIR. All users shall keep their own service pipes in good repair and
protected from frost, at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent any unnecessary
overburdening of the sewer system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER. All floor drains shall have a backflow prevention valve installed
at the owner’s expense.
USER USE ONLY. No user shall allow other persons or other services to connect to the sewer
system through their lateral.
VACATING OF PREMISES AND DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. Whenever premises
served by the system are to be vacated, or whenever any person desires to discontinue service
from the system; the Wastewater Utility must be notified in writing. The owner of the premise
shall be liable for any damages to the property of the system other than through the fault of the
system or its employees, representative, or agents.
USER TO PERMIT INSPECTION. Every user shall permit the City of Ashland or its duly
authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter their premises or building to
examine the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the drains, and sewer connections
operate; and they must at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to
them relative to its use, all in accordance with this Ordinance and Section 196.71, Wisconsin
Statutes.
INSTALLATION OF HOUSE LATERALS.
All service pipes (laterals) on private property will be installed in accordance with City of
Ashland Building Inspection Ordinance 748 and, with State of Wisconsin Administrative Code
Chapter ILHR 82 “Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision, and Inspections of
Plumbing”, especially, Section ILHR 82.04, “Building Sewers”.
As required by Section ILHR 82.04(5), all laterals shall be inspected: “The building sewer
and/or private interceptor main sewer shall be inspected upon completion of placement of the
pipe and before backfilling and tested before or after backfilling.”
EXTENSIONS. The Wastewater Utility shall extend sewer mains to a new person(s) in
accordance with the following charges and the following conditions:
When an extension of a sewer main is required by the prospective user, said person shall make
an application on such a form as it prescribed for that purpose for such an extension in writing to
the Wastewater Utility by filing of such an application, the Wastewater Utility shall first
determine the logical location of the next manhole or manholes. Next, the Wastewater Utility
shall determine the length and location of the extension, taking into consideration the prospective
demands for service, the capacity of downstream facilities, and the orderly development of the
particular area. No extension shall be made for a distance less than to the next manhole. All
sewer extensions shall be constructed in compliance with local and state laws, ordinances, and
regulations.
The person who requests the extension shall pay the entire cost of said extension including the
manhole or manholes that are part of the extension. If more than one user is involved, the entire
cost shall be divided among these users.
After making the decision as to the length and location of the extension and prior to the time of
making the charge to the person(s), the City of Ashland shall determine the benefits to be
received by any parcel that can be served by said extension. Before making a determination as to
benefits received, the City of Ashland shall first divide the area to be served into logical building
lots. The City of Ashland may consider the recommendations of the landowner in determining
said building lots if the landowner as part of his or her application accompanies said application
with a proposed division of said land into lots for sale or use. In determining the amount to be
paid by the original users, if more than one user is involved, the division of the charge shall be
made by considering each building lot as a separate user. Payments are to b considered
contributions to construction.
UTILITY RESPONSIBILITY. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the
City of Ashland or acting representative by reason of the breaking, clogging, stoppage, or
freezing of any service pipes; nor from any damage arising from repairing mains, making
connections or extensions or any other work that may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby
reserved to cut off the service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary
purpose, any permit granted or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it shall
become necessary to shut off the sewer within any district of the City of Ashland, the
Wastewater Utility shall, if practicable, give notice to each and every consumer within the
district, of the time when such service will be shut off.
EXCAVATIONS.
In making excavations in streets or highways for laying service pipe or making repairs, the
paving and the earth removed must be deposited in a manner that will result in the least
inconvenience to the public.
No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or highway open at any time
without barricades; and during the night, warning lights must be maintained at such excavations.
In refilling the opening, after the service pipes are laid, the earth must be laid in layers of not
more than nine inches in depth, and each layer thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This
work together with the replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, must be done so as to make
the street as good, at least, as before it was disturbed, and satisfactory to the City of Ashland. No
opening of the streets for tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground is frozen.
TAPPING THE MAINS.
No persons, except those having special permission from the Wastewater Utility or persons in
their service and approved by them, will be permitted, under any circumstances to tap the mains
or collection pipes. The kind and size of the connection with the pipe shall be that specified in
the permits or order from the Wastewater Utility to ensure that new sewers and connections to
the sewer system are property designed and construction.
Pipes should always be tapped on top, and not within six inches (15 m) of the joint, or within 24
inches (60 cm) of another lateral connection. All service connections to mains must comply with
State plumbing code. Lateral connections to existing sewers shall be made with saddles and by
coring the existing sewer or by inserting (cutting-in) a wye or tee into the existing sewer. The
lateral/tee connection shall be made with approved adaptors or couplings.
In addition to the charge made as above provided to each lot, each user shall pay the full cost of
the lateral from the main to their building.
SEPTAGE ACCEPTANCE LOCATION. Septage shall only be discharged to the City’s
sewerage system by City-approved and State of Wisconsin licensed disposers and at locations,
times, and conditions as specified by the City of Ashland Wastewater Utility.
Septage discharges to Wastewater Utility specified manholes may, under special circumstances,
be allowed provided discharge rates are restricted as necessary to facilitate mixing, prevent a
backup in the receiving sewer and prevent a slug load to the wastewater treatment facility.
Discharges may be limited to the normal working hours of the Wastewater Utility and shall
require written documentation of the discharge to be submitted to the Wastewater Utility within
one working day of the discharge to the City of Ashland Wastewater Utility sewerage system.
Septage discharges to the septage dumping facility at the wastewater treatment facility shall be
limited to the posted normal working hours of the facility. Documentation of the discharge shall
be submitted to the Wastewater Utility within one working day of the discharge to the WWTF
septage dumping facility.
Forms are prescribed for the purpose of documentation of the discharge will be furnished at the
WWTF and will include the following information:
1) Name, address and telephone number of the hauler
2) License Number
3) Type of septage
4) Quantity of septage
5) Estimated quality of septage
6) Location, date, time and feed rate of discharge to the sewerage system
7) Source of septage
8) Name and address of septage generator
9) Other information as required by the Wastewater Utility
ADDITONAL AUTHORITY. The Wastewater Utility may at any time establish specific
connection and lateral changes for any main not covered by other provisions in this Ordinance or
when the Wastewater Utility has made an extension and the Wastewater Utility has failed to
provide lateral or connection charges. It is further provided that Wastewater Utility may amend
or alter any connection or lateral charge after its establishment under the terms of this Ordinance
or previous Ordinance or Resolutions.
ARTICLE V
REGULATIONS
GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
No Discharger shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the
following described substances into the wastewater disposal system or otherwise to the facilities
of the Authority:
a) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be,
sufficient either alone or by interaction to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way
to the operation of the City of Ashland wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works.
b) Solids or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the wastewater system.
c) Any wastewater having a pH less that 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the
system.
d) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or to exceed the limitation set forth in State or Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.
A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified in the Toxic Pollutant
List set forth in NR 215 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
e) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction are
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
f) Any substance which may cause the City of Ashland effluent or treatment residues, sludges,
or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
g) Any substance which will cause the City of Ashland to violate its WPDES and/or other
Disposal System Permits.
h) Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
i) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the City of
Ashland treatment works resulting in interference; but in no case, wastewater with a temperature
at the introduction into the Publicity Owned Treatment Works which exceeds 40°C (104°F).
j) Any slugload, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause
interference to the Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
k) Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to non-contact cooling water.
l) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as exceed limits established by the Authority in compliance with applicable State
or Federal regulations.
m) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
n) Any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off or surface drainage or any other
connections from inflow sources to the sanitary sewer. Such waters may be discharged to a
storm sewer or other waterway with permission of the Wastewater Utility.
LIMITATIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH
a) National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency shall be met by all Dischargers of the regulated industrial categories.
b) State Requirements
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the Public Owned Treatment Works shall be
met by all Dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this or any other applicable
ordinance.
c) Right of Revision
The Authority reserves the right to amend this Ordinance to provide for more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the Publicly Owned Treatment Works where
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in this Ordinance.
d) Dilution
No Discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way nor mix separate
waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this Ordinance.
e) Supplementary Limitations
No Discharger shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations [and/or mass limitations] of
the following enumerated materials, exceeding the following values:
Materials Concentration (ms/l) [Mass Limitation]
f) Accidental Discharges
Each Discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated
materials or substances established by this Ordinance. Where necessary, facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained as the Discharger’s
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protections shall be submitted to the Authority for review, and shall be approved by the
Authority before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures by the Authority shall not relieve the Discharger from the responsibility to modify its
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
Dischargers shall notify the Authority immediately upon the occurrence of a “slugload”, or
accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this Ordinance. The notification shall include
location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions. Any Discharger who discharges a slugload of prohibited materials shall be
liable for any expense, loss or damage to City of Ashland wastewater facilities or wastewater
treatment works, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the Authority on account
thereof under State or Federal law.
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on Discharger’s premises, advising
employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct
all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency
notification procedure.
ARTICLE VI
SEWER USER CHARGE SYSTEM
DEFINITIONS. The following terms shall have the following meaning under this Ordinance.
BENEFITTED USERS are all residential users and those other users which would use a residential size
water service.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGES shall include all costs associated with repayment of debts incurred for the
construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater collection system and treatment facility.
NON-BENEFITTED users are those which would need a one inch or larger water meter.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER shall mean wastewater with concentrations of
BOD’s and suspended solids no greater than 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and concentrations of
phosphorus no greater than 6 mg/l.
NORMAL USER shall be a user whose contributions to the sewerage system consist only of normal
domestic strength waste water originating from a house, apartment, flat, or other living quarters occupied
by a person or person constituting a distinct household, business or commercial enterprise.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS shall include all costs associated with the operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
REPLACEMENT COSTS shall include all costs necessary to accumulate the resources to replace
equipment, the collection system, and other fixed assets as required to maintain capacity and performance
during the design life of the facility. A separate, segregated, distinct replacement fund shall be
established and used only for replacement of equipment.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE is a service charge levied on users of the sewerage system for payment of
capital expenses as well as operation and maintenance costs, including replacement of said facility.
POLICY. It shall be the policy of the utility to obtain sufficient revenues to pay the costs of operation
and maintenance of the sewerage facilities, including a replacement fund, through a system of sewer
service charges as defined in this Article. The system shall assure that each user of the sewerage system
pays their proportionate share of the cost of such facilities.
BASIS FOR SERVICE CHARGE. Service charges are based on an annual revenue requirement
consisting of operation and maintenance expenses, replacement costs, taxes and debt service. These costs
are to be recovered through a volume charge and a fixed charge. The cost allocation between volume and
fixed charges shall be according to best management estimates and practices.
FIXED CHARGE
The fixed charge shall be a minimum monthly charge for all users based on the user’s meter size, meter
equivalency ratio, monthly equivalency factor and benefitted/non-benefitted status. .
The fixed charge calculation is described below. The fixed charge shall be revised to reflect the actual
number and size of users and actual cost no less often than biennially.
Benefitted Monthly = ( Meter ) X ( Benefitted Monthly )
Fixed Charge (Equivalency Ratio) ( Equivalency Ratio )
Monthly Non-Benefitted = ( Meter ) X (Non-Benefitted Monthly)
Fixed Charge (Equivalency Ratio) ( Equivalency Ratio )
The meter equivalency ratios are as follows:
Meter Size Meter Equivalency Ratio
5/8” and 3/4” 1.0
1” 2.5
1-1/2” 5.0
2” 8.0
3” 15.0
4” 25.0
6” 50.0
VOLUME CHARGE
The volume charge shall be a monthly charge based upon the volume and strength of wastewater
discharged by a user to the sewer system. The normal domestic strength volume charge shall be
calculated as described below. The normal domestic strength volume charge shall be revised to reflect
actual volume cost no less often than biennially.
Normal Domestic
Annual Cost Allocation to Volume Charge = Strength
Total Annual Wastewater Volume Volume Charge
The monthly volume charge shall be calculated as follows:
a) Normal Domestic Strength User
Monthly Volume = (Normal Domestic Strength) X (Monthly Volume of Wastewater)
Charge ( User Charge ) (Discharged to the Sewer System)
b) Greater Than Domestic Strength Users
Charges to users discharging wastewater greater than normal domestic strength shall be assessed a
surcharge bused on the amount by which the wastewater exceeds normal domestic strength in accordance
with the following formula:
Monthly Volume
Charge - (NDS x V) + ((.00834 x V) x [(B$ x B#) + (S$ x S#) + (P$ x P#)])
NDS = Normal domestic strength volume charge
V = Wastewater volume in CCF
B$ = Cost per pound of BOD above normal domestic strength
B# = Concentration of BOD from a user above normal domestic strength
S$ = Cost per pound of SS above normal domestic strength
S# = Concentration of SS from a user above normal domestic strength
P$ = Cost per pound of phosphorus above normal domestic strength
P# = Concentration of phosphorus from a user above normal domestic strength
.00834 = Conversion factor (mg/l to pounds)
In no event will a user pay less than the charge for normal domestic strength wastewater.
c) Holding Tank Discharges
Charges to licensed dischargers of holding tank wastes shall be computed on the basis described below.
Strengths of holding tank discharges shall be monitored on a continuing, ongoing basis and the holding
tank volume charge shall be revised to reflect results of the monitoring no less often than biennially.
Holding Tank (Holding Tank X Holding Tank ) + Administrative
Charge (Volume Charge Volume ) Charge
d) Septic Tank Discharges
Changes to licensed dischargers of septic tank wastes shall be computed on the basis described below.
Strengths of septic tank discharges shall be monitored on a continuing, ongoing basis and the septic tank
volume charge shall be revised to reflect results of the monitoring no less often than biennially.
Septic Tank = (Septic Tank X Septic Tank) + Administrative
Charge (Volume Charge Volume ) Charge
e) Leachate Discharges
Charges to licensed dischargers of leachate shall be computed on the basis described below. Strengths of
leachate discharges shall be monitored on a continuing, ongoing basis and the leachate volume charge
shall be revised to reflect results of the monitoring no less often than biennially.
Leachate (Volume X Leachate ) + Administrative
Charge (Charge Volume ) Charge
See Appendix A Attachment at end of the ordinance.
ARTICLE VII
CONTRIL OF INDUSTRIAL AND SEPTAGE WASTES
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES. If any waters, wastes or septage are discharged, or proposed to
be discharged, to the public sewerage system contain substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in Article V and which, in the judgment of the Wastewater Utility may be
detrimental to the sewerage system, the Wastewater Utility may:
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the sewerage
system.
(3) Require a control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the waste not
required by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Section IV (C).
CONTROL MANHOLES
(1) Each person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer shall construct and maintain
one or more control manholes or access points to facilitate observation, measurement, and
sampling their waste, including domestic sewage.
(2) Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a manner acceptable to the
Wastewater Utility. If measuring devices are to be permanently installed, they shall be of a type
acceptable to the Wastewater Utility.
(3) Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the person
discharging the industrial waste, at their expense, and shall be maintained by the person
discharging the waste so as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operating condition
at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and related
equipment shall be approved by the Wastewater Utility prior to the beginning of construction.
MEASUREMENT OF FLOW. The volume of flow used for computing the sewer service and
the cost recovery charges for nonseptage disposal shall be based upon the water consumption of
the person as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the City of Ashland Water
Utility.
PROVISIONS FOR DEDUCTIONS. In the event that a person discharging industrial waste into
the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the Wastewater Utility that more than 10
percent of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the public sewer,
then the determination of the water consumption to be used in computing the waste volume
discharged into the public sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the Wastewater
Utility and the industrial waste discharger.
METERING OF WASTE. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the Wastewater Utility if this volume cannot otherwise be determined from the
metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining the volume of water shall
be installed, owned, and maintained by the person discharging the wastewater. Following
approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the
Wastewater Utility.
WASTE SAMPLING
(1) Industrial wastes and septage discharge into the public sewers shall be subject to periodic
inspection and a determination of character and concentration of said waste at least quarterly.
The determination shall be required by the Wastewater Utility.
(2) Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the composition of the
wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either manually or by the use of mechanical
equipment acceptable to the Wastewater Utility. A minimum schedule of sampling may be set
up by the Wastewater Utility to determine sewer service charges.
(3) Testing facilities shall be the responsibility of the person discharging the waste or septage
and shall be subject to the approval of the Wastewater Utility or its duly authorized
representatives at all times. Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to ensure
their preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was taken.
PRETREATMENT. When required, in the opinion of the Wastewater Utility, to modify or
eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes, or operation of the sewerage
system, the discharger shall provide at their expense such preliminary treatment or processing
facilities as may be required to render this waste acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
GREASE AND/OR SAND INTERCEPTIORS. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
provided by the industrial discharger and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the discharger shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material
and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
Wastewater Utility. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the
discharger(s) personnel, must be performed by currently licensed disposal firms.
ANALYSIS
(1) All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of water, waste and septage to
which reference is made in the Ordinances shall be determined in accordance with the latest
edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”, published by the
American Public Health Association and “Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis
of pollutants,” (1978, 40 CFR 136). Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and
frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Wastewater
Utility.
(2) Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial waste shall be made by the
person discharging them or their agent, as designed and required by the Wastewater Utility. The
Wastewater Utility may also make its own analysis of the wastes and these determinations shall
be used as a basis for charges. If the person discharging the waste contests the determination, the
Wastewater Utility may elect to have an independent laboratory determine the character and
concentration of the waste. Said independent laboratory shall be certified under NR 149 and be
acceptable to both the Wastewater Utility and the person discharging the waste. All costs
incurred by the independent laboratory in making the determination shall be assumed by the
discharger.
SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed flow equalization, pretreatment, or processing facilities shall be submitted
for review by the Wastewater Utility prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from
such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers.
SUBMISSION OF BASIC DATA. Within three (3) months after passage of this Ordinance,
each person who discharges industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare and file with the
Wastewater Utility a report that shall include pertinent date relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the waste discharged to the sewerage system.
Similarly, each person desiring to make a new connection to a public sewer for the purpose of
discharging industrial wastes shall prepare and file with the Wastewater Utility a report that shall
include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be
discharged.
EXTENSION OF TIME: When it can be determined that circumstances exist which would
create an unreasonable burden on the person proposing to discharge a waste, to comply with the
time schedule imposed herein, a request for extension of the time may be presented for
consideration to the Wastewater Utility.
ARTICLE VIII
PAYMENT FOR CHARGES
PAYMENT AND PENALTY. The sewerage service charge shall be Monthly, corresponding to
the period of the water bills, and shall be payable to the Wastewater Utility not later than 20 days
from the date of the bills are issued. A penalty of 1 percent per month shall be added to all bills
not paid by the date fixed for final payment.
CHARGES A LIEN. All sewage charges shall be a lien upon the property serviced pursuant to
Section 66.076(7), Wisconsin Statutes, and shall be collected in the manner therein provided.
DISPOSITION OF REVENUE. The amounts received from the collection of charges authorized
by this Ordinance shall be credited to a sanitary sewerage account which shall show all receipts
and expenditures of the sewerage system. Charges collected for equipment replacement
expenses shall be credited to a segregated, nonlapsing replacement account. These funds are to
be used exclusively for replacement. When appropriated by the Wastewater Utility, the credits
to the sanitary sewerage account shall be available for the payment of the requirements for
operation, maintenance, and replacement of the sewerage system. Any surplus in said account,
shall be available for the payment of principal and interest of bonds issued and outstanding, or
which may be issued, to provide funds for said sewerage system, or part thereof, and all or a part
of the expenses for additions and improvements and other necessary disbursements or
indebtedness, and the Wastewater Utility may resolve to pledge each surplus or any part thereof
for any such purposes. All present outstanding sewer system general obligation bonds, including
the refunding bonds, shall be paid from this fund as to both principal and interest.
ADDITIONAL CHARGES. Additional charges shall be imposed upon each lot, parcel of land,
building, or premises served by public sewer and wastewater facilities located outside the
boundaries of the City of Ashland to equalize local capital costs. Such additional charges shall
result in a minimum charge for each user according to the schedule for debt repayment from
utility revenues. Such additional charges shall be added to the sewer bill for each billing period.
EXCESS REVENUES. Excess revenues collected from a user class will be applied to operation
and maintenance costs attributable to that class for the next year.
ARTICLE IX
AUDIT
ANNUAL AUDIT. The Wastewater Utility shall have conducted, an independent Annual Audit,
the purpose of which shall be to verify the reasonableness of Utility’s financial statements, and
also to maintain the proportionality between users and user classes of the user charge system and
ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to increasing operation, maintenance and
replacement costs and debt retirement. Copies of Audit Reports shall be maintained at the
Utility’s office and made available to the public upon request.
ARTICLE X
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
DAMAGES. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure of pertinence or equipment which is a part
of the sewerage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest
under charge of disorderly conduct.
WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any person connected to the sewerage system found to
be violating a provision of this Ordinance shall be served by the Wastewater Utility with a
written notice sating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.
Any licensed disposer discharging to the sewerage system, found to be violating a provision of
this ordinance or of any conditions of the Wastewater Utility approval for septage disposal, may
have their approval immediately revoked. This revocation shall be done in writing and state the
reasons for revoking the septage disposal approval.
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. Any person found to be responsible for accidently allowing a
deleterious discharge into the sewerage system which cause damage to the sewerage system
and/or receiving water body shall, in addition to a fine, pay the amount to cover all damages,
both of which will be established by the Wastewater Utility.
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE REPORTING. Any person responsible for an accidental
discharge, that may have a detrimental impact on the sewerage system, shall immediately report
the nature and amount of the discharge to the Wastewater Utility.
CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Any persons, partnership, or corporation, or any officer, agent,
or employee thereof, who shall continue any violation beyond the aforesaid notice time limit
provided shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $100 dollars, ($100), together with
the costs of prosecution. Each day in which any violation is continues beyond the aforesaid
notice time limit shall be deemed a separate offense.
LIABILITY TO WASTEWATER UTILITY FOR LOSSES. Any person violating any provision
of this Ordinance shall become liable to the Wastewater Utility for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation which the Wastewater Utility may suffer as a result
thereof.
DAMAGE RECOVERY. The system shall have the right of recovery from all persons, any
expense incurred by said system for the repair or replacement of any part of the sewerage system
damaged in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under their control, or by
any negligent acts.
PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance or rules or
regulations of the City of Ashland or who shall connect a service pipe or discharge without first
having obtained a permit thereof; or who shall violate any provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes,
Wisconsin Administrative Code, or any other materials which are incorporated by reference,
shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $500 and the costs of
prosecution. This, however, shall not bar the Wastewater Utility from enforcing the connection
duties set out in Section III (C) for mandatory hookup.
APPEAL PROCEDURE. Any user, affected by any decision, action, or determination including
cease and desist orders, made by the interpreting or implementing provisions of this Ordinance
may file with the City Clerk a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of the date
of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user’s
request for reconsideration. The City Clerk upon receiving the request for reconsideration shall
publish the request in the official newspaper. The City of Ashland shall render a decision on the
request for reconsideration to the user in writing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of request.
ARTICLE XI
VALIDITY
REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. All ordinances, resolutions, orders or parts
thereof heretofore adopted, enacted or entered in conflict with this Ordinance shall be and the
same are hereby repeated.
SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any provision of this Ordinance is found invalid or unconstitutional or
if the application of this Ordinance to any person or circumstances is found to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional
provision of application.
AMENDMENTS. The City of Ashland, through its duly qualified governing body, may amend
this Ordinance in part or in whole whenever it may deem necessary.
ARTICLE XII
EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, approval, and
publication as provided by law.
ADOPTED: 711 (1252) 3/25/1991
AMENDMENTS: 711 (1265) 11/12/1991; 711 (1353) 8/8/1995; 711 (1458) 2/2/1999;
711 (1542) 5/14/2002; 711 (1559) 2/11/2003; 711 (1690) 10/28/2008;
711 (1776) 3/13/2012; 711 (1806) 5/28/2013; 711 (1822) 1/14/2014;
711 (2016-1869) 5/10/2016;
ASHLAND WASTEWATER UTILITY
SEWER USE ORDINANCE
APPENDIX A
SANITARY SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
(Part I Effective May 26, 2016)
(Part II Effective May 24, 2017)
A sanitary sewer service charge is hereby imposed upon each lot, parcel of land, building, or premise
service by the public sanitary sewer and wastewater facilities or otherwise discharging sewage, including
industrial wastes, into the public sanitary sewer system. Such sanitary sewer charge shall be payable as
hereinafter provided and in the amount determinable as follows:
APPENDIX A PART I
Schedule 1 – Volume and Strength Rate Calculation Effective May 26, 2016
VOLUME CHARGE
Volume $1,078,166
BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) $ 181,789
SS (Suspended Solids) $ 163,608
Phosphorous $ 99,983
COMPONENT
Volume
(1,000 Gallons)
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Assumed
Strength
Billed Units
Volume – Domestic
Strength
166,576
166,576 (1,000 gal)
BOD 166,576 x 0.00834538 x 250 mg/L = 347,535 pounds
SS 166,576 x 0.00834538 x 250 mg/L = 347,535 pounds
Phosphorous 166,576 x 0.00834538 x 6 mg/L = 8,341 pounds
COST PER UNIT Allocated Cost Billed Units Rate per Unit
Volume Cost per 1,000 gallons $1,078,166 / 166,576 = $ 6.47 / 1000 gallons
BOD $181,789 / 347,535 = $ 0.52 / pound
SS $163,608 / 347,535 = $ 0.47 / pound
Phosphorous $ 99,983 / 8,341 = $11.99 / pound
CALCULATED DOMESTIC STRENGTH RATES
COMPONENT
Assumed
Strength
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Rate per
Pound
Rate per 1,000
Gallons
Volume = $ 6.47 / 1,000 gal
BOD 250 mg/L x 0.00834538 x $ 0.46 = $ 1.08 / 1,000 gal
SS 250 mg/L x 0.00834538 x $ 0.42 = $ 0.98 / 1,000 gal
Phosphorous 6 mg/L x 0.00834538 x $10.80 = $ 0.60 / 1,000 gal
Total Calculated Domestic Rate $ 9.14 / 1,000 gal
Total Calculated Domestic Rate $ 6.83 / CCF
Authorized Domestic Rate $ 5.51 / CCF
APPENDIX A PART I - CONTINUED
Schedule 2 – Customer Charge Calculation Effective May 26, 2016
Customer Fixed Customer Demand
Customer Related Costs $129,016 $326,061
Meter Size Meters Equivalent Ratio Meter Equivalents
< 1 Inch Meter 2900 1.0 2900
1 Inch Meter 71 2.5 178
1.5 Inch Meter 37 5.0 185
2 Inch Meter 41 8.0 328
3 Inch Meter 15 15.0 225
4 Inch Meter 2 25.0 50
Total 3066 3866
Customer Fixed Monthly Rate per Meter $3.51
Customer Demand Monthly Rate per Meter Equivalent $7.03
Meter Size
Customer
Fixed
Customer
Demand
Calculated Monthly
Customer Charge
< 1 Inch Meter $ 3.51 $ 7.03 $ 10.54
1 Inch Meter $ 3.51 $ 17.58 $ 21.09
1.5 Inch Meter $ 3.51 $ 35.15 $ 38.66
2 Inch Meter $ 3.51 $ 56.24 $ 59.75
3 Inch Meter $ 3.51 $105.45 $108.96
4 Inch Meter $ 3.51 $175.75 $179.26
Meter Size
Calculated Monthly
Customer Charge
Authorized
Benefitted Charges
Authorized Non-
Benefitted Charges
< 1 Inch Meter $ 10.54 $ 13.52 $ 13.52
1 Inch Meter $ 21.00 $ 34.00 $ 66.00
1.5 Inch Meter $ 39.00 $ 68.00 $132.00
2 Inch Meter $ 60.00 $108.00 $211.00
3 Inch Meter $109.00 $203.00 $396.00
4 Inch Meter $179.00 $338.00 $661.00
APPENDIX A PART I CONTINUED
Schedule 3 – Septic and Holding Tank Rate Calculation Effective May 26, 2016
Assumed holding tank strength is 550 mg/L of BOD, 550 mg/L of SS, and 6 mg/L of Phos.
Component
Concentration
(mg/L)
Concentration
in Domestic
Rate (mg/L)
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Pounds per
1,000
Gallons
Rate
per
Pound
Rate per
1,000 Gallons
Volume $ 9.14
BOD 550 (250) 0.00834538 2.504 $ 0.52 = $ 1.30
SS 550 (250) 0.00834538 2.504 $ 0.47 = $ 1.18
Phosphorus 6 (6) 0.00834538 - $11.99 = $ -
Total Rate per 1,000 Gallons $ 11.61
Assumed septic tank strength is 4500 mg/L of BOD, 12,000 mg/L of SS, and 71 mg/L of Phos.
Component
Concentration
(mg/L)
Concentration
in Domestic
Rate (mg/L)
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Pounds per
1,000
Gallons
Rate
per
Pound
Rate per
1,000 Gallons
Volume $ 9.14
BOD 4,500 (250) 0.00834538 35.468 $ 0.52 = $18.44
SS 12,000 (250) 0.00834538 98.058 $ 0.47 = $46.09
Phosphorus 71 (6) 0.00834538 0.542 $11.99 = $ 6.50
Total Rate per 1,000 Gallons $80.17
Administrative Charge per Load
Loaded Labor Rates
Office Billing and
Collection
WWTP Dumping
Supervision
Hours
Administrative
Charge
$29.98 $32.64 0.25 $15.66
APPENDIX A PART I CONTINUED
Schedule 4 – Summary of Authorized User Fees Effective May 26, 2016
Authorized Benefitted and Non-Benefitted Monthly Customer Charges
Meter Size
Authorized
Benefitted Charges
Authorized Non-
Benefitted Charges
< 1 Inch Meter $ 13.52 $ 13.52
1 Inch Meter $ 34.00 $ 66.00
1.5 Inch Meter $ 68.00 $132.00
2 Inch Meter $108.00 $211.00
3 Inch Meter $203.00 $396.00
4 Inch Meter $338.00 $661.00
Authorized Volume Charges
Domestic Volume Charge - $ 5.51 / CCF
High Strength Charges per pound
BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) - $ 0.52 / pound
SS (Suspended Solids) - $ 0.47 / pound
Phosphorous - $11.99 / pound
Authorized Suburban Customer Charges
Surburban customer charges are at a rate of 1.25 times (x) the rates charged to customers
located within the corporate limits of the City of Ashland.
Authorized Holding Tank Charges
Charge per 1,000 gallons - $11.61
Administrative Fee / Load - $15.66
Authorized Septic Tank Charges
Charge per 1,000 gallons - $80.17
Administrative Fee / Load - $15.66
APPENDIX A PART II
Schedule 1 – Volume and Strength Rate Calculation - May 24, 2017
VOLUME CHARGE
Volume $1,126,384
BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) $ 189,360
SS (Suspended Solids) $ 170,424
Phosphorous $ 104,149
COMPONENT
Volume
(1,000 Gallons)
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Assumed
Strength
Billed Units
Volume – Domestic Strength
166,576
166,576 (1,000 gal)
BOD 166,576 x 0.00834538 x 250 mg/L = 347,535 pounds
SS 166,576 x 0.00834538 x 250 mg/L = 347,535 pounds
Phosphorous 166,576 x 0.00834538 x 6 mg/L = 8,341 pounds
COST PER UNIT Allocated Cost Billed Units Rate per Unit
Volume Cost per 1,000 gallons $1,126,384 / 166,576 = $ 6.76 / 1000 gallons
BOD $ 189,360 / 347,535 = $ 0.54 / pound
SS $ 170,424 / 347,535 = $ 0.49 / pound
Phosphorous $ 104,149 / 8,341 = $12.49 / pound
CALCULATED DOMESTIC STRENGTH RATES
COMPONENT
Assumed
Strength
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Rate per
Pound
Rate per 1,000
Gallons
Volume = $ 6.76 / 1,000 gal
BOD 250 mg/L x 0.00834538 x $ 0.54 = $ 1.13 / 1,000 gal
SS 250 mg/L x 0.00834538 x $ 0.49 = $ 1.02 / 1,000 gal
Phosphorous 6 mg/L x 0.00834538 x $12.49 = $ 0.63 / 1,000 gal
Total Calculated Domestic Rate $ 9.53 / 1,000 gal
Total Calculated Domestic Rate $ 7.13 / CCF
Authorized Domestic Rate $ 5.90 / CCF
APPENDIX A PART II CONTINUED
Schedule 2 – Customer Charge Calculation Effective May 24, 2017
Customer Fixed Customer Demand
Customer Related Costs $134,530 $340,746
Meter Size Meters Equivalent Ratio Meter Equivalents
< 1 Inch Meter 2900 1.0 2900
1 Inch Meter 71 2.5 178
1.5 Inch Meter 37 5.0 185
2 Inch Meter 41 8.0 328
3 Inch Meter 15 15.0 225
4 Inch Meter 2 25.0 50
Total 3066 3866
Customer Fixed Monthly Rate per Meter $3.66
Customer Demand Monthly Rate per Meter Equivalent $7.34
Meter Size
Customer
Fixed
Customer
Demand
Calculated Monthly
Customer Charge
< 1 Inch Meter $ 3.66 $ 7.34 $ 11.00
1 Inch Meter $ 3.66 $ 18.35 $ 22.01
1.5 Inch Meter $ 3.66 $ 36.70 $ 40.36
2 Inch Meter $ 3.66 $ 58.72 $ 62.38
3 Inch Meter $ 3.66 $110.10 $113.76
4 Inch Meter $ 3.66 $183.50 $187.16
Meter Size
Calculated Monthly
Customer Charge
Authorized
Benefitted Charges
Authorized Non-
Benefitted Charges
< 1 Inch Meter $ 11.00 $ 13.52 $ 13.52
1 Inch Meter $ 22.00 $ 34.00 $ 66.00
1.5 Inch Meter $ 40.00 $ 68.00 $132.00
2 Inch Meter $ 62.00 $108.00 $211.00
3 Inch Meter $114.00 $203.00 $396.00
4 Inch Meter $187.00 $338.00 $661.00
APPENDIX A PART II CONTINUED
Schedule 3 – Septic and Holding Tank Rate Calculation Effective May 24, 2017
Assumed holding tank strength is 550 mg/L of BOD, 550 mg/L of SS, and 6 mg/L of Phos.
Component
Concentration
(mg/L)
Concentration
in Domestic
Rate (mg/L)
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Pounds per
1,000
Gallons
Rate
per
Pound
Rate per
1,000 Gallons
Volume $ 9.53
BOD 550 (250) 0.00834538 2.504 $ 0.54 = $ 1.35
SS 550 (250) 0.00834538 2.504 $ 0.49 = $ 1.23
Phosphorus 6 (6) 0.00834538 - $12.49 = $ -
Total Rate per 1,000 Gallons $ 12.11
Assumed septic tank strength is 4500 mg/L of BOD, 12,000 mg/L of SS, and 71 mg/L of Phos.
Component
Concentration
(mg/L)
Concentration
in Domestic
Rate (mg/L)
Conversion
Factor
(lb*L)/(gal*mg)
Pounds per
1,000
Gallons
Rate
per
Pound
Rate per
1,000 Gallons
Volume $ 9.53
BOD 4,500 (250) 0.00834538 35.468 $ 0.54 = $19.15
SS 12,000 (250) 0.00834538 98.058 $ 0.49 = $48.05
Phosphorus 71 (6) 0.00834538 0.542 $12.49 = $ 6.77
Total Rate per 1,000 Gallons $83.51
Administrative Charge per Load
Loaded Labor Rates
Office Billing and
Collection
WWTP Dumping
Supervision
Hours
Administrative
Charge
$29.98 $32.64 0.25 $15.66
APPENDIX A PART II CONTINUED
Schedule 4 – Summary of Authorized User Fees Effective May 24, 2017
Authorized Benefitted and Non-Benefitted Monthly Customer Charges
Meter Size
Authorized
Benefitted Charges
Authorized Non-
Benefitted Charges
< 1 Inch Meter $ 13.52 $ 13.52
1 Inch Meter $ 34.00 $ 66.00
1.5 Inch Meter $ 68.00 $132.00
2 Inch Meter $108.00 $211.00
3 Inch Meter $203.00 $396.00
4 Inch Meter $338.00 $661.00
Authorized Volume Charges
Domestic Volume Charge - $ 5.90 / CCF
High Strength Charges per pound
BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand) - $ 0.54 / pound
SS (Suspended Solids) - $ 0.49 / pound
Phosphorous - $12.49 / pound
Authorized Suburban Customer Charges
Surburban customer charges are at a rate of 1.25 times (x) the rates charged to customers
located within the corporate limits of the City of Ashland.
Authorized Holding Tank Charges
Charge per 1,000 gallons - $12.11
Administrative Fee / Load - $15.66
Authorized Septic Tank Charges
Charge per 1,000 gallons - $83.51
Administrative Fee / Load - $15.66

Page 712-1
CHAPTER 712. SANITARY SEWER RULES, RATES, AND REGULATIONS.
712.01. Definition of Terms. The meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
(a) Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 125let seq.) as
amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500)
Pub. L. 93-243 and Pub. L. 92-217, or modified by Chapter 147, Statutes of the State of
Wisconsin or appropriate sections of the Wisconsin Administrative Code Adopted pursuant to
Chapter 147.
(b) “Approving Authority” shall mean the Common Council of the City of Ashland.
(c) “BOD” shall mean the quantity of oxygen expressed milligrams per liter (mg/1), utilized
in the bio-chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5)
days at a temperature of 20 degrees centigrade. The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
(d) “City” shall mean the City of Ashland, Wisconsin, or any authorized person acting in its
behalf.
(e) “Collection System” shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the
collection, transportation and pumping of domestic wastewater and industrial waste.
(f) “Debt Retirement” shall mean the annual cost of principal and interest incurred by the
Wastewater Department for the wastewater treatment plant and other core sanitary sewer
collection system facilities such as forcemains and pumping stations
(g) “Depreciation or Replacement Costs” shall mean funds set aside annually for:
(1) Plant equipment and facilities which require such expenditures because of wear and
obsolescence;
(2) Purchase and installation of new equipment, or modifications to existing facilities
which will improve the operation and performance of the wastewater treatment facilities
or wastewater pumping stations;
(3) Purchase of trucks and heavy equipment needed for operation and maintenance;
(4) Purchase of office and accounting equipment.
(h) “Domestic Wastewater” shall mean water-borne waste normally being discharged from
the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, apartment houses, hotels, office buildings, factories and
institutions, free from industrial wastes and in which the average concentration of suspended
solids is established at or below 250 mg/1 and the BOD is established at or below 250 mg/1.
Page 712-2
(i) “Industrial User” shall mean any non-governmental, non-residential user of municipality
owned wastewater works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day
(GPD) of sanitary wastewater which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
(1) Division A. Agriculture, forestry and fishing
(2) Division B. Mining
(3) Division C. Manufacturing
(4) Division E. Transportation, Communications, Gas and Sanitary Services
(5) Division I. Services
A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it discharges only domestic wastewater.
(j) “Industrial Waste” shall mean any water-borne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes other
than domestic wastewater, resulting from, discharging from, flowing from or escaping from any
commercial, industrial, manufacturing of food processing operation or process or from the
development of any natural resources, or any mixture of these with water or domestic
wastewater.
(k) “Manager” shall mean the Manager of the wastewater treatment department and shall be
in charge of and supervise the operations and functions of the wastewater treatment plant.
(l) “Major Contributing Industry” means an industrial or commercial facility that is a user of
a publicly owned treatment works and:
(1) Has a waste discharge flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
(2) Has a waste discharge flow greater than 5 percent of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste;
(3) Has in its waste, toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in Wisconsin
Administrative Code Chapter NR 214 or;
(4) Has a waste which the Manager determines has, or in the case of a new source will
have, a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other wastes, on the
publicly owned treatment works or on the quality of effluent from such works.
(m) “Operation and Maintenance Cost” shall mean expenditures made by the Wastewater
Department in the operation and maintenance of its wastewater treatment facilities and
wastewater pumping stations consisting of and limited to the actual sums spent for each and all
of the following purposes:
Page 712-3
(1) Wages and salaries of operating, maintenance, clerical, laboratory and supervisory
personnel, together with fringe benefits and premiums paid on such wages and salaries
for the State of Wisconsin workmen’s compensation coverage and Public Employee’s
Retirement Act benefits.
(2) Electrical power.
(3) Chemicals, fuel and other operating supplies.
(4) Repairs to and maintenance of the equipment associated therewith.
(5) Premiums for hazard insurance.
(6) Premiums for insurance providing coverage against liability for the injury to persons
and/or property.
(7) Rents and leasing costs.
(8) Operation, licensing and maintenance costs for trucks and heavy equipment.
(9) Consultant and legal fees.
(10) Depreciation or replacement costs as defined in Section 712.01(g).
(n) “Persons” shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individuals,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, governmental agency, or other
entity, and agents, servants, or employees.
(o) “pH” shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of the procedures
outlined in the “Standard Methods”.
(p) “Public Works Director” shall mean the Public Works Director of the City of Ashland as
designated by the Approving Authority.
(q) “Replacement” shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, and appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works
to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
(r) “Sanitary Sewer” shall mean a sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial
waste or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or unpolluted
industrial wastewater are not intentionally passed.
(s) “Slug” shall mean a sudden increase in sewage discharge that may tend to overload the
receiving sewer.
Page 712-4
(t) “Standard Methods” shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” as prepared,
approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water
Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(u) “Storm Sewer” shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface drainage but excludes
domestic wastewater and industrial wastes.
(v) “Surcharge” shall mean an additional charge related to industrial wastes being discharged
by any user having unusual characteristics such as excessive BOD, excessive suspended solids,
or other pollutants.
(w) “Suspended Solids” shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by a laboratory, filtration
device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with the
procedures set forth in “Standard Methods” and is designated by the abbreviation “SS”.
(x) “Unpolluted Water or Wastewater” shall mean water or waste containing none of the
substances or characteristics defined under Section .02 “Prohibited Discharges” and shall
contain not more than 10 mg/1 each of suspended solids and BOD.
(y) “User” shall mean any person discharging domestic wastewater or industrial wastes into
the collection system.
(z) “User Charge” shall mean a charge levied on users of a wastewater works for the cost of
operation and maintenance including replacement of the wastewater treatment facilities and
wastewater pumping stations, depreciation or replacement cost, previous year operating debt,
and that portion of local capital costs as may be determined by the Approving Authority.
(aa) “User Class” shall mean a group of users having similar wastewater flows and
characteristics; levels of BOD, suspended solids, etc.
(bb) “Waste” shall mean any solids, liquid, or gaseous material or combination thereof
discharged from any residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments
into the collection system or storm sewer.
(cc) “Wastewater” shall mean a combination of the water carried waste discharged into the
collection system from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments
together with such ground, surface and storm water as may be present.
(dd) “Wastewater Pumping Station” shall mean a pumping facility utilized to pump
wastewater within the collection system.
(ee) “Wastewater Treatment Facilities” shall mean any City owned facility, devices and
structures used for receiving and treating wastewater from the City collection system.
Page 712-5
(ff) “Wastewater Works” shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of domestic wastewater and industrial wastes.
(gg) “WPDES Permit” shall mean a permit to discharge pollutants obtained under the
Wisconsin Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (WPDES) pursuant to the State of
Wisconsin Statutes.
712.02. Prohibited Discharges.
(a) Storm Water. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
ground water, roof runoff, yard drainage, yard fountain or pond overflow into the collection
system. Unpolluted water or waste shall be discharged to only storm sewers or to a natural
outlet. Unpolluted water or wastewater may be discharged upon prior written approval of the
Manager to the collection system if the rate is not in excess of three gallons per minute.
(b) Prohibited substances. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the
wastewater works either directly or indirectly any of the following described wastes or
wastewater:
(1) Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit
(65 degrees centigrade)
(2) Any wax, grease, or oil, plastic or any other substance that will solidify or become
discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees to 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0
degrees to 65 degrees centigrade).
(3) Any solids, liquids, or gases which by themselves or by interaction with other
substances may cause fire, explosion, hazards, create toxic fumes or in any other way be
injurious to persons or property involved in the operation or maintenance of the
wastewater works.
(4) Any solids, slurries, or viscous substances of such character as to be capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in the collection system of storm sewers, or interferes
with the proper operation of the wastewater works.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substances, which either singly or by interaction with
other substances is capable of causing odors objectionable to persons of ordinary
sensitivity.
(7) Any wastes or wastewater having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5 or having
any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to the wastewater works or
personnel.
Page 712-6
(8) Any wastes or wastewater of such character and quantity that unusual attention or
expense is required to handle them in the wastewater works.
(9) Any wastewater or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance such as plating
or heat treating wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create any hazard in
the wastewater works, including agricultural application of the wastewater sludge or
which would cause the City wastewater treatment facilities to discharge any of the
following pollutants in quantities in excess of the limitations established in the
Wisconsin Administrative Code; arsenic, Cadmium, Cyanide, Chromium, Lead,
Mercury, Manganese, Nickel, Phenols, Selenium, Silver, Sulfates, Sulfides, Tin, Zinc.
(10) Any radioactive wastes greater than allowable releases as specified by current
United States Bureau of Standards Handbooks dealing with the handling and releasing of
radioactivity.
(11) Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of 100 mg/1 of
either or both or combination of free or emulsified oil and grease, if, in the opinion of
the Manager, it appears probably that such waste or wastewater:
(A) Can deposit grease or oil in the collection system in such manner to cause it to
clog.
(B) Are not amendable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving
waters without being affected by normal wastewater treatment processes.
(C) Can have deleterious effects on the wastewater treatment process due to the
excessive quantities.
(12) Any cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas or
acidification in excess of one-half (0.5) mg/1 by weight as cyanide in the wastes:
(13) Wastes or wastewater which:
(A) Cause unusual concentration of solids or composition as for example, in total
suspended solids of inert nature (such as Fuller’s Earth) and/or in total dissolved
solids (such as sodium chloride, or sodium sulfate).
(B) Cause excessive discoloration in the wastewater treatment facilities discharge.
(C) Has BOD in excess of 900 mg/1 based upon a twenty-four (24) hour composite
sample.
(D) Has flow characteristics or pollutant loadings in excess of the limits established
in the discharge permit for a user.
Page 712-7
(E) Is discharged without application for a wastewater discharge permit as required
under Section.08.
(F) Cause damage to the collection system or impair the treatment process.
(c) Slugs. No person shall allow the discharge of slugs of water or wastes to the collection
system which may be harmful to the operation of the wastewater works. Where, in the opinion
of the Manager, slugging does occur, each person producing such discharge into the collection
system shall construct and maintain at his own expense, a storage reservoir of sufficient
capacity, with flow control equipment, to ensure an equalized discharge over a twenty-four (24)
hour period.
(d) WPDES violation. No person shall discharge any waste or wastewater which would
cause the wastewater treatment facilities to be in violation of any of the requirements of their
WPDES Permit.
(e) Sufficient capacity. No person shall connect to and discharge to the collection system,
unless there is capacity available to all downstream components of the wastewater works as
determined by the City Public Works Director.
(f) Act or Code violation. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the
wastewater works either directly or indirectly, any waste or wastewater violation of the Act or
the Wisconsin Administrative Code. To the extent that the provisions of the chapter are more
restrictive than the act or the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the provisions of this chapter shall
be controlling.
712.03. Accidental Discharges. Any persons who accidentally discharges wastes or wastewater
prohibited under Section 712.02 into the wastewater works or storm sewer shall immediately
report such discharge to the Manager.
712.04. Pretreatment Facilities.
(a) Approving Authority. The Approving Authority may require pretreatment facilities of
any person discharging or planning to discharge industrial waste, if the waste or wastewater:
(1) Could cause damage to the collection system.
(2) Impair the treatment process.
(3) Cause the City to incur treatment costs exceeding those of domestic wastewater.
(4) Have any of the characteristics of the “Prohibited Discharges” described in Section
712.02.
(5) Cause the wastewater treatment facilities to violate its WPDES Permit.
Page 712-8
(6) Cause a particular industry to exceed its allocation volume, BOD, suspended solids
or any other pollutant set for in the discharge permit.
(7) Has any characteristics which require pretreatment under Wisconsin Administrative
Code Pretreatment Standards for Discharge to Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
(b) Expense. Construction, operation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities shall be at
the expense of the person discharging the industrial waste.
(c) Plans. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
pretreatment facilities shall be filed with the Manager prior to the start of construction.
(d) Operator's Certificate. In accordance with Wisconsin Administrative Code, all
pretreatment facilities shall be operated by qualified personnel holding the appropriate
operator’s certificate issued by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
712.05. Sand and Grease Trap Installations. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
provided at repair garages, gasoline stations, car washes, and other industrial or commercial
establishments for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
oil, flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be constructed
in accordance with the Wisconsin Plumbing Code and shall be located as to be readily and easily
assessable for easy cleaning and inspection. All grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuous efficient operation at all times.
712.06. Wastewater Measurement and Sampling.
(a) Waste Consumption. The waste consumption as determined from the meter records of
the City Water Department, shall be the basis for computing the wastewater flows, unless:
(1) The water is contained in a product or is evaporated or is discharged as unpolluted
water or waste to surface drainage. In such cases, an application may be made for a
reduction in the volume of wastewater discharged to the collection system, providing
supporting data, satisfactory to the Manager, is furnished and the total monthly
wastewater exceeds 500 cubic feet. This data shall include a flow diagram, destination of
water and/or wastewater, supported by submetering data installed on such process piping
at the expense of the user.
(2) The water is condensed from a product, so that the quantity of wastewater is
increased over the amount of water being metered. In such cases, the increased flow
shall be measured in a manner which is acceptable to the Manager and added to the flow
obtained from the water meter readings.
(3) All unmetered users shall be billed quarterly in advance on or before the first day of
January, April, July and October of each year for service to be rendered during the
following three (3) months.
Page 712-9
(4) If discharger uses water in excess of 500 cubic feet per month and it can be shown to
the satisfaction of the City that a portion of the water does not enter the collection
system, the user may request and the City may determine the first, second and third
quarter sewage flow be based upon the fourth quarter sewage flow. The fourth billing
quarter shall be defined as the months of October, November, and December. The
Manager shall have the authority to make an adjustment to the fourth quarter water use to
account for irregularities such as nonoccupancy, incorrect meter readings, broken water
fixtures, etc.
(5) Sprinkling Lawns. When water for sprinkling lawns is metered separately, no user
charge will be made.
(6) Water Obtained Outside of City. If any lot, parcel of land, building or premises
discharging domestic wastewater or industrial waste into the collection system is
supplied in whole or in part with water not obtained from the City, the Manager shall
furnish a water meter with outside reading device. The property owner shall, at his
expense, install and thereafter maintain the equipment to measure the quantity of water
pumped or discharged to the collection system. The user charge shall be based on the
quantity of water so measured. Whenever the person does not permit the installation of
such metering equipment, or where it is not practicable to measure the water consumed
on any premises by a meter or meters, the Manager shall determine the estimated volume
of water discharged into the wastewater works.
(b) Installing Devices. The Manager may require the installation of devices for metering the
volume of waste discharge if those volumes cannot otherwise be determined for metered water
consumption records or if the user discharges over 10,000 gallons in any day. The metering
devices shall be owned and maintained by the person and may not be removed without consent
of the Manager.
(c) Control Manholes. All person discharging industrial wastes into the wastewater works
shall construct and maintain control manholes in suitable and accessible positions on public
property or easements to facilitate the observation, measurement, and sampling of all his wastes
or wastewater. Control manholes shall be located and constructed in a manner approved by the
Manager. Plans shall be submitted to the Manager prior to construction.
712.07. New Sanitary Sewer and Connections. New sanitary sewers shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. New
sanitary sewer connections shall comply with DNR and DSPS requirements provided in the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
712.08. Industrial Waste Analysis.
(a) Testing. The City will collect samples and perform laboratory tests on industrial waste
discharged as necessary to verify the quantity of flow and character and concentration of an
industrial waste. The City’s test results shall be used to determine the applicable surcharge.
Page 712-10
(b) Sampling methods. Waste or wastewater discharge may be sampled manually or by the
use of mechanical equipment as necessary to obtain a representative twenty-four (24) hour
composite sample. Samples shall be taken at intervals to be established in the discharge permit.
(c) Test results. When Wisconsin Administrative Code requires the submittal of the character
and concentration of wastes, waste volume, and production information to the City or Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR), the user shall have the waste character and
concentration determined by an independent testing laboratory. A copy of the test results and
DNR reports shall be submitted to the Manager.
(d) Analysis. All measurements, test analysis of the characteristics of industrial wastes shall
be determined in accordance with “Standard Methods” or 40 CFR 136. Alternate methods of
analysis may be used, subject to prior written approval of the Manager.
(e) Permanent sampling equipment. The Manager may require the installation of permanent
twenty-four (24) hour composite sampling or monitoring equipment or the purchase of portable
twenty-four (24) hour composite sampling or monitoring equipment if the user discharges over
10,000 gallons on any day or discharges a waste containing incompatible pollutants as defined in
Chapter NR 211, Wisconsin Administrative Code. The sampling device shall be owned and
maintained by the person and may not be removed without the consent of the Manager.
712.09. Wastewater Discharge Permit System.
(a) Wastewater Discharge Permit. A wastewater discharge permit is required under this
section if a person’s discharge into the City wastewater works has any of the following
characteristics:
(1) A BOD greater that 250 mg/1.
(2) A suspended solids concentration greater than 250 mg/1.
(3) A volume of 10,000 gallons or greater is discharged by any user at one or more
points of discharge.
(4) Any of the characteristics listed under Section .02 “Prohibited Discharges.”
(5) Is an incompatible pollutant as defined in the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(6) Any such persons planning to discharge, changing the characteristics of their
discharge or whose discharge permit has expired shall make application to the Manager
within sixty (60) days prior to the discharge. All persons currently discharging shall
make application to the Manager within sixty (60) days after passage of this Chapter and
must have an executed permit within sixty (60) days of application to discharge or
discontinue discharging. A discharge permit will be required for each separate point of
discharge into the City wastewater works. No person shall discharge waste or
Page 712-11
wastewater into the City wastewater works without a wastewater discharge permit, if
required by this section.
(b) Permit Application. Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file
with the Manager an application on the form prescribed by the Manager. In support of this
application, the user shall submit the following information:
(1) Name, address, and standard industrial classification number of applicant.
(2) Average daily volume of wastewater to be discharged.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by a method approved by
the Manager.
(4) Time and duration of discharge.
(5) Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal
variations, if any.
(6) Site plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size and location.
(7) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including all
materials, any types of materials which are, or could be discharged.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production.
(9) Number and type of employees, and hours of work.
(10) Any other information as may be deemed by the Manager to be necessary to
evaluate the permit application.
(11) The Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
(c) Permit Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges, and fees established by the
Approving Authority. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly
enforced by the Manager in accordance with this chapter, and applicable State and Federal
regulations. Permit conditions will include the following:
(1) The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(2) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations
and equalization.
Page 712-12
(3) Requirements for installation of control manholes, flow measurement devices, and
composite sampling equipment.
(4) Pretreatment facilities pursuant to Section .04 as deemed necessary by the Manager.
(5) Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharges as
specified by the Manager and affording the City access thereto.
(6) Average and maximum pollutant concentrations and total daily average and
maximum pollutant discharges for all pollutants subject to limitations and prohibitions
which are present in the user’s wastewater discharge.
(7) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Manager to ensure compliance with
this chapter.
(d) Appeal.
(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Manager may appeal such decision to the
Approving Authority within thirty (30) days after the decision is made by the Manager,
by filing with the City Clerk a Notice of Appeal specifying the ground thereof. The
Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Approving Authority all of the papers
constituting the records upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(2) The Approving Authority shall hold a hearing on the appeal within twenty (20) days
from the time of Notice of Appeal is taken. The Mayor shall act as Chairman of the
meeting of the Approving Authority. The meeting of the Approving Authority shall be
open to the public, minutes shall be kept of its proceedings, witnesses may be compelled
to attend, all testimony shall be under oath (and tape recorded), and any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney and all witnesses shall be subject to crossexamination.
The Approving Authority shall have the following powers: to hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Manager and in exercising said powers, the Approving
Authority may in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as
ought to be made, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the Manager from
whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a discharge permit.
The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Approving Authority shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Manager.
The ground of every such determination shall be stated. The Approving Authority may
permit members of the public to testify.
(e) Duration of Permits. A permit shall be issued for two (2) years and shall be automatically
renewed on a year to year basis, thereafter, unless the person is notified by the Manager within
sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the permit or any renewal thereof. After such
Page 712-13
modification by the Manager, the permit shall expire at the end of that year, the terms and
conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification and change by the Manager during the
life of the permit, if so required because of any chapters, statutes, or rules and regulations of the
Approving Authority or any applicable state or federal body. The person shall be informed of
any proposed changes in his permit at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of change.
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
(f) Transfer of a Permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be assigned or transferred or sold to
a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation.
(g) Revocation of Permit. Any user who violates any of the conditions of his permit or this
chapter; or of applicable State and Federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked.
712.10. Admission to Property. The City shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as
may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
712.11. Confidentiality of Critical Information. When requested by the user furnishing a
report or permit application or questionnaire, the portions of the report, or other document,
which might disclose trade secrets, or secret processes shall not be made available for use by the
City or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report.
712.12. Damage to Utility Property. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the wastewater works.
712.13. User Charge. The Approving Authority shall establish the following user charges to
generate sufficient revenue to offset the total cost of operation and maintenance, all or a portion
of debt retirement and the total cost of previous years operating debt of its wastewater treatment
facility and the total cost of operation and maintenance all or a portion of debt retirement of the
wastewater pumping stations, including; The Approving Authority shall determine that portion
of debt service to be paid by user charges. The user charges shall be established in accordance
with the subsequent definitions and formulas, and shall distribute the costs proportionately
among users and user classes. All wastewater customers shall be notified annually of the
wastewater rates. The notification shall indicate that portion of the rate which is applicable to
operation and maintenance expenses. If excess revenues are collected from a particular user
class, the excess revenues shall be applied to reduce the user charge for the same user class the
following year.
The cost shall be reviewed and the rates adjusted by the Approving Authority on a bi-annual
basis. The initial rates shall be effective October 1, 1981. The subsequent rates shall be adjusted
annually thereafter; except, if necessary, the rates may be adjusted more frequently.
Page 712-14
(a) Definitions. C=A user’s total charge per unit of time; A=A user’s charge for accounting
and collecting per unit of time; U=A user’s charge for pumping and treating domestic
wastewater per unit of time; S=A user’s surcharge for wastewater having pollutant
concentrations in excess of domestic wastewater per unit of time; Ca= Total cost for accounting
and collecting per unit of time; Cv= Total cost for pumping and treating domestic wastewater
volume per unit of time; Cb= Total cost for treatment of a quantity of BOD above a
concentration of 250 mg/1 per unit of time; Cs= Total cost for treatment of quantity of
suspended solids above a concentration of 250/mg/1 per unit of time; Cp= Total cost for
treatment of a quantity of any pollutant above base concentration per unit of time; A+= Total
number of billings per unit of time; Vt= Total volume contribution from all users per unit of
time; Bt= Total quantity BOD having a concentration above 250 mg/1 for all users per unit of
time; St = Total quantity suspended solids having a concentration above 250 mg/1 from all users
per unit of time; Pt= Total quantity of any pollutant contribution above base concentration from
all users per unit of time; Vu= Volume contribution from a user per unit of time; Bu= Quantity
of BOD having a concentration of above 250 mg/1 from a user per unit of time; Su=Quantity of
suspended solids having a concentration of above 250 mg/1 from a user per unit of time; Pu=
Quantity of any pollutant contribution above base concentration from a user per unit of time.
(b) C equals A plus U plus S
(c) A equals Ca divided by A+
(d) U equals Cv divided by Vt times Vu
(e) S equals Cb divided by Vt times Bu plus CS divided by St times Su plus CP divided by Pt
times Pu
(f) Wastes discharged at strengths or pollutant levels equal to or less than domestic sewage
shall pay the user charge for pumping and treating domestic wastewater. Persons discharging
wastes with strengths or pollutant levels above domestic wastewater shall pay the surcharge in
addition to the user charge based on volume.
(g) Any person discharging an industrial waste of such character that it causes the City to
incur additional expenses for treatment, to the extent that the expenses are not covered by
existing City user charges or surcharges, the person making the discharge shall pay the added
cost of handling and treating the wastewater.
(h) All liquid wastes from septic tanks and holding tanks to be disposed of within the City,
by either public or private means, shall be disposed of at approved locations within the
collection system of the City. The charges for such disposal of liquid wastes from septic tanks
and holding tanks shall be established by the Approving Authority.
(i) This user charge system takes precedence over any pre-existing agreements which are
inconsistent with Section 204 (b) (1) (a) of the Act and 40 CFR 35, Subpart E.
Page 712-15
(j) The Manager shall maintain such records as are necessary to document compliance with 40
CRF 35, Subpart E.
712.14. Wastewater Service: Billing and Collection.
(a) Monthly Statements.
(1) Wastewater user charges provided for in this chapter shall be payable on the first of
the month following the month in which service is rendered. A three percent (3 percent)
delinquency charge ($.30 minimum) will be made on any bill not paid within twenty (20)
days of issuance. This late payment charge is applicable to all customers. Failure to
receive a bill shall not exempt or excuse the customer from the obligation to pay for the
service rendered. If a meter ceases to register, the amount of the bill shall be computed
on the basis of the average consumption for the previous three (3) months.
(2) The utility customer may be given a written notice that the bill is overdue no sooner
than twenty (20) days after the bill is issued and unless payment or satisfactory
arrangement for payment is made within the next eight (8) days, service may be
disconnected pursuant to Wisconsin Administrative Code, Chapter PSC 185.
(3) When a consumer’s premises has several buildings, each supplied with service and
metered separately, the full service charge will be billed for each meter separately, and
the readings will not be cumulated. If these buildings are all used in the same business
and are connected by the consumer, they can be metered in one place. If the utility, for
its own convenience, installs more than one meter, the readings will be cumulated for
billing.
(b) Collection of Delinquent Charges. All charges shall be collected and taxed and shall be a
lien upon the property served pursuant to Section 66.076 (7) of the Wisconsin Statutes as the
same has been and from time to time may be amended or recreated.
(c) Recovery of Delinquent Charges in Civil Action. In addition, any charges levied by and
pursuant to this section, not paid and becoming delinquent, may be recovered from the occupant
of the premises served in a civil action by the City in a court of competent jurisdiction, if the
City elects to do so.
712.15 Enforcement of Penalties.
(a) Notification of Violation. Any person found by the Manager to be in violation of this
chapter or a discharge permit or any requirement contained herein, will be served by the
Manager with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The Manager will endeavor to the full extent
possible to eliminate or remedy such violation without resorting to further administrative
proceedings.
(b) Show Cause Hearing.
Page 712-16
(1) If those effects have been unsuccessful, the Manager may order any person who
causes or allows unauthorized discharge or who violates any section of this chapter to
show cause before the Approving Authority why such discharge should not be
discontinued or corrected. Notice shall be served on the offending party specifying the
time and place of hearing to be held and directing the offending party to show cause
before the Approving Authority why an order should not be made directing the
discontinuance of such discharge or why some other appropriate order should not be
made.
(2) The notice of hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail
addressed to the billing address of the user at least ten (10) days before the hearing.
Service may be made upon any officer, director, or registered agent of a corporation or
the person apparently in charge of the local office of the corporation. The notice shall be
signed by the Mayor and delivered to the City Clerk of the City who shall cause the
notice to be served on the offending party. The date for hearing shall be set by the
Mayor, or in his absence, by the Council President. The hearing shall be conducted by
the Approving Authority and shall be public. All testimony taken before the Approving
Authority shall be under oath and recorded and all witnesses shall be subject to crossexamination.
At the hearing, the Manager and the offending party may be represented by
an attorney and may compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena and may compel
the production of books, papers, documents, or tangible things described in the subpoena
in accordance with Section 805.07 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The Approving Authority
may permit members of the public to testify.
(3) After the Approving Authority has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the
party responsible for the discharge:
(A) Revoking the discharge permit;
(B) Ordering that within a specified term period, any or all of the following:
(i) Require that the discharge be discontinued.
(ii) Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge.
(iii) Require pretreatment.
(iv) Require proper operation and maintenance of existing pretreatment
equipment.
(v) Require extra payment over and above the user charges for the extra costs
incurred by the City caused by a user’s discharge.
(vi) Terminate the water and sanitary sewer service until the ordered corrective
action is completed.
Page 712-17
(c) Violations. A violation of an order of the Approving Authority shall be considered a
public nuisance. If any person discharges waste or wastewater into the wastewater treatment
works contrary to any order of the Approving Authority, the Approving Authority may order
that an action be commenced on behalf of the City in the Circuit Court for Ashland County for
the purpose of having discharge stopped by injunction.
(1) In addition, any person who is in violation of their permit or who fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter or with an order of the Approving Authority issued
in pursuance of this Chapter, or shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by such violation including reasonable attorney’s fees and other
expenses of litigation and upon conviction of any violation of this chapter, shall be
subject to a forfeiture not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,500 per violation, plus
damages. Each day a condition is allowed to exist which is contrary to all or any part of
a person’s discharge permit or of this chapter shall constitute a new violation. The
forfeiture herein stated in this section shall supersede any penalty provision of any other
City ordinance. Change of ownership or occupancy of premises delinquent under the
provisions of this chapter shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating charges due and
penalties for violations.
(2) In addition, if any shall discharge a waste or wastewater with BOD concentration of
900 mg/1 or greater, as defined in Section .01 (3), said user shall pay a penalty of $200
per violation. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. Said
penalty shall be added to the monthly or quarterly billing statement.
(3) In addition to the court proceedings and penalties described in the foregoing sections
of this chapter, whenever a person violates any provision of this chapter or fails to
comply with any order of the Approving Authority, the Approving Authority may order
that an action be commenced on behalf of the City in the Circuit Court for Ashland
County for the purpose of obtaining an injunction restraining the person from violating
the chapter or failing to comply with the order from making any further discharges into
the wastewater treatment works of the City.
ADOPTED: 712 (978) 2/9/1982
Page 714-1
CHAPTER 714. AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE SEWER SERVICES TO SPECIFIED
PROPERTY OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF ASHLAND.
714.01. Services in Bayfield County. Pursuant to the powers granted the City under Wisconsin
State Statute 66.069(2), the City of Ashland may provide sewer utility services to the real
property located in Bayfield County commonly known as the Best Western/Holiday House and
Marine Club which real property is legally described on attached Exhibit A and to the real
property located in Bayfield County commonly known as the Northern Great Lakes Regional
Visitor’s Center, which real property is legally described on attached Exhibit B.
714.02. Governance. The terms and conditions for the sewer utility services to be provided shall
be governed by City of Ashland Ordinances and additional terms negotiated for the best interests
of the City of Ashland by the Wastewater Utility Commission. The sewer utility services
provided may be terminated by the City of Ashland in its discretion.
ADOPTED: 714 (1233) 7/10/1990
AMENDMENTS: 714 (1283) 10/13/1992
Page 714-2
EXHIBIT A
PARCEL 1
A parcel of land located in Government Lot Three (3) of Section One (1), Township Forty-seven
(47) North, Range Five (5) West, in the Town of Eileen, Bayfield County, Wisconsin, as more
particularly described as follows:
To locate the point of beginning, commence at the West quarter corner of Section 6, Township
47 North, Range 4 West, said quarter corner being marked by a 2 inch pipe 8 feet long driven in
the swampy ground; thence run North ' 20’ East on the range line between Sections 1 and 6,
1183.51 feet to a point marked by copper rivet set in the concrete base of the memorial
monument on the North side of the Federal Highway; thence run North 71' 40’ west, 767.26 feet
to a point; thence run North 80' 39’ West, 1949.39 feet to a point marked by a nail which falls 11
feet North 9' 21’ East from the center line of the Federal Highway; thence run North 9' 21’ East,
39 feet to the point of beginning, which is marked by an iron auto truck axle set in the ground on
the North right-of-way boundary of said Federal Highway; said point of beginning is also 2648.9
feet due West of a point on the section line between Sections 1 and 6 extended to a point in the
lake which is North 0' 20’ East, 1764.64 feet of the quarter section corner between said Sections
1 and 6;
Thence from said point of beginning by metes and bounds:
Run Easterly along the Northerly boundary of the right-of-way of Federal Highway No. 2 a
distance of 56.25 feet to a point;
Thence run North 9' 21’ East to the mean high water line of Chequamegon Bay;
Thence run Westerly along said mean high water line to a point which bears North 9' 21’ East,
167.4 feet from the point of beginning;
Thence N. 59' 03’ 30” W., 224.47 feet along the mean high water line of Lake Superior to an
iron truck spring;
Thence S. 9' 21’ W., 250 feet to an iron pin;
Thence S. 80' 39’ W., 208.7 feet along the Northerly boundary line of the right-of-way of U.S.
Highway No. 2 to the point of beginning.
Page 714-3
PARCEL 2
A parcel of land in Government Lot Three (3), Section One (1), Township Forty-seven (47)
North, Range Five (5) West, in the Town of Eileen, Bayfield County, Wisconsin, described as
follows:
Commencing at the West one-quarter corner of Section 6, Township 47 North, Range 4 West,
said quarter corner being marked by a 2 inch pipe 8 feet long driven in the swampy ground;
Thence North 0' 20’ East on the range line between said Sections 1 and 6, 1183.51 feet to a point
marked by a copper rivet in the concrete base of the memorial monument on the North side of
U.S. Highway #2;
Thence North 71' 40’ West, 767.26 feet to a point;
Thence North 80' 39’ West, 1949.39 feet to a point marked by a nail which falls 11 feet North 9'
21’ East from the center line of said highway;
Thence North 9' 21’ East, 39 feet to a point which is marked by an iron truck axle set in the
ground on the North right-of-way boundary of said highway, said point also being 2648.9 feet
due West of a point on the section line between Sections 1 and 6 extended, which is North 0' 20’
East, 1820.89 feet North of the West one-quarter corner of said Section 6;
Thence from said point by metes and bounds:
Run Easterly along the Northerly boundary line of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway No. 2 a
distance of 56.25 feet to the point of beginning;
Thence continuing Easterly along the Northerly boundary of said right-of-way a distance of
437.45 feet to a point;
Thence North 9' 21’ East to the mean high water line of Lake Superior;
Thence Westerly along the mean high water line of Lake Superior to a point which bears North 9
'21’ East from the point of beginning;
Thence South 9' 21’ West to the point of beginning.

Page 721-1
CHAPTER 721. SEPTIC AND HOLDING TANK PUMP OUT.
721.01. Locations. Septic tanks and holding tanks that are located within the City of Ashland
may be pumped out at the lift station located on 17th Avenue East and at no other location,
except that the Council may, in their discretion, give permission to pump out at some other
locations.
721.02. Rates. The rates to be charged for pump out pursuant to this ordinance are as follows:
500 gallon $ 5.00
1000 gallon 7.50
1500 gallon 10.00
2000 gallon 12.50
721.03. Portable Tanks. This ordinance is not intended to cover portable tanks carried by motor
vehicles or trailers.
ADOPTED: 721 (850) 8/12/1975
Page 730-1
CHAPTER 730. GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO LAKE SUPERIOR DISTRICT
POWER COMPANY TO CONSTRUCT AND MAINTAIN FACILITIES FOR THE
DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL GAS IN THE CITY OF ASHLAND.
730.01. Franchise granted. The City of Ashland hereby grants unto Lake Superior District
Power Company, a Wisconsin corporation, its successors and assigns, an exclusive franchise to
construct and maintain facilities within said city for the distribution and sale of natural gas to
customers within the said city, and for such purpose said company is authorized to enter upon
and use and occupy the streets, alleys, bridges, avenues and public grounds and places of the said
city to construct, lay, maintain, operate and extend thereon, through and thereunder, such mains,
pipes, apparatus, equipment and appliances as may be necessary or appropriate for the sale,
distribution and delivery of natural gas to consumers within the said city, subject, however, to
the conditions hereinafter set forth.
730.02. Excavations. For the purpose of carrying into effect the franchises and privileges
granted by Section 730.01 hereof, Lake Superior District Power Company, its successors and
assigns, is hereby authorized to make all necessary excavations in streets, alleys, avenues and
public grounds and places, which shall be done with reasonable dispatch and with the least
possible interference with, or inconvenience to, the rights of the public. If Lake Superior District
Power Company shall restore all streets, alleys, avenues and public grounds and places when
excavated by it, to their original condition of safety and utility, Lake Superior District Power
Company shall use any bridges or viaducts on which to lay mains or other facilities, it shall lay
or place such mains or other facilities over, under or upon such bridge or viaducts with the least
practicable interference with, or inconvenience to, the rights of the public.
730.03. Notice required. Except in emergencies, Lake Superior District Power Company shall
give the official or committee, designated by the City, 24 hours notice of its intention to excavate
in any street, alley, avenue or public ground or place, and such excavation shall be made on the
side or portion of the street, alley, avenue or public ground or place as may be directed by such
official or committee.
730.04. PSC approval. Prior to commencing the construction of its natural gas distribution
system and facilities in this City, Lake Superior District Power Company shall procure any
authority from the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin, and any other regulatory body
having jurisdiction, required to authorize construction of said facilities and to supply natural gas
to customers within the said city.
730.05. Termination of Franchise. If Lake Superior District Power Company does not
commence the construction of its natural gas distribution system and facilities required to
introduce natural gas into the City of Ashland, within 12 months of the date when natural gas is
delivered by a pipe line to a city gate delivery point near the city limits of said city for sale and
distribution within the city, then the said City of Ashland shall have the option to terminate and
cancel this franchise by giving Lake Superior District Power Company, its successors or assigns,
at least 90 days written notice of its election to do so, such notice to Lake Superior District
Power Company to be sent to 101 West Second Street, Ashland, Wisconsin.
Page 730-2
730.06. Rules and Regulations. The franchise granted in this ordinance is subject to all lawful
rules and regulation of the Common Council of said city and to all provisions of statutory law
applicable thereto, and to all legal orders, rules and regulations of the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin and of any other state agency having authority under law, from time
to time, over any phase of the operations of Lake Superior District Power Company under or
pursuant to the franchise granted in this ordinance.
ADOPTED: 730 (695) 3/14/1961
Page 746-1
CHAPTER 746. PREVENTION OF CLEAR WATER INFLOW TO THE SANITARY
SEWER.
746.01. Discharges prohibited. In accordance with the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the
following shall not be discharged to a sanitary building drain or sewer, nor to a private sewage
disposal system:
(a) Roof conductors, surface drains, ground water drains, foundation footings drains,
(b) Refrigerator cooling water drainage systems,
(c) Storm water drains,
(d) Drinking water foundations with continuous flowing water,
(e) Air conditioning drains,
(f) Building storm sewers, and
(g) Other clear water drains not described herein.
746.02 Citations. The City Building Inspector are empowered to issue citations for violations of
this ordinance.
746.03 Violations. Violations may be punishable by a fine of $25.00 for each day the violation
continues, each day being considered as a separate violation.
ADOPTED: 746 (896) 10/11/1977
Page 748-1
CHAPTER 748. BUILDING INSPECTOR AND BUILDING, HOUSING, ELECTRICAL
AND PLUMBING CODES.
748.01. Definitions.
(a) Accessory Building. A building subordinate to a principal building or use, located on the
same parcel as and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building or
land use. Accessory buildings include, but are not limited to, garages, carports, sheds, and
greenhouses.
(b) Accessory Structure. A structure subordinate to a principal building or use, located on the
same parcel as and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building or
land use. Accessory structures include but are not limited to utility or alternative energy structures,
fuel tanks and storage canopies.
(c) Addition. Any new construction performed on a building which increases the outside
dimensions of the building.
(d) Building. A structure enclosed within exterior walls, built, erected and framed of a
combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, and used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. See also, “structure.”
(e) Building Inspector. The Building Inspector of the City of Ashland.
(f) Structure. That which is built or constructed, including, but not limited to, dwellings,
buildings, fences, pergolas and arbors, canopies, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water or fuel
tanks, towers, stairways, tents and anything erected and framed of component parts which is
fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground, including a mobile home,
manufactured home, modular home or travel trailer.
(g) Temporary. Lasting, designed, or intended to last for a limited time.
(h) Unsafe Building. A building that is or becomes unsafe, or in noncompliance because of
inadequate egress facilities, inadequate light, inadequate ventilation, or which constitutes a fire
hazard or is otherwise dangerous to the public welfare, which involves illegal or improper
occupancy, or which is vacant and not secured against entry.
(i) Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. Chapters SPS 320 to 325, of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
748.02. Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Sec. 101.65, Wis. Stats..
748.03. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general health, safety and welfare
within the City of Ashland, Wisconsin, and to maintain required local uniformity with the
administrative and technical requirements of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Wisconsin
Enrolled Commercial Building Code, State of Wisconsin Electrical Code, and State of Wisconsin
Plumbing Code.
Page 748-2
748.04. Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
(a) The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, SPS 320-325 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, and all amendments thereto, is adopted and incorporated by reference and shall apply to all
buildings within the scope of this ordinance. The scope of SPS 320-325 includes the construction
and inspection of one- and two-family dwellings built since June 1, 1980.
(b) Notwithstanding SPS 320-325, the scope also includes the construction and inspection
of alterations and additions to one- and two-family dwellings built before June 1, 1980. Because
such projects are not under state jurisdiction, petitions for variance and final appeals under SPS
320.19 and 320.21, respectively, shall be decided by the municipal board of appeals. Petitions for
variance shall be decided per SPS 320.19 so that equivalency is maintained to the intent of the rule
being petitioned. As the board of appeals approves petitions for variance, the Building Inspector is
granted the power to apply the results to similar circumstances by precedent.
(c) Notwithstanding SPS 320-05, the scope also includes the construction and inspection of
detached garages and accessory buildings throughout the City. The building structure and any
heating, electrical or plumbing systems shall comply with the Uniform Dwelling Code. Petitions
for variance and appeals shall be handled as in the previous paragraph.
748.05. Adoption of the Commercial Building Code. The Wisconsin Enrolled Commercial
Building Code Vol 1 & 2, SPS 361-366 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and all
amendments thereto, is adopted and incorporated by reference and shall apply to all commercial
and multi-family buildings within the scope of this ordinance.
748.06. Adoption of the Plumbing Code. The Wisconsin Uniform Plumbing Code, SPS 381-382
and 384 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and all amendments thereto, is adopted and
incorporated by reference and shall apply to all buildings within the scope of this ordinance. The
scope of this ordinance includes plumbing work completed on all residential and commercial
structures within the City.
748.07. Adoption of the Electrical Code. The Wisconsin Uniform Electrical Code, SPS 316 of
the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and all amendments thereto, which adopts the National
Electrical Code with amendments, is adopted and incorporated by reference and shall apply to all
buildings within the scope of this ordinance.
748.30. Building Inspector.
(a) Position created. There is hereby created the position of Building Inspector, who shall
administer and enforce this ordinance and shall be certified by the Department of Safety and
Professional Services, as specified by Wisconsin Statutes, Section 101.66(2). Specific duties of
this position shall be further described and outlined in a Position Description which has been
approved by the City.
(b) Power and Duty of Inspectors. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance and of all other laws and lawful orders of the State of
Wisconsin and of all ordinances of the City of Ashland related to buildings and structures. The
Building Inspector may appoint other designees who shall have the power and duty to enforce all,
or specific portions of, said ordinance and laws. The Building Inspector shall have the authority to
Page 748-3
require the procurement of a building permit and to issue citations as necessary to compel
compliance with this ordinance.
(c) Authority for Inspector to Enter Premises. The inspectors provided by this section shall have
the power and authority at all times during reasonable hours for any proper purpose to enter upon
any public or private premises and make inspections thereof.
748.40. Building Permits.
(a) Permits required. No building or structure or any part thereof shall hereafter be built,
enlarged, altered, moved, or demolished, or any plumbing or electrical work commenced within the
City of Ashland, unless exempted by the Unified Development Ordinance, or as exempted in this
Chapter, until a building permit is first obtained from the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent. Building permit fees and project cost minimums shall be set and identified in
the City of Ashland’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule. If the Building Inspector shall find at any
time that the above mentioned ordinance, laws, orders, plans or specifications are not being
complied with, the building permit shall be revoked by written notice posted at the site of the work.
When any such permit is revoked, it shall be unlawful to do any further work upon such building
until the permit is reissued, excepting such work as the Building Inspector shall order to be done as
a condition precedent to the re-issuance of the permit.
(b) Exceptions. A permit may not be required for repairs to an existing structure which does
not change the area, structural strength, or level of occupancy, fire, protection, light or ventilation
or the number of exits and where the total cost of the repairs including labor and materials, does not
exceed the amount identified in the City of Ashland’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Replacement
of existing heating and air conditioning equipment to its previous code-compliant condition as
determined by the building inspector is exempted from permit requirements. Repainting of interior
and exterior surfaces, replacement of existing floor coverings and basic interior decorating
activities shall also be exempted from permit requirements. Installation of certain accessory
structures such as playground equipment, utility equipment, temporary fabric structures or storage
canopies may not require a permit.
(c) Building Permit Fee. The Building Permit fees shall be as provided in the most current City
of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule. All permit fees shall be double the usual amount for any
work commenced prior to obtaining a required permit.
748.50. Unsafe Buildings. Wisconsin State Statutes 66.0413 grants specific authority and outlines
procedures to be followed when dealing with unsafe buildings. If a building is old, dilapidated or
out of repair and consequently dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation and unreasonable to repair, the Building Inspector may order the owner to raze the
building or, if the building can be made safe by reasonable repairs, order the owner to either make
the building safe and sanitary or to raze the building, at the owner’s option. In addition, failure to
comply with such orders may cause the City Council to revoke any license that may be required by
ordinance, until such orders are complied with.
748.90. Penalties. The enforcement of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances relating to
building shall be by means of the withholding or revocation of building permits, and/or the
imposition of forfeitures, and/or injunctive action against any person, contractor, company or agent
who commences work without a valid permit. Forfeitures shall be not less than $50.00 nor more
than $500.00 for each day of noncompliance. This chapter shall not be construed as assuming any
Page 748-4
liability on the part of the City for damages to any injured person(s) or any property destroyed by
any defect in any building or equipment.
ADOPTED: 748 (1768) 1/10/2012
AMENDMENTS: 748 (1799) 2/12/2013
Page 750-1
CHAPTER 750. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
750.01. Adoption of Pamphlet. The “City of Ashland Property Maintenance Ordinance” is
hereby adopted in pamphlet form, as authorized by Wisconsin State Statute 66.0103.
750.02. Pamphlet On File. The “City of Ashland Property Maintenance Ordinance” pamphlet
shall be permanently on file and open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk after its
adoption.
750.03. Repeal of Former Pamphlet. Ordinance 750 (1673), Adoption of “City of Ashland
Property Maintenance Ordinance” in pamphlet form, adopted in 2008, and subsequent
amendments thereto, shall be repealed upon adoption of this amended ordinance.
ADOPTED: 750 (1770) 1/31/2012
AMENDMENTS: 750 (2018-1908) 8/14/2018;
Page 750-2
Page 750-3
City of Ashland
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE
A. Administration .................................................................................................................. 5
1. Title ............................................................................................................................................ 5
2. Intent. ......................................................................................................................................... 5
3. Legal Authority.. ........................................................................................................................ 5
4. Effective Date ............................................................................................................................ 5
5. Applicability .............................................................................................................................. 5
6. Interpretation .............................................................................................................................. 5
7. Separability ................................................................................................................................ 5
8. Responsibility.. .......................................................................................................................... 5
9. Inspection authority and access procedures. .............................................................................. 6
10. Penalties for violation of this ordinance and failure to maintain property. ................................ 5
11. Procedures for razing and vacating structures. .......................................................................... 7
12. Procedures for repairing or removing structures damaged by fire. ............................................ 9
13. Procedure for appealing decisions made by an authorized agent of the City. ......................... 10
B. Clean, Safe, Sanitary, and Attractive Maintenance of Exterior Property .....................10
1. Clean, safe, sanitary, and attractive.. ....................................................................................... 10
2. Grading and drainage. .............................................................................................................. 10
3. Vegetation and landscaping. .................................................................................................. 10
4. Noxious Weeds, Nuisance Weeds, and Invasive Species. ..................................................... 112
5. Composting. ............................................................................................................................. 12
6. Harborage of pests ................................................................................................................... 13
7. Animals, animal enclosures, and feces .................................................................................... 13
8. Accessory structures ................................................................................................................ 13
9. Fences. ..................................................................................................................................... 13
10. Storage of detached truck toppers.. .......................................................................................... 13
11. Miscellaneous storage. ............................................................................................................. 14
12. Exterior clothes drying. ...................................................................................................................... 14
13. Graffiti. ................................................................................................................................................. 14
14. Firewood storage. ..................................................................................................................... 14
15. Outdoor wood-fired furnace .................................................................................................... 15
16. Fuel Tanks ............................................................................................................................... 15
17. Dumping and littering.. ............................................................................................................ 16
18. Rubbish in the Public Rights-of-Way.. .................................................................................... 16
19. Driveways, sidewalks, and steps. ............................................................................................. 16
20. Snow removal and storage.. ..................................................................................................... 16
21. Vehicles. .................................................................................................................................. 16
C. Exterior Structure ............................................................................................................20
1. General maintenance of exterior structure. .............................................................................. 20
2. Foundations. ............................................................................................................................. 20
3. Exterior walls and exterior surfaces. ........................................................................................ 20
4. Roofs and roof drainage. .......................................................................................................... 20
5. Exterior stairs, porches, front porch skirts, and railings. ......................................................... 21
6. Windows, doors, and hatchways. ............................................................................................. 21
7. Street numbers. ........................................................................................................................ 22
8. Chimneys and towers. .............................................................................................................. 22
Page 750-4
9. Exhaust vents. .......................................................................................................................... 22
D. Interior Structure .............................................................................................................22
1. Basements and crawl spaces. ................................................................................................... 22
2. Structural members .................................................................................................................. 22
3. Interior stairs and railings ........................................................................................................ 22
4. Bathroom and kitchen floors .................................................................................................... 22
5. Sanitation. ................................................................................................................................ 22
6. Insect, rodent, and vermin infestations. ................................................................................... 22
7. Interior surfaces ....................................................................................................................... 23
8. Smoke detectors. ...................................................................................................................... 23
E. Basic Facilities ................................................................................................................23
1. Sanitary facilities ..................................................................................................................... 23
2. Heating facility ........................................................................................................................ 23
3. Operation of heating facilities and incinerators ....................................................................... 24
4. Rubbish and garbage storage. .................................................................................................. 24
F. Installation and Maintenance of Equipment and Fixtures ............................................24
1. Construction, installation and maintenance of equipment and fixtures ................................... 24
2. Maintained clean and sanitary ................................................................................................. 24
3. Plumbing fixtures. .................................................................................................................... 24
4. Plumbing system. ..................................................................................................................... 24
5. Cooking and heating equipment.. ............................................................................................ 24
6. Electrical outlets and fixtures ................................................................................................... 25
7. Electrical system. ..................................................................................................................... 25
G. Definitions........................................................................................................................26
1. Construction of words and phrases. ......................................................................................... 26
2. Definitions of words and phrases. ............................................................................................ 26
Illustrations
750-A Maintenance of vegetation ................................................................................................... 31
750-B Natural landscape buffer ...................................................................................................... 31
750-C Vehicle parking and storage ................................................................................................. 32
Page 750-5
750. Property Maintenance
A. Administration
1. Title. This Ordinance shall be known, referred to, and cited as the Property
Maintenance Ordinance of the City of Ashland, Wisconsin.
2. Intent. The intent of this section is to ensure public health, safety, and welfare to the
degree that they are affected by the occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. It is also the intent of this section to help prevent the continuation,
extension, and aggravation of blight in Ashland.
3. Legal Authority. This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authorization contained
in Section 62.23, Wisconsin Statutes.
4. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication.
5. Applicability. This section applies to all structures and premises in the City of
Ashland. The provisions of this section shall not limit the authority of the City or
other applicable jurisdictions to abate problems on improperly maintained and unsafe
structures or premises pursuant to other applicable laws.
6. Interpretation.
a. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
b. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Ordinance are either more
or less restrictive than comparable standards imposed by any other provisions of
this Ordinance or of any other applicable law, Code, Ordinance, resolution, rule,
or regulation of any kind, the regulation that is more restrictive or that imposes
higher standards or requirements shall govern.
7. Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council of the City
of Ashland that the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance
with the following:
a. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this
Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment; and
b. If any court or competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any
provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building, or structure, such
judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property,
building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
8. Responsibility. The responsible person, as defined herein, shall maintain their
structures and premises in compliance with this Ordinance. A person shall not
occupy, or permit another person to occupy, a structure or premises that does not
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. Occupants, including owner occupants
and tenants, of a structure or premises are responsible for caring for and maintaining
that part of the structure or premises that they occupy or control. All responsible
persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for securing compliance of their
structure or premises with this Ordinance.
For questions on
Landlord and
Tenant Rights and
Responsibilities
see State Statute
704.
Page 750-6
9. Inspection authority and access procedures.
a. Persons authorized to conduct inspections. Agents of the City authorized to
conduct inspections pursuant to this section shall include the Building Inspector,
Zoning Administrator, Police Department, Fire Department, Public Works
Director or other designated agents to conduct inspections.
b. Inspection with consent. Authorized agents of the City, upon display of proper
identification and the consent of the owner, owner’s agent, occupant, or other
responsible person, may enter any structure or premises (locked or unlocked) at
any reasonable time to determine whether said structures or premises comply with
the provisions of this Ordinance. No person shall obstruct or resist any authorized
agent of the City acting in his or her official capacity and with lawful authority.
c. Special inspection warrant. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be
construed to allow an authorized agent of the City to inspect structures or premises
without the consent of the owner, owner’s agent, occupant, or other responsible
person. If said person refuses to permit an inspection, an authorized agent of the
City may apply to a court for a warrant to inspect the structure and premises
pursuant to Section 66.0119, Wisconsin Statutes. In cases of emergency, a special
inspection warrant shall not be required.
d. Access by owner or operator. The provisions of this section shall not restrict the
owner, owner’s agent, or other responsible person lawful access to structures or
premises for the purpose of inspecting, maintaining, repairing, or altering the
structure or premises as necessary to comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
e. Confidentiality of complaints. In the event that the City receives a complaint
regarding the maintenance of a structure or premises, the City may request contact
information of the complainant. However, the City shall endeavor to keep the
identity of all complainants confidential unless a complainant desires his or her
name to be revealed. The City shall reveal a complainant’s identity if so ordered
by a court or required by law.
f. Inspections resulting from anonymous complaints. Anonymous complaints
shall not cause the City to inspect the interior of a structure unless there is reason
to believe there is immediate and grave danger to the occupants of the structure or
to the occupants of structures on adjacent properties.
10. Penalties for violation of this ordinance and failure to maintain property.
a. Penalties. If any responsible person, as defined herein, fails to comply with any
provision of this ordinance a citation will be issued to the responsible person for
the violation. The violation shall be referred to the City Attorney who shall
expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
forfeit to the City a penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense, together with the taxable costs of
such action plus reasonable attorney’s fees. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this Ordinance is a public
nuisance and the creation may be enjoined, and the maintenance may be abated by
action at suit of the City, the State of Wisconsin, or any citizen thereof. Any
subsequent and similar violations of this Ordinance within a twenty-six (26)
month period shall be considered a continued offense and as such may cause the
Page 750-7
usual penalty to double for each subsequent and continued offense up to the
maximum allowed by this section.
b. Responsible person’s liability to City for costs of correction of violation.
1) Notification of failure to maintain property. An authorized agent of the City
shall serve written correction orders upon the owner, the owner’s agent, or other
responsible person, by certified mail or by delivering the order to him or her
personally. In the event that the owner, his or her agent, or other responsible
person cannot be found, an authorized agent of the City shall do one or more of
the following:
a) Deliver and describe the written correction order to a person of suitable
age and discretion at the owner’s or owner’s agent’s regular place of
abode; and/or
b) Post the written correction in a conspicuous place on the structure or
property affected by the order.
2) Collection of costs incurred by the City. If any owner, owner’s agent, or
other responsible person fails to comply with this Ordinance; and after written
notice given by an authorized agent of the City as described in the foregoing
subsection, has not complied with the correction orders within the time specified
in the written notice, the City may cause such maintenance to be performed. The
Finance Director or other authorized agent shall certify to the County Treasurer
of Ashland County, a statement of the cost incurred by the City to correct the
deficiencies. Costs will include all expenses incurred associated with bringing
the property into compliance with this Ordinance, including but not limited to
administrative and clerical costs, notification and publication fees, equipment
charges, tipping fees, contractor fees, and other related expenses. The cost
thereof shall be a lien upon such real estate and shall be a personal liability of the
owner of said real estate, collectable as any other money judgment. Such
amount, together with interest, shall be entered as a special assessment against
such lot or parcel of land and may be collected in the same manner as real estate
taxes.
c. Enforcement of other ordinances and codes. The provisions in this Ordinance
are intended to be coordinated with the enforcement of other City ordinances and
codes including the adopted building codes.
11. Procedures for razing and vacating structures.
a. Razing structures. Pursuant to Section 66.0413, Wisconsin Statutes, the
Common Council, Building Inspector, or other authorized agent of the City may
order the owner of a structure to raze the structure if one or more of the following
conditions exist:
1) A structure is dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human
habitation, and unreasonable to repair.
2) There has been a cessation of normal construction of a structure for a period of
more than two (2) years.
b. Reasonableness of repair. Except as provided in Section 66.0413 (3), Wisconsin
Statutes, and in the City’s Historic Preservation Ordinance (No. 826), for the
razing of historic buildings, if the Common Council or Building Inspector or other
Page 750-8
authorized agent determines that the cost of repairs of a structure ordered by the
City would exceed fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the structure
divided by the ratio of the assessed value to the recommended value as last
published by the City Assessor’s Office, then the repairs are presumed
unreasonable for the purposes of this Ordinance and the property will be ordered
to be razed.
c. Structures unfit for occupancy. If the Building Inspector or other authorized
agent of the City determines that a structure is dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or
otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy, or use, but is not in danger of
structural collapse, then the Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the
City shall post a placard on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this
Ordinance. The Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the City shall
prohibit use of the structure for human habitation, occupancy, or use until all
necessary repairs have been made to the satisfaction of the City.
d. Unlawful structures. If any structure, or any part thereof, is occupied by more
occupants than permitted under this Ordinance or is erected, altered, or occupied
contrary to this Ordinance, such structure shall be declared an unlawful structure
and the Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the City shall post a
placard on the premises pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. No person
shall again occupy said structure until it or its occupation, as the case may be,
conforms to this Ordinance.
e. Posting of placard. The Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the City
shall post a placard on any structure declared as unlawful or unfit for human
occupancy. The placard shall include the following text:
1) “City of Ashland, Wisconsin”
2) Name of the authorized department having jurisdiction.
3) The section of this Ordinance and the State Statute under which the placard is
posted.
4) An order that the structure be vacated and remain vacant until the order is
withdrawn. The order shall include the statement: “This Building May Not Be
Used for Human Habitation, Occupancy, or Use.”
5) The date the placard is posted.
6) A statement of the penalty for defacing or removing the placard.
f. Removal of placard. A placard posted in accordance with this Ordinance shall
be removed by the Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the City only
after the defects upon which the placard action were based are eliminated. No
other person shall deface or remove a placard from any structure that the City has
condemned or declared unlawful or unfit for human habitation, occupancy, or use.
Unauthorized removal of said placard shall be considered a violation of this
Ordinance and prosecuted pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
g. Content of raze order. Whenever the Building Inspector or other authorized
agent of the City placards a structure as unlawful or unfit for human habitation, he
or she shall notify the owner or owner’s agent of said structure. The notice shall
be in writing and shall include the following:
1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
Page 750-9
2) A description of the conditions to be corrected and the basis for the raze order.
3) The time by which the conditions must be corrected.
4) The time by which the occupants must vacate the structure.
h. Service of raze order. A raze order pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be served on the owner of record of the structure that is subject to the order,
or on the owner’s agent if the agent is in charge of the structure, in the same
manner as a summons is served in circuit court. A raze order pursuant to the
provision of this Ordinance shall be served on the holder of an encumbrance of
record by first class mail at the holder’s last known address and by publication as
a class 1 notice under Chapter 985, Wisconsin Statutes. If the owner and the
owner’s agent cannot be found or if the owner is deceased and an estate has not
been opened, the order may be served by posting it on the main entrance of the
structure and by publishing it as a class 1 notice under Chapter 985, Wisconsin
Statutes before the time limited in the order begins to run. The time limited in the
order begins to run from the date of service on the owner or owner’s agent or, if
the owner and agent cannot be found, from the date that the order was posted on
the structure.
i. Effect of recording raze order. If a raze order issued under the provisions of this
Ordinance is recorded with the Ashland County Register of Deeds, the order is
considered to have been served, as of the date the raze order is recorded, on any
person claiming an interest in the structure or the real estate as a result of a
conveyance from the owner of record unless the conveyance was recorded before
the recording of the raze order.
j. Failure to comply with the raze order. If the owner of a structure fails to
comply with a raze order issued under the provisions of this Ordinance within the
time prescribed, the Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the City may
proceed to secure the structure, or to raze the structure through any available
public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons. The cost of
securing or razing the structure may be charged in full or in part against the real
estate upon which the building is located, and if that cost is so charged it is a lien
upon the real estate and may be assessed and collected as a special tax. Any
portion of the cost charged against the real estate that is not reimbursed under
Section 632.103 (2), Wisconsin Statutes, from funds withheld from an insurance
settlement may be assessed and collected as a special tax.
k. Illegal occupation or use of structure. Any person who rents, leases, or
occupies a structure that has been condemned for human habitation, occupancy, or
use under this Ordinance shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5) nor more
than fifty dollars ($50) per day of violation.
12. Procedures for repairing or removing structures damaged by fire or structures
being razed or removed with an approved demolition permit. Whenever any
structure is damaged by a fire or is being razed or removed for any reason, the owner
or owner’s agent shall obtain a demolition permit before removing any part of the
structure. Utilities shall be capped or disconnected as necessary or as directed by the
City. If the structure is partially burned, the owner or owner’s agent shall, within
thirty (30) days of the completion of the investigation by the Fire Department,
remove from the premises all refuse, debris, and charred and partially burned lumber
and material. If the structure is burned to the extent that it is incapable of being
Page 750-10
repaired, the owner or owner’s agent shall, within sixty (60) days of the completion
of the investigation by the Fire Department, remove from the premises all the
remaining portion of the structure and fill the site with clean material to prevent the
possibility of standing or stagnant water. Any structure being demolished, razed or
removed with an approved demolition permit shall be completely removed from the
site and properly disposed of, including footings, foundations and floors. Utilities
shall be capped as directed by the city. The site shall be filled with clean, suitable
soil to prevent standing or stagnant water. If the structure is to be repaired, work
shall begin within sixty (60) days and be completed within one hundred twenty (120)
days of the completion of the investigation by the Fire Department. Exceptions to
these timelines may be granted by the Building Inspector.
13. Procedure for appealing decisions made by an authorized agent of the City. In
the event that an owner, an owner’s agent, occupant, or other responsible person
disagrees with a decision made by an authorized agent of the City in regard to the
enforcement of this Ordinance, the responsible person may request in a letter to the
City Administrator that the Common Council or other appropriate decision making
body review and address the situation in question.
B. Clean, Safe, Sanitary, and Attractive Maintenance of Exterior Property
1. Clean, safe, sanitary, and attractive. All exterior property areas shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of
rubbish, brush, clothing, garbage, recyclables or other refuse.
2. Grading and drainage.
a. All premises shall be properly graded and maintained to prevent soil erosion and
to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water, except that approved retention and
detention basins and rain gardens shall be permitted to hold water in accordance
with their approved design and capacity. No wetland shall be filled or altered,
except as permitted pursuant to the provisions of City Ordinances and State
Statutes.
b. Existing drainage shall not be altered in a manner that causes, changes or creates
drainage problems on adjoining properties.
c. No project that adds, removes, disturbs or redistributes more than 50 cubic yards
of earth, 10,000 square feet of earth in the Future Development zoning district, or
3,500 square feet of earth in any other zoning district shall be permitted without an
approved grading or fill permit pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance,
except that an approved grading plan in conjunction with an approved building
permit or development permit or normal agricultural activities shall not require a
grading or fill permit.
3. Vegetation and landscaping. Vegetation and landscaping shall present an attractive
appearance in accordance with generally accepted landscaping practices and as
follows:
a. Exposed soil, except exposed soil that is associated with a garden or cultivated
farmland, shall be vegetated, landscaped, or paved consistent with this Ordinance
to prevent soil erosion.
b. Grass lawns consisting primarily of Kentucky bluegrass, perennial rye grass,
fescues, and other grasses generally associated with mowed and maintained grass
lawns shall be maintained to a height not to exceed eight (8) inches. Grass lawns
See Figure 750-
A: Maintenance
of vegetation, and
Figure 750-B:
Natural
landscape buffer,
at the end of this
section for an
illustration of the
key vegetation
and landscaping
provisions of this
section.
Page 750-11
exceeding eight (8) inches are a noxious weed as defined in Section 750, B, 4, c,
5. Native grasses and forbs that are part of a managed natural landscape are
exempt from the height requirement of this provision.
c. Natural landscapes shall be permitted in all zoning districts. However,
unmanaged vegetation that constitutes a nuisance or hazard shall be prohibited.
The Building Inspector/ Zoning Administrator or other authorized agent shall
determine whether an existing landscape is a natural landscape or unmanaged
vegetation that constitutes a nuisance or hazard. Natural landscapes include
existing wooded areas, wetlands, prairies, and similar areas that are generally
characterized by a diversity of species native to the area. Natural landscapes also
include restored and managed plant communities and wildlife habitats that are
comprised primarily of native ferns, grasses, forbs, aquatic plants, trees and
shrubs. Where a natural landscape abuts a property or right-of-way that does not
have a natural landscape, the property owner with the natural landscape shall
provide an adequate grass lawn buffer or other acceptable buffer between the
natural landscape and the adjacent property or right-of-way so at to prevent the
natural landscape from being a nuisance or hazard. An authorized agent of the
City may require up to a ten (10) foot wide buffer if necessary. If requested by the
property owner of the natural yard, a waiver may be obtained to allow less than
the ten (10) foot buffer between properties. Waiver(s) shall be signed and dated by
the adjoining property owner(s). Adjoining property owner(s) may request the
Planning and Development Department to revoke the waiver at any time.
Wherein the City is an adjoining property owner, the Public Works Director or
other authorized agent shall act as a signatory to the waiver, so long as the vision
triangle, public safety, and visibility of public infrastructure are not impacted.
d. Vegetation that may impede the proper functioning of a drainage swale shall be
removed unless specifically approved in writing by an authorized agent of the
City.
e. Vegetation (including gardens) shall be properly and routinely maintained or
removed so that it does not present a hazard to structures, persons, or vehicles,
impact vision triangles, and visibility/utility of public infrastructure.
f. Diseased, dying or dead trees shall be managed according to Ordinance 454.
g. The owner, owner’s agent, or other responsible person shall maintain the
vegetation and landscaping within the public right-of-way adjacent to the parcel
line. No tree or shrub shall be planted or removed within the public right-of-way
or on public property without the approval of an authorized agent of the City, as
per Ordinance 454.
h. Fertilizers, grass clippings, leaves, twigs, and similar yard wastes or products shall
not be directed onto public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and onto other areas where
they may enter the storm water system or public waters untreated.
4. Noxious Weeds, Nuisance Weeds and Invasive Species.
a. The species listed herein are not native to Ashland and have a tendency to prohibit
the successful growth of native plant communities. These plants are not naturally
occurring in Ashland and become capable of spreading and developing a
significant population that destroys ecologic relationships, habitats, and create an
overall loss in plant diversity.
If viewing this
Ordinance
electronically,
clicking on the
common names
of the listed
plants will direct
you to one of
several websites,
which have
photographs and
other information
about the
species.
Page 750-12
b. As listed herein, some of these species are prohibited while others are encouraged
to be eradicated. In situations where the Building Inspector/ Zoning
Administrator or other authorized agent determines that a plant is causing or has
the potential to cause negative impacts on neighboring properties, said plant(s)
shall be properly removed and disposed.
c. Noxious Weeds. Pursuant to Section 66.0407, Wisconsin Statutes, a person
owning, occupying, or controlling land shall destroy all noxious weeds on said
land. If an owner or occupant neglects to destroy any weeds as required, the
Weed Commissioner of the City as appointed per Section 66.0517 Wisconsin
Statutes, shall destroy such weeds or cause them to be destroyed per the
provisions of Sections 66.0407 and 66.0517, Wisconsin Statutes. Noxious weeds
include the following:
1) Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense) and all other thistle varieties;
2) Field bindweed also known as creeping Jenny (Convolvulus arvensis);
3) Leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula);
4) Any additional noxious weeds that may be enumerated in Section
66.0407, Wisconsin Statutes; and
5) Grass lawns that exceed eight (8) inches in height.
d. Nuisance Weeds. Pursuant to Section 23.235, Wisconsin Statutes, it is prohibited
to sell, distribute, plant, or cultivate Nuisance Weeds. Nuisance weeds include the
following:
1) Any nuisance weeds that may be enumerated in Section 23.235, Wisconsin
Statutes; and
2) All other weeds, which, in the judgment of an authorized agent of the City, are
creating a nuisance.
e. Prohibited Invasive Species. The species of terrestrial plants enumerated in
NR40.04(2)(b), Wisconsin Administrative Code, are prohibited. They shall be
eradicated from properties and may not be transported, possessed, transferred
(including sale), or introduced.
f. Restricted Invasive Species. The species of terrestrial plants enumerated in
NR40.05(2)(b), Wisconsin Administrative Code, are restricted. They may not be
transported, transferred (including sale), or introduced. If they are already on your
property, you are encouraged, but not required to remove them.
5. Composting. Composting shall be allowed in all zoning districts subject to the
following conditions. Future Development zoned parcels with an area of at least five
(5) acres shall be exempt from the following conditions:
a. Composting shall be conducted within an enclosed container (or containers) not to
exceed a sum total of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet per parcel. A compost
container shall be of durable material such as wood, block, plastic, or sturdy metal
fencing and shall have been constructed exclusively for composting.
b. Compost containers shall not present an aesthetic, health, or odoriferous nuisance
to neighboring properties.
Page 750-13
c. Compost containers are prohibited in any front yard. Compost containers shall not
be located in any drainage swale.
d. Only kitchen wastes that break down in compost containers and yard waste (free
of logs, large branches, and diseased plants) may be placed in compost containers.
e. Meat, bones, fat, oil, dairy products and other kitchen wastes that do not break
down in compost containers, as well as plastic synthetic fibers, and human or pet
waste shall not be placed in compost containers.
f. Compost shall be maintained within the container to keep the material aerated,
minimize odor, reduce potential rodent harborage, and promote effective
decomposition of the material.
6. Harborage of pests. All premises shall be kept free from non-domesticated rodents,
vermin, insect infestation, rock doves (feral pigeons), starlings, skunks and other
pests as determined by the Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the City.
Where such pests are found, they shall be promptly exterminated or removed in a
lawful manner that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to control harborage of pests and to prevent reinfestation.
Bats shall be removed from a structure as determined by the Building Inspector or
Zoning Administrator when they cause a health or structural issue to a residence.
However, eradication methods of bats shall be consistent with WDNR rules.
7. Animals, animal enclosures, and feces.
a. All animal pens, runs, exercise areas, fenced areas, structures, and enclosures shall
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and shall be kept clean, sanitary, and
free from odor, feces, insects, and other unsightly or objectionable matters, which
constitute a public nuisance or are otherwise detrimental to public health, safety,
or welfare.
b. Unless fully contained within an approved fence, no animal shall be regularly
chained or kept in a front yard or corner side yard in a manner that causes the
destruction of the surrounding vegetation or allows the animal to approach to
within ten (10) feet of the public right-of-way.
c. Domestic animal feces shall be removed and properly disposed of within twentyfour
(24) hours.
8. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages,
carports, sheds, storage buildings, and other accessory structures, shall be maintained
in good repair and shall not create a hazard or aesthetic nuisance. Accessory
structures shall be protected from the elements by periodic painting, staining, or other
waterproofing or surface protection.
9. Fences. All fences shall be maintained in good repair and be structurally sound and
plumb. Fences shall be free of rust, corrosion, deterioration, decay, missing parts,
and peeling, flaking, and chipped paint. Wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant
wood, must be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective
covering or treatment.
10. Storage of detached truck toppers. No person may leave or store a detached truck
topper in any front yard or corner side yard. All detached toppers shall be stored
inside an enclosed structure or they shall be stored in a rear or side yard in a manner
that does not create a hazard or an aesthetic nuisance. No detached truck toppers
shall be used as a compost container, accessory storage structure, animal enclosure,
Page 750-14
or any other use that is contrary to the designed and originally intended use
customarily associated with a truck topper.
11. Miscellaneous storage. All furniture, furnishings, appliances, household goods
(except those items designed and intended for outdoor use), clothing, tires, vehicle
parts, tools, equipment, construction materials (except items being used for a current
construction project on said property), and similar items shall be stored within a
completely enclosed structure or properly and promptly disposed of. Furniture may
be placed for use on a covered porch, so long as said furniture is protected from the
elements and kept in good repair.
12. Exterior clothes drying. Exterior clothes drying shall be performed in an organized
manner on structures designed for said function.
13. Graffiti. The existence of graffiti on public or private property is in violation of this
Ordinance and is expressly declared to be a public nuisance. Therefore, it is the
responsibility of the owner, owner’s agent, occupant, or other responsible person of
the property to which the graffiti has been applied, to at all times, keep the property
clear of graffiti, pursuant to the removal provisions of this Ordinance.
a. Removal of graffiti by the perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public
or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty-four
(24) hours. Such removal shall be done in a manner acceptable to the Building
Inspector, Police Chief, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director or other
authorized agent of the City. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for
the removal or the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove
graffiti or pay for the removal of graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of
this Ordinance. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents
or legal guardians shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment
for the removal.
b. Property owner responsibility. If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator
according to this Ordinance, the owner, owner’s agent, or other responsible person
shall remove the graffiti within ten (10) days.
14. Firewood storage. Firewood storage associated with permitted outdoor sales shall
be consistent with the outdoor sales provisions of the appropriate zoning district. All
other stored firewood shall be used on premises and shall be stored pursuant to the
following conditions:
a. All firewood (in unprocessed, uncut, split, or quartered segments) shall be stored
in straight, orderly, and safe stacks not to exceed eight (8) feet in overall height.
b. All firewood that is stored outside shall be used within a reasonable time.
Decaying or rotting firewood shall be properly disposed of.
c. Any accessory or covered structure used to shield or protect any firewood stack
shall be consistent with the accessory structure provisions of this and other City
Ordinances. Any tarp or similar material used to cover a firewood pile shall be
made of durable and wind/water resistant materials, shall be properly tied or
anchored down, and shall be repaired or replaced when necessary.
d. Within twelve (12) months of delivery to the premises, unprocessed logs
(typically eight (8) feet in length) shall be cut, split, and properly stacked for use
as firewood. Sawdust, tree bark, and other waste wood products shall be properly
disposed of. Parcels five (5) acres or more in size may be exempt from this
Page 750-15
requirement if reasonably shielded from view as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, Building Inspector or other authorized agent.
15. Outdoor wood-fired furnace. Outdoor wood-fired furnaces may be installed and
used in any zoning district. All outdoor wood-fired furnaces shall comply with the
following provisions:
a. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall burn only clean firewood. All other
materials including, but not limited to the following, shall not be burned in an
outdoor wood-fired furnace:
1) Rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, food wastes, food wraps,
packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite
shingles, construction or demolition debris, or other household or business
wastes.
2) Waste oil or other oily wastes.
3) Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
4) Treated or painted wood, including, but not limited to, plywood, composite
wood products or other wood products that have been painted, varnished, or
treated with preservatives.
5) Any plastic material, including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, synthetic fabrics, plastic films, or plastic
containers.
6) Rubber, including rubber tires or synthetic rubber-like products.
7) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper, and other
materials.
b. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall meet the setback requirements for an
accessory structure in the applicable zoning district.
c. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall have a chimney that extends at least fifteen
(15) feet above the ground surface. The chimney shall be constructed of block or
of a galvanized-type metal that will not rust.
d. An outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be separated from adjoining properties by a
fence that is a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
e. An outdoor wood-fired furnace installed prior to July 21, 1993 or an outdoor
wood-fired furnace on property zoned for agriculture use that has an area of five
(5) acres or more, shall be exempt from the chimney and fencing provisions of this
section.
f. If the use of an outdoor wood-fired furnace creates a human health hazard or a
public nuisance as determined by the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, or
other authorized agent of the City, continued use of said outdoor wood-fired
furnace shall be prohibited until all necessary corrections have been made to the
satisfaction of the City.
g. Refer to Ordinance 978 for additional restrictions.
16. Fuel Tanks. Fuel tanks shall not be stored in any front or corner side yard.
Page 750-16
17. Dumping and littering. Dumping of any garbage, rubbish, furniture or furnishings,
brush, junk, stone, construction materials, appliances, grease, solvents, petroleum
products, vehicle and vehicle parts, in any place and in any manner is prohibited
unless such dumping is within an approved landfill or recycling center.
18. Rubbish in Public Rights-of-Way. To protect the City’s storm water system,
pedestrian safety and vehicular traffic in public rights-of-way, dirt, mud, rocks and/or
rubbish of any kind may not be dropped, deposited, or directed towards the publc
rights-of-way. Dirt, mud, rocks, and/or other rubbish unintentionally directed
towards the public rights-of-way shall be removed and properly disposed of.
19. Driveways, sidewalks, and steps.
a. All driveways and parking areas shall be composed of durable, hard-surfaced
areas adequate for parking a motor vehicle with room for opening doors on both
sides, together with a clear, properly related access to a public street or alley.
b. All driveways and off-street parking areas shall comply with the design standards
of this and other City Ordinances, shall be maintained in good repair, and shall not
pose a hazard to public health and safety.
c. All driveways and parking areas shall be graded and maintained to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water and shall be kept free of weeds or other noxious
plant materials. Gravel or limestone bases shall be contained within the
designated driveway and parking area.
d. All sidewalks and steps shall be maintained in good repair and shall not pose a
hazard to public health and safety. Sidewalks within the public right-of-way shall
be maintained pursuant to Ordinance 530: Sidewalk Construction and
Maintenance.
20. Snow removal and storage. Snow shall not be thrown, plowed, or moved onto
adjacent properties without the written consent of the adjacent property owner. Snow
shall not be piled or stored in a manner that creates runoff or drainage problems for
adjacent properties, nor shall it be stored in a manner that creates safety hazards for
motorists or pedestrians. In no case shall snow be pushed onto public rights-of-way.
21. Vehicles.
a. Parking and storage of vehicles in all zoning districts.
1) Parking and storage of registered, licensed, and operable vehicles. In all
districts, parking or storage of registered, licensed and operable vehicles,
including automobiles, vehicles, and trailers used for recreational purposes
over twenty (20) feet in length (not including trailer tongue) and commercial
vehicles under twenty (20) feet in length, shall be consistent with the
following:
a) All vehicles shall be parked or stored inside an attached or detached garage
or accessory structure, or on a driveway or parking area pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance.
b) No person shall park or store, or permit any other person to park or store, a
vehicle on lawn, except that parking on frozen lawns shall be permitted.
2) Parking of vehicles and trailers under twenty (20) feet in length.
Vehicles, and trailers under twenty (20) feet in length (not including trailer
tongue) not required by the State of Wisconsin to be licensed or registered,
Refer to Figure
750-C: Vehicle
parking and
storage, for an
illustration on the
key vehicle
provisions of this
section.
Page 750-17
including cargo trailers, travel trailers, boats and other such items, as well as
registered and licensed vehicles and trailers used for recreational purposes,
including snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles, shall not be parked on front or
corner side yards in any zoning district, unless parked on a driveway or
parking area pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
3) Parking or storage of unregistered, unlicensed, or inoperable vehicles.
a) Private premises. Any unregistered, unlicensed, or inoperable vehicle
(including an automobile, motorized boat, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle,
motor home, or similar vehicle) shall not be stored for more than fortyeight
(48) hours, unless the vehicle is stored in an enclosed structure. This
section does not apply to premises for which this Ordinance permits the
storage of unregistered, unlicensed, or inoperable vehicles outside of an
enclosed structure, nor does it apply to legally licensed or permitted vehicle
sales and vehicle repair facilities.
b) Public property. Except as permitted on State of Wisconsin property, no
person shall park any unregistered, unlicensed, inoperable vehicle upon
any public street, alley, highway, or other public property.
4) Abandoned vehicles.
a) Public premises. The City of Ashland Police Department shall be
responsible for removal and disposition of vehicles abandoned on public
premises. Vehicles abandoned on public property shall be disposed of per
Section 342.40, Wisconsin Statutes. A vehicle is abandoned on public
property if the vehicle is parked and left unattended in the same place for
forty-eight (48) consecutive hours and the vehicle is left without the
permission of a public official in charge of the premises.
b) Private premises. Property owners shall be responsible for the removal
and disposition of vehicles abandoned on private premises. The Police
Department’s involvement is limited to issuing appropriate parking tickets.
A vehicle is abandoned on private premises if the vehicle is parked and left
unattended for forty-eight (48) consecutive hours and the vehicle is parked
without the permission of the owner of the premises, and the vehicle is in
public view.
c) Penalty for violation. Any person who abandons a vehicle on public or
private premises may be punished by imposition of a forfeiture as provided
in Section 750.A.10.b, penalty for failure to maintain property, of this
Ordinance.
5) Responsibility for parking violations on premises.
The registered owner of a vehicle shall be responsible for any violation of the
parking provisions of this Ordinance. If a vehicle has been abandoned or the
owner of the vehicle is unknown, then the owner of the property on which the
vehicle is located shall be responsible for any violation of the parking
provisions of this Ordinance.
6) Storage of machinery, implements, and equipment.
Page 750-18
No person shall park or store, or permit any other person to park or store, any
machinery, implements, or equipment designed for use in agriculture,
construction, or other commercial enterprise, unless the machinery, implements
or equipment is stored in an enclosed structure. This section does not apply to
premises for which this Ordinance specifically permits outdoor storage,
display, or sale of machinery, implements or equipment. Nor does this section
apply to Future Development zoned parcels that have an area of five (5) or
more acres or premises in industrial zoning districts.
7) Vehicles or trailers used for storage of goods.
No vehicle or trailer shall be used for the storage of goods, unless the vehicle is
licensed, operable, and is being used on regular basis for the transporting of
goods.
b. Parking and storage of vehicles in residential zones and/or on a parcel where a
residential dwelling is a primary use. (The following requirements are in addition
to those 21a.)
1) Parking and storage of commercial motor vehicles/trailers over twenty
(20) feet in length.
a) No person shall park or store, or permit any other person to park or store
any oversized commercial motor vehicle (designed for use in agriculture,
construction or other commercial enterprises) in any area zoned for
residential purposes without the approval and issuance of a Conditional
Use Permit (CUP) pursuant to this ordinance.
b) Exceptions to items 750 B (21)(b)(i) are the following:
i. Commercial trailers/vehicles that are parked for no longer than six (6)
hours:
? For the purpose of loading and unloading cargo on or in said
commercial trailer/vehicle;
? Delivering materials to or from the subject parcel;
? Being used to perform a service on the subject parcel.
ii. Commercial trailers/vehicles that are parked for no longer than fortyeight
(48) hours for the purpose of loading and unloading items related
to moving an occupant to or from a subject parcel.
iii. An emergency as authorized by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent, or the Police Department, if such
vehicle/trailer is unable to travel or travel safely because of unforeseen
circumstances beyond the driver’s control.
c) If issued a Conditional Use Permit to allow parking of an oversized
commercial vehicle/trailer, all owners and occupants must comply with the
following standards. Failure to comply with these standards will subject the
CUP to immediate revocation.
i. The vehicle shall be parked or stored on a hard surface driveway off
the City streets and right-of-way.
ii. While parked on the property, an oversized commercial vehicle cannot
be left idling or running for a total time of more than thirty (30)
minutes between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. No oversized
Page 750-19
commercial vehicle shall be left to idle or run for any length of time
between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
iii. No major onsite mechanical work may be performed on the vehicle.
iv. The vehicle shall be kept fully operational, licensed, and used on a
regular basis.
v. The vehicle shall be parked and stored in a neat and orderly fashion
and shall be kept clean.
vi. Oil and other vehicle fluids shall not be permitted to spill onto the
ground, which may create an aesthetic nuisance or migrate into the
City’s right-of-way or sewer system.
vii. In no case shall the sound pressure of the vehicle be allowed to exceed
80dB(A) as measured at that point on the property boundary or rightof-
way boundary closest to the vehicle and located between the
vehicle’s proposed regular parking location and the principal use or
structure of any adjacent parcel(s) selected by the Zoning
Administrator. For purposes of this clause: the “right-of-way
boundary” shall be the outermost edge of a platted City right-of-way
and no the street curb or edge of pavement, and an “adjacent parcel”
shall be any parcel located opposite the vehicle’s parcel regardless of
separation by a right-of-way. Sound shall otherwise be measured in
accordance with Chapter 202.
viii. Conditional Use Permits required under this Section shall be
authorized by the Plan Commission and City Council and administered
by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with all applicable
authorities, procedures and standards of Ordinance 781: Unified
Development Ordinance.
2) Major overhaul of vehicles.
No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle, or permit any other
person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle, unless the following
conditions are met:
a) The person performing the overhaul is the occupant of the premises;
b) The person performing the overhaul is the owner of the vehicle; and
c) The work is done inside an enclosed structure.
c. Parking and storage of vehicles in all zoning districts, excluding residential zones
and excluding parcels where a residential dwelling is a primary use. (The
following requirements are in addition to those in 21a.)
1) Parking or storage of commercial trailers over twenty (20) feet in length.
a) All vehicles shall be parked or stored inside an attached or detached garage
or accessory structure, or on a driveway or parking area pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance. Parcels greater than five (5) acres located in
the Future Development zoning district are exempt from this requirement.
b) No person shall park or store or permit any other person to park or store, a
vehicle on a lawn, except that parking on frozen lawns shall be permitted.
Page 750-20
Parcels greater than five (5) acres located in the Future Development
zoning district are exempt from this requirement.
2) Major overhaul of vehicles.
No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle, or permit any other
person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle, unless the following
conditions are met:
a) The person performing the overhaul is the occupant of the premises.
b) The person performing the overhaul is the owner of the vehicle.
c) The work is done inside an enclosed structure.
d) The major overhaul has been permitted as an approved use.
C. Exterior Structure
1. General maintenance of exterior structure. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof,
and other exterior surface of any principal or accessory structure in the City of
Ashland shall be maintained and repaired in a workmanlike manner and shall be
capable of excluding rodents.
2. Foundations. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all
support points and shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks.
3. Exterior walls and exterior surfaces.
a. Every exterior wall shall be maintained structurally sound, weatherproofed, and
free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions
that might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the
occupied spaces of the building. All repairs shall be completed in a workmanlike
manner and harmonious with the existing materials, architecture, and colors. All
exterior materials shall be commonly accepted materials for final exterior
treatment including wood, vinyl, or aluminum siding, stucco, and similar
materials. Building wrap, sheathing, and similar materials shall not constitute a
permitted final exterior treatment. All exterior materials shall be consistent with
the provisions of all applicable building codes.
b. All exterior surfaces that require a protective coating to prevent deterioration shall
be properly coated by paint, or other manufacturer approved protective coating,
applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. All front doors,
front porches, and front porch skirts and railings shall be surface-coated with paint
or other protective coating. Any exterior surface treated with paint or other
preservative shall be maintained to prevent chipping, cracking, or other
deterioration of the exterior surface or the surface treatment and to present an
attractive appearance. Paint and other protective coatings shall be applied in a
workmanlike manner.
4. Roofs and roof drainage.
a. All roofs and flashing shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects that
admit water. All roofs (including underlayment materials) shall be maintained,
repaired, or replaced in workmanlike manner. All repairs shall be harmonious
with the existing roofing material.
Page 750-21
b. All water shall be conveyed from the roof to prevent dampness in the walls,
floors, and ceilings of all stories, including attics and basements. Roof drains,
gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from
obstructions. Water conveyed from the roof shall not be allowed to fall or flow
upon any public sidewalk. Where such a condition already exists, provision shall
be made to carry the water under the sidewalk to the gutter or to the storm sewer.
c. Roof drainage shall not be permitted to enter the sanitary system pursuant to
Ordinance 711.
5. Exterior stairs, porches, front porch skirts, and railings.
a. Stairs and other exit facilities shall comply with the provisions of all applicable
building codes and shall be maintained in a workmanlike manner.
b. Every outside stair, porch, and every appurtenance attached thereto shall be safe to
use; capable of supporting the load to which it is subjected; and shall be kept
plumb, in sound condition and in good repair. Porch floor slopes shall not exceed
one-half (½) inch per foot.
c. Every flight of stairs that has more than three (3) risers shall have handrails
pursuant to all applicable building codes. Every handrail and balustrade shall be
firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good condition. Handrails shall be
provided on all open sides of stairways.
d. All openings between floors, open sides of landings, platforms, balconies, or
porches, which are more than twenty-four (24) inches above grade or a floor, shall
be provided with guardrails as required by all applicable building codes.
6. Windows, doors, and hatchways.
a. Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight
and shall be kept in sound condition and repair.
b. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with a glass windowpane or an
approved substitute that is without open cracks or holes.
c. Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonably tight within its
frame.
d. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily opened
and shall be held in position by window hardware.
e. Every exterior door, door hinge, and door latch shall be maintained in good repair
and capable of tightly securing the door.
f. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame.
g. Every window, door, and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such
relation to the adjacent wall construction to prevent rain and wind, as completely
as possible, from entering the dwelling or structure.
h. Every basement hatchway shall be constructed and maintained to prevent the
entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water into the dwelling or structure.
i. Every basement window that is capable of being opened shall be supplied with a
mesh screen, with not more than one-sixteenth (1/16th) inch mesh openings, or
with other material affording equivalent protection against the entry of rodents.
Page 750-22
7. Street numbers. Every structure to which a street number has been assigned shall
have the number displayed in a conspicuous place so that the number can be read
from the public right-of-way. All numbers shall be maintained in conformance with
the requirements in Ordinance 781: Unified Development Ordinance.
8. Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, towers, smoke stacks, antennas and similar
appurtenance shall be maintained structurally safe and shall not pose a hazard to
health and safety. All exposed metal or wood surfaces shall be surface coated to
prevent rust and deterioration.
9. Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, and blowers discharging gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, or other gaseous or particulate wastes shall be
constructed and located so as not to discharge directly upon abutting or adjacent
public or private property.
D. Interior Structure
1. Basements and crawl spaces. Basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained
reasonably free from dampness that may be conducive to decay or deterioration of
the structure and shall be structurally sound.
2. Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be
maintained structurally sound and showing no evidence of deterioration that would
render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads in accordance with the
provisions of all applicable building codes.
3. Interior stairs and railings. Stairs shall be provided in every structure pursuant to
all applicable building codes and according to the following standards:
a. All interior stairs of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair. Treads and risers that are broken, warped, loose, or excessively worn
shall be replaced. Every inside stair shall be constructed and maintained to be safe
and capable of supporting the load required by all applicable building codes.
b. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs that has more than three (3) risers shall
have handrails or railings pursuant to all applicable building codes. Every
handrail or railing shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition.
Properly balustraded railings, capable of bearing normally imposed loads pursuant
to all applicable building codes, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs,
balconies, landings, and stairwells.
4. Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained to be substantially impervious to water and to
permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
5. Sanitation. The interior of every dwelling and structure shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage, or
other refuse. Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be properly kept inside
temporary storage facilities approved for garbage disposal.
6. Insect, rodent, and vermin infestations.
a. All structures shall be kept free from insect, rodent, and vermin infestation.
Whenever insects, rodents, or vermin are found in a structure, they shall be
promptly exterminated in a lawful manner that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
Page 750-23
b. Every owner of a two-family or multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests whenever infestation
exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units or in the shared or public parts of
the structure.
c. The occupant of a dwelling unit in a two-family or multi-family dwelling shall be
responsible for extermination within the occupant’s dwelling unit, if the
occupant’s dwelling unit is the only dwelling unit in the building that is infested.
Notwithstanding the previous sentence, whenever rodent infestation is caused by
the owner’s failure to maintain any two-family or multi-family dwelling in a
rodent-proof condition, the owner shall be responsible for extermination of such
rodents.
7. Interior surfaces. All interior walls, ceilings, floors, windows, and doors shall be
structurally sound, in good repair, painted or decorated, and free from defects. All
interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean,
and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and
other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. Severe mold problems shall be
corrected to eliminate unsafe conditions.
8. Smoke and Carbon Monoxide detectors. Smoke and Carbon Monoxide detectors
shall be installed and maintained pursuant to all applicable Wisconsin statutes and
building codes. The Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the City may
inspect the common area of dwellings and, at the request of the owner or renter, may
inspect the interior of a dwelling unit to ensure compliance with this section.
E. Basic Facilities
1. Sanitary facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be supplied and
maintained in sanitary, safe, and working condition:
a. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room that affords privacy and is equipped with
a water closet and lavatory.
b. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room that affords privacy and is equipped with
a bathtub or shower.
c. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the required lavatory.
d. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, and water closets shall be properly
connected to a public water and sewer system, or to an approved private water and
sewer system, and shall be supplied with hot and cold running water pursuant to
all applicable building code.
e. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with water heating facilities that are
installed in a code compliant manner, properly maintained, and properly
connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with hot
water pursuant to this Ordinance. Water heating facilities shall be capable of
heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, laundry
facility, and other similar units, at a temperature of not less than one hundred
thirty (130) degrees Fahrenheit at any time needed.
2. Heating facility. Every dwelling shall have a heating facility. The heating facility
shall be installed in a code compliant manner and be properly maintained in good
working condition. The heating facility shall be capable of safely and adequately
Page 750-24
heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms in the structure to a
temperature of at least an average of 68 degrees Fahrenheit with an outside
temperature of 10 degrees below zero. The owner shall at all times maintain a
minimum average room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit in all rented habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms on the basis of 10 degrees below zero outside.
The temperature shall be measured at five (5) feet above the floor level and three (3)
or more feet from an exterior wall.
3. Operation of heating facilities and incinerators. Every heating or water heating
facility and incinerator shall be installed and shall operate in accordance with the
requirements of all applicable building codes and other ordinances of the City.
4. Rubbish and garbage storage.
a. In a building consisting of four (4) or fewer dwelling units, each owner or
occupant shall provide an adequate number of solid waste, rubbish and lidded
trash containers. Containers shall not be stored in the front yard or on the front
porch in public view, or along a corner side yard except during those hours when
the containers are lawfully placed at the curb for solid waste and/or recycling
pickup.
b. The owner of every building or premises consisting of five (5) or more dwelling
units shall supply the occupants of the building or premises with adequate lidded
garbage storage containers and facilities. Containers shall not be stored in the
front yard or on the front porch in public view. The garbage storage containers
and facilities shall be regularly emptied and constructed and located in accordance
with all applicable city codes and ordinances.
F. Installation and Maintenance of Equipment and Fixtures
1. Construction, installation and maintenance of equipment and fixtures. All
required equipment and fixtures in every structure shall be constructed, installed and
maintained to properly and safely perform their intended functions in accordance
with the provisions of the Building, Electrical and Plumbing Codes.
2. Maintained clean and sanitary. All equipment and fixtures shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed insects or rodents or
produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.
3. Plumbing fixtures. Water lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be
properly installed, connected, and maintained in working order and shall be kept free
from obstructions, leaks, and defects and be capable of performing the function for
which they are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance
with all applicable building or plumbing codes.
4. Plumbing system. Every plumbing stack, waste, and sewer line shall be installed
and maintained to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks,
and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards, refer to Ordinances
705, 711 and 712. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of all applicable building or plumbing codes.
5. Cooking and heating equipment. Each space heating, cooking, and water heating
device located in a building or structure shall be properly installed, connected, and
maintained and shall be capable of performing the function for which it was designed
in accordance with the provisions of all applicable building codes.
Page 750-25
6. Electrical outlets and fixtures. Every electrical outlet and fixture shall be installed,
maintained, and connected to the source of electric power in accordance with all
applicable building and electrical codes.
7. Electrical system. Every room of every dwelling unit and all public and common
areas shall be supplied with electric service, over current protection devices, electric
outlets, and electric fixtures which are properly installed in compliance with the
National Electrical Code. All electrical equipment shall be maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be energized by an approved source of electric power
and in compliance with the applicable ordinances and codes of the city and the state.
All branch circuits shall have sufficient capacity to safely serve the normally
anticipated loads resulting from everyday living. When the Building Inspector
determines the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the occupants of
the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets,
improper wiring, improper installation, deterioration or damage, or other reasons, he
or she shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
Page 750-26
G. Definitions
1. Construction of words and phrases.
a. Interchangeability. In this Ordinance words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
b. Words and phrases not defined. When words or phrases are not defined in this
Ordinance, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings, as
the context may imply.
2. Definitions of words and phrases.
Abandoned vehicle. Any vehicle that has been left unattended without the
permission of the property owner for more than forty-eight (48) hours. Refer to
Section 342.40, Wisconsin Statutes, for a more detailed definition.
Approved. To give formal or official sanction to by the Building Inspector, Zoning
Administrator, Plan Commission, City Council, or other responsible entity.
Basement. That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.
Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
Building. A structure erected on a permanent foundation and designed for human
habitation or occupancy.
Building code. The building code officially adopted by the City Council or such
other code as may be officially designated by the City Council for the regulation of
construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location,
occupancy, and maintenance of buildings and structures.
Building Inspector. The City of Ashland Building Inspector.
Commercial trailer. A vehicle for transporting commercial goods. Usually
associated with a semi truck.
Corner side yard. The yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and lying
between an open public right-of-way and the principle structure.
Detached truck topper. A removable top or cap intended to cover the cargo portion
of a truck or vehicle. When the truck topper is not attached to the truck, it is a
detached truck topper.
Driveway. A private road giving access from a public way to a premises.
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more individuals
living together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities.
Enforcement officer. The City Administrator and his/her authorized representatives
charged with the responsibility of enforcing this Ordinance.
Equipment. The implements used in an operation or activity
Page 750-27
Exterior property areas. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by:
? Eliminating their harborage places.
? Removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food.
? Poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.
Family. An individual or married couple and the children thereof with not more than
two (2) other persons related directly to the individual or married couple by blood or
marriage; or a group of not more than five (5) unrelated persons, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
Forb. A broad-leaved herb other than a grass.
Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
Graffiti. Graffiti shall mean any drawing, inscription, writing, figure or mark made
upon a wall or other exposed surface, including but not limited to any house, garage,
rock, bridge, fence, gate, tree, monument, motor vehicle, sidewalk, street, lamp post,
street sign, underpass or retaining wall, whether publicly or privately owned, with
paint, chalk, dye, ink, pencil, wax or other similar substance or by etching,
scratching, cutting, burning or carving without the express consent of the owner of
said wall or other exposed surface.
Gross floor area. The total area of all habitable space in a building or structure.
Grass lawn. A lawn consisting primarily of Kentucky bluegrass, perennial rye grass,
fescues, and/or other grasses generally associated with mowed and maintained grass
lawns.
Habitable room. A room or enclosed floor space arranged for living, eating or
sleeping purposes, not including bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries,
pantries, foyers, hallways, and other accessory floor spaces.
Habitable space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking.
Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar
areas are not considered habitable spaces.
Hard surface parking area. Hard surfaced parking areas shall be defined as having
asphalt, concrete, paving brick, block, compacted gravel or limestone, or pervious
pavers.
Hotel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public
and which may include additional facilities and services, such as restaurants, meeting
rooms, entertainment, personal services, and recreational facilities.
Implements. A device used in the performance of a task.
Page 750-28
Incinerator. A device for burning waste substances in which the combustion
factors: temperature, retention time, turbulence and combustion air, may be
controlled.
Infestation. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests within or
contiguous to a structure or premises.
Inoperable vehicle. A vehicle which is incapable of operation or use, or which has
no resale value except as a source of parts or scrap.
Machinery. Machines in general or as a functioning unit; a mechanically,
electrically, or electronically operated device for performing a task;
Major overhaul. The repair, alteration or restoration of a motor vehicle that
involves the removal of the paint or major parts of the disassembly of major parts of
a motor vehicle, including, without limitation because of enumeration, the following
major parts:
? Engine.
? Body.
? Interior seats.
? Interior equipment necessary for the operation of the vehicle.
? Drive train.
Motel. An establishment providing sleeping accommodations for transients.
Motor vehicle. A vehicle, including a combination of two (2) or more vehicles, or
an articulated vehicle, which is self-propelled, except a vehicle operated exclusively
on a rail. See Section 340.01, Wisconsin Statutes, for more detailed information.
Multi-family (or multiple-family) dwelling. A building containing more than two
(2) dwelling units.
Natural landscape. Any land managed to preserve or restore primarily native
Wisconsin grasses, forbs, wildflowers, shrubs, trees, and aquatic plants.
Occupant. Any person living or sleeping in a building or having possession of a
space within a building.
One-family (or single-family) dwelling. A building containing one dwelling unit
with not more than five (5) lodgers or boarders in addition to a family.
Openable area. That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises
which are let or offered for occupancy.
Oversized commercial motor vehicle. A motor vehicle greater than ten (10) feet
high or eight (8) feet wide or greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle
weight (GVW) when empty. Commercial vehicles are used for commercial use
rather than the private use.
Page 750-29
Owner. The owner or owners of the freehold estate of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, a receiver, a
personal representative, a trustee.
Parcel. Usually composed of one or more lots in platted areas of the City, or a plot
of land, usually a division of a larger unplatted area.
Park. To park means causing a vehicle to stand unattended for any amount of time
or to stand attended for five (5) minutes within thirty (30) feet of the same point, or to
permit a vehicle so to stand when it is within one’s power to prevent it from so
standing. In determining whether a vehicle is parked, it is immaterial whether or not
its motor is running. A vehicle is attended when its driver is inside it or within
twenty (20) feet of it.
Parking area. A durable, hard-surfaced area permitted for the parking of vehicles
with room for opening doors on both sides, together with a clear, properly related
access to a public street or alley, and maneuvering room which shall be located
totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
Person. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other group
acting as a unit.
Plumbing or plumbing fixtures. Water heating facilities, water pipes, gas pipes,
garbage and disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines or other similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents or other
similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or vent
lines.
Premises. A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon.
Responsible person. The owner, operator, manager, occupant, or tenant of any
structure or premises.
Residence building. A building in which sleeping accommodations or sleeping
accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided, except an institution.
Rooming house. A building arranged or used for lodging, with or without meals, for
compensation and not occupied as a one-family dwelling or a 2-family dwelling.
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking.
Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, including but not
limited to, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible
materials, paper, rags, clothing, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree
branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and
other similar materials.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, including, but not limited to,
buildings, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks,
towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks, stairways, tents and anything erected and
framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent
Page 750-30
foundation or on the ground, including a mobile home, manufactured home, modular
home or travel trailer.
Supplied. Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
Turf-grass. Grass commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play areas such as but
not limited to, blue grass, fescue, and rye grass blends.
Two-family dwelling. A building containing two dwelling units and designed to
house one family in each unit.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn upon.
Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
Workmanlike. Executed in a skilled manner; for example, plumb, level, square, in
line, undamaged, done without marring adjacent work and done by using materials
that match adjacent work.
Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building.
Page 750-31
The following figures are intended to help illustrate key provisions of this section. Refer to the applicable
provisions of this Ordinance for additional information and detailed language. In the event that a conflict exists
between the figures and the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of the Ordinance shall take
precedence.
Figure 750-A: Maintenance of vegetation
Refer to Section 750, B., 3., of this Ordinance for specific provisions.
Figure 750-B: Natural landscape buffer
Refer to Section 750, B., 3., of this Ordinance for specific provisions.
Page 750-32
Figure 750-C: Vehicle parking and storage
Refer to Section 750, B., 22 of this Ordinance for specific provisions.
Page 751-1
CHAPTER 751. ROOF DRAINS CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWERS.
751.01. Roof Drains. Roof drains on any building or structure in the City of Ashland which
permits clear water inflow into the sanitary sewer system are prohibited. Any roof drain on any
building or structure in the City of Ashland which permits clear water inflow into the sanitary
sewer system is hereby declared a public nuisance.
751.02. Public Nuisance. Any roof drain on any building or structure in the City of Ashland
which permits clear water inflow into the sanitary sewer system is hereby declared a public
nuisance.
751.03. Disconnection. Any roof drain on any building or structure in the City of Ashland which
permits clear water inflow into the sanitary sewer system shall be disconnected within 90 days of
the effective date of the publication of this ordinance.
751.04. Fines and Liability. The owner of any building or structure with any roof drain which
permits clear water inflow into the sanitary sewer system which is not disconnected in
accordance with this chapter shall be subject to liability for a court order requiring disconnection
and abatement of the nuisance and forfeitures of $100.00 per day until the disconnection is
completed. The violator shall also be responsible to the City of Ashland for all costs of
prosecution and enforcement including reasonable attorney’s fees.
Adopted: 751 (1137) 6/14/1988
Page 781-1
CHAPTER 781. CITY OF ASHLAND “UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
(U.D.O.)” AND ZONING DISTRICT MAP IN PAMPHLET FORM.
781.01 Adoption of Pamphlet. The City of Ashland “Unified Development Ordinance” and
Zoning District Map is hereby adopted in pamphlet form, as authorized by Wisconsin State
Statutes.
781.02 Pamphlet on File. The City of Ashland “Unified Development Ordinance” pamphlet and
Zoning District Map shall be permanently on file and open to public inspection in the office of
the Clerk after its adoption.
781.03. Repeal of Former Ordinance. Previous Ordinance 781(1386), and subsequent
amendments thereto, shall be repealed upon adoption of this ordinance.
ADOPTED: 781 (1764) 1/10/2012
AMENDMENTS: 781 (1775) 3/13/2012; 781 (1789) 6/26/2012; 781 (1790) 6/26/2012;
781 (1791) 7/31/2012; 781 (1793) 8/28/2012; 781 (1796) 10/30/2012;
781 (1800) 3/12/2013; 781 (1804) 4/16/2013; 781 (1812) 8/13/2013;
781 (1834) 10/28/2014; 781 (2015-1843) 5/26/2015;
781 (2015-1851) 9/08/2015; 781 (2016-1880) 7/26/2016;
781 (2017-1890) 3/14/2017; 781 (2017-1894) 6/13/2017;
781 (2017-1895) 7/25/2017; 781 (2017-1897) 8/29/2017;
781 (2018-1902) 3/27/2018; 781 (2019-1922) 12/03/2019
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 TOC-1
This table of contents lists the parts and sections of this Unified Development Ordinance. If you are viewing this document from
the City’s website (www.ci.ashland.wi.us), clicking on the Part you want to view will call up that part in your viewer. Once that
document is up, you will see a more detailed table of contents specific to that part. Clicking on sections and subsections in that
table of contents will bring you to those sections or subsections in the document that you wish to read.
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part 1 General Provisions
Section 1.1 Title, Authority, and Effective Date ......................................................................... 1-3
Section 1.2 Purpose and Intent .................................................................................................... 1-3
Section 1.3 Organization and Use of the Ordinances .................................................................. 1-4
Section 1.4 Integration of Principles of Sustainability ................................................................ 1-5
Section 1.5 Interpretation and Separability .................................................................................. 1-6
Section 1.6 Transitional Provisions ............................................................................................. 1-7
Section 1.7 Applicable Codes Pertaining to Development .......................................................... 1-8
Part 2 Review and Approval Authorities
Section 2.1 General Provisions .................................................................................................... 2-3
Section 2.2 Zoning Administrator ............................................................................................... 2-5
Section 2.3 Building Inspector..................................................................................................... 2-5
Section 2.4 Director of Public Works .......................................................................................... 2-6
Section 2.5 Plan Commission ...................................................................................................... 2-6
Section 2.6 Common Council ...................................................................................................... 2-7
Section 2.7 Zoning Board of Appeals .......................................................................................... 2-7
Part 3 Application, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1 General Provisions .................................................................................................... 3-6
Applications Requiring a Public Hearing
Section 3.2 Comprehensive Plan Amendment........................................................................... 3-17
Section 3.3 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) ..................................................................... 3-19
Table of Contents
TOC-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
Section 3.4 Unified Development Ordinance Text Amendment ............................................... 3-21
Section 3.5 Reserved ................................................................................................................. 3-23
Section 3.6 Map and/or Text Amendment to the Floodplain Overlay District .......................... 3-23
Section 3.7 Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay District .............................. 3-25
Section 3.8 Creation of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District .................................... 3-28
Section 3.9 Conditional Use Permit ........................................................................................... 3-34
Section 3.10 Variance .................................................................................................................. 3-36
Section 3.11 Appeal of an Administrative Decision .................................................................... 3-39
Section 3.12 Appeals, Variances, and Boundary Disputes relating to the
Floodplain Overlay ................................................................................................. 3-40
Section 3.13 Appeals, Variances, and Conditional Use Permits relating to the
Wetland Overlay ..................................................................................................... 3-43
Section 3.14 Discontinuance or Vacation of a Public Way ......................................................... 3-45
Section 3.15-
Section 3.19 Reserved
Applications Requiring an Informational Meeting
Section 3.20 Site Plan Approval .................................................................................................. 3-45
Section 3.21 Reserved ................................................................................................................. 3-50
Section 3.22 Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness ............................................. 3-50
Section 3.23 Preliminary Plat ...................................................................................................... 3-51
Section 3.24 Final Plat ................................................................................................................. 3-52
Section 3.25 Public Art Permit .................................................................................................... 3-54
Section 3.26-
Section 3.29 Reserved
Applications Requiring Administrative Approval
Section 3.30 Reserved
Section 3.31 Development Permit ............................................................................................... 3-55
Section 3.32 Building Permit ....................................................................................................... 3-57
Section 3.33 Demolition Permit................................................................................................... 3-58
Section 3.34 Permit to Move a Building or Structure .................................................................. 3-60
Section 3.35 Certificate of Occupancy ........................................................................................ 3-61
Section 3.36 Sign Permit ............................................................................................................. 3-63
Section 3.37 Bed and Breakfast Establishment Permit ................................................................ 3-64
Section 3.38 Floodplain Certificate of Compliance ..................................................................... 3-65
Section 3.39 Certified Survey Map without Public Dedication ................................................... 3-66
Section 3.40 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ........................................................................ 3-67
Section 3.41 Storm Water Management Plan .............................................................................. 3-68
Section 3.42 Right-of-Way Permit .............................................................................................. 3-69
Section 3.43 Fence Permit ........................................................................................................... 3-69
Section 3.44 Approval to Temporarily Place Items on Sidewalks .............................................. 3-70
Section 3.45 Sign Permit for a Sidewalk Sign ............................................................................. 3-70
Section 3.46 Keeping of Animals Permit .................................................................................... 3-72
Section 3.47-
Section 3.54 Reserved
Section 3.55 Other Required Permits and Approval .................................................................... 3-72
Part 4 Zoning Districts
Section 4.1 Zoning District Regulations ...................................................................................... 4-6
Table of Contents
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 TOC-3
Predominantly Residential Districts
Section 4.2 R-E Residential Estate District ................................................................................. 4-9
Section 4.3 R-1 Single-Family Residential District ................................................................... 4-13
Section 4.4 R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District .................................................... 4-18
Section 4.5 R-3 Medium Density Residential District............................................................... 4-22
Section 4.6 R-4 High Density Residential District .................................................................... 4-27
Section 4.7 MHC Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District .................. 4-31
Section 4.8 MRC Mixed Residential District ............................................................................ 4-35
Section 4.9 PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District ........................................................ 4-43
Section 4.10-
Section 4.14 Reserved
Predominantly Commercial Districts
Section 4.15 NC Neighborhood Convenience District ................................................................ 4-45
Section 4.16 RC Regional Commercial District .......................................................................... 4-50
Section 4.17 CC City Center District ........................................................................................... 4-56
Section 4.18-
Section 4.19 Reserved
Predominantly Industrial Districts
Section 4.20 MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District ........................................................... 4-62
Section 4.21 LI Light Industrial District ...................................................................................... 4-66
Section 4.22 HI Heavy Industrial District ................................................................................... 4-71
Section 4.23-
Section 4.24 Reserved
Waterfront Districts
Section 4.25 W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District .......................................... 4-76
Section 4.26 W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District ................................ 4-80
Section 4.27 W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District ..................................... 4-85
Section 4.28 W-C Waterfront Commercial District .................................................................... 4-90
Section 4.29 W-CC Waterfront City Center District ................................................................... 4-95
Section 4.30 W-I Waterfront Industrial District ........................................................................ 4-100
Section 4.31 W-PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District ....................................................... 4-104
Section 4.32-
Section 4.34 Reserved
Other Districts
Section 4.35 PI Public Institutional District .............................................................................. 4-107
Section 4.36 PP Public Parks District ........................................................................................ 4-111
Section 4.37 FD Future Development District .......................................................................... 4-113
Section 4.38 AIR Airport District .............................................................................................. 4-118
Section 4.29-
Section 4.44 Reserved
Overlay Zoning Districts
Section 4.45 AIR-O Airport Overlay District ............................................................................ 4-120
Section 4.46 W-O Waterfront Overlay District ......................................................................... 4-120
Section 4.47 GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District .................................................................... 4-124
Section 4.48 Reserved ............................................................................................................... 4-127
Section 4.49 BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay District .............................................................. 4-127
Section 4.50 F-O Floodplain Overlay ........................................................................................ 4-128
Table of Contents
TOC-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
Section 4.51 WET-O Wetland Overlay ..................................................................................... 4-138
Section 4.52-
Section 4.54 Reserved
Section 4.55 PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District ............................................... 4-143
Section 4.56 Conservation Subdivision Overlay District .......................................................... 4-144
Section 4.57 Traditional Neighborhood Design Overlay District ............................................. 4-148
Part 5 Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1 Residential Uses ........................................................................................................ 5-3
Section 5.2 Commercial Uses .................................................................................................... 5-11
Section 5.3 Industrial Uses ........................................................................................................ 5-16
Section 5.4 Utility and Communication Uses ............................................................................ 5-20
Section 5.5 Temporary or Seasonal Uses .................................................................................. 5-31
Section 5.6 Accessory Uses and Other Uses ............................................................................. 5-33
Part 6 General Development Standards
Section 6.1 General Standards ..................................................................................................... 6-3
Section 6.2 General Building and Site Design Guidelines .......................................................... 6-9
Section 6.3 Parking and Loading ............................................................................................... 6-12
Section 6.4 Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening ..................................................................... 6-20
Section 6.5 Fences ..................................................................................................................... 6-26
Section 6.6 Signs ....................................................................................................................... 6-29
Section 6.7 Exterior Lighting..................................................................................................... 6-54
Part 7 Performance Standards
Section 7.1 Performance Standards ............................................................................................. 7-2
Part 8 Environmental Protection
Section 8.1 General Protection of Natural Features..................................................................... 8-3
Section 8.2 Construction Site Erosion Control ............................................................................ 8-5
Section 8.3 Post-Construction Storm Water Management ........................................................ 8-12
Section 8.4 Invasive Species Management ................................................................................ 8-21
Part 9 Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1 General Provisions of Land Divisions ...................................................................... 9-3
Section 9.2 General Procedures and Required Information ......................................................... 9-8
Section 9.3 Infrastructure Design Standards ............................................................................. 9-12
Part 10 Nonconformities
Section 10.1 General Provisions .................................................................................................. 10-3
Section 10.2 Nonconforming Uses .............................................................................................. 10-3
Section 10.3 Nonconforming Parcels .......................................................................................... 10-4
Section 10.4 Nonconforming Structures ...................................................................................... 10-6
Section 10.5 Nonconforming Site Features ................................................................................. 10-6
Section 10.6 Nonconforming Signs ............................................................................................. 10-7
Table of Contents
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 TOC-5
Part 11 Violations and Remedies
Section 11.1 Violations ................................................................................................................ 11-2
Section 11.2 Remedies ................................................................................................................. 11-2
Part 12 Definitions
Section 12.1 General .................................................................................................................... 12-1
Section 12.2 Defined Terms ........................................................................................................ 12-1
Appendices
Appendix A Resolutions .............................................................................................................. A-1
Appendix B Maps ......................................................................................................................... B-1
Appendix C Tables ........................................................................................................................ C-1
Appendix D Illustrations & Diagrams .......................................................................................... D-1

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 1-1
Part 1: General Provisions references the primary sections of the Wisconsin Statutes that grant the City of Ashland the authority
to adopt the provisions of this Ordinance. Additional references may be provided in other parts of this Ordinance. Part 1 also
describes the overarching purpose and intent of this Ordinance including the intent to integrate principles of sustainability into the
use of land in the City of Ashland. General provisions relating to interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance and a
description of other applicable codes are also provided in this Part.
PART 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Part 1: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 1.1 Title, Authority, and Effective Date ....................................................................................... 3
A. Title ............................................................................................................................................ 3
B. Authority .................................................................................................................................... 3
C. Effective Date ............................................................................................................................ 3
Section 1.2 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................................................... 3
A. Purpose....................................................................................................................................... 3
B. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 3
Section 1.3 Organization and Use of this Ordinance ............................................................................... 4
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 4
B. General Organization ................................................................................................................. 4
Section 1.4 Integration of Principles of Sustainability ............................................................................. 5
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 5
B. Principles of Sustainability ........................................................................................................ 5
Section1.5 Interpretation and Separability .............................................................................................. 6
A. Interpretation .............................................................................................................................. 6
B. Separability ................................................................................................................................ 7
Section 1.6 Transitional Provisions ............................................................................................................ 7
A. Approvals Prior to the Effective Date of this Ordinance ........................................................... 7
B. Pending Applications Submitted Prior to the Effective Date of this Ordinance ........................ 8
Part 1: General Provisions
Section 1.1: Title, Authority, and Effective Date
1-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Section 1.7 Applicable Codes Pertaining to Development ....................................................................... 8
A. General Applicability ................................................................................................................. 8
B. Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling, Commercial, Plumbing and Electrical Codes ........................... 8
C. Historic Building Code .............................................................................................................. 8
Part 1: General Provisions
Section1.1: Title, Authority, and Effective Date
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 1-3
Section 1.1 Title, Authority, and Effective Date
A. Title
This Ordinance is hereby officially known and cited as the Unified Development Ordinance of
the City of Ashland, Wisconsin. References to “this Ordinance” or “this UDO” shall be
interpreted as references to this Unified Development Ordinance.
B. Authority
The provisions of this Ordinance are adopted under the authority granted by the following
sections of the Wisconsin Statutes and amendments thereto:
1. Section 62.23(7) relating to general land use zoning;
2. Section 62.231 relating to the zoning of wetlands;
3. Section 62.234 relating to construction site erosion control and storm water management
zoning;
4. Section 66.1027 relating to traditional neighborhood designs and conservation subdivisions;
5. Section 87.30 relating to floodplain zoning;
6. Section 114.135 and Section 114.136 relating to airport approach protection;
7. Section 236.45 relating to subdivisions of land;
8. Section 281.3 relating to water quality and quantity; and
9. Other Wisconsin Statutes that may be referenced in other parts of this Ordinance.
C. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Section 1.2 Purpose and Intent
A. Purpose
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the
purpose of the following:
1. Implementing the goals, objectives, policies, and plans of the City of Ashland’s
Comprehensive Plan;
2. Promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare;
3. Securing adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other dangers;
4. Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings;
5. Preserving and enhancing the aesthetic values, generally, throughout the City of Ashland;
and
6. Regulating and controlling the division of land to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare.
B. Intent
This Ordinance is intended to establish and accomplish certain standards and objectives by doing
the following:
Part 1: General Provisions
Section 1.2. Purpose and Intent
1-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Section 1.1 Section Heading
A. Subsection Heading
1. Paragraph heading.
a. Subparagraph heading.
(1) Clause.
1. Integrating principles of sustainability into the development and use of land in the City of
Ashland;
2. Dividing the City of Ashland into districts and regulating therein the location, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings, structures, and land for residence, business,
manufacturing, or other specified uses;
3. Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets by adequate requirements for offstreet
parking and loading facilities;
4. Preventing the overcrowding of land by regulating and limiting the height and bulk of
buildings hereafter erected;
5. Establishing, regulating, and limiting the building or setback lines on or along streets,
alleys, or parcel lines;
6. Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of parcel areas, and regulating and
determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding such buildings;
7. Permitting in each of the zoning districts only those uses, buildings, and structures that are
compatible with the character of each district;
8. Providing controls over additions to and alterations and remodeling of existing buildings
and structures;
9. Providing controls governing the continuation of those uses, buildings, and structures that
are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are located;
10. Providing controls governing the size and location of signs and other forms of outdoor
advertising;
11. Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies of the
administration and enforcement of this Ordinance; and
12. Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or of any
amendment thereto.
Section 1.3 Organization and Use of this Ordinance
A. Intent
This Section is intended to guide the reader in the use of this Ordinance. This Section is not
intended to be a substitute for the standards, criteria, and procedures specified in this Ordinance.
B. General Organization
This Ordinance includes twelve (12) parts as well as several appendices. Each part is further
subdivided into sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, and clauses. A consistent
numbering and formatting convention is used throughout this Ordinance to identify these
divisions and to help orient the reader to the organization of information. The following
illustrates the formatting and numbering convention:
Part 1: General Provisions
Section1.3: Organization and Use of this Ordinance
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 1-5
C. Commentary
Commentary is provided throughout this Ordinance in the form of “helpful notes” and
“sustainability tips”. The helpful notes are intended to help explain complex provisions or to
direct the reader to related areas in this Ordinance or elsewhere. The sustainability tips are
intended to provide general information on how certain provisions relate to the City’s
sustainability goals. If the commentary is in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, the
text associated with the actual provisions shall prevail.
D. Graphics
Graphics are provided throughout this Ordinance to help the reader visualize and understand
complex provisions that have physical or dimensional qualities associated with them. If the
graphics are in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, the text associated with the actual
provisions shall prevail.
E. Hyperlinks
Hyperlinks are provided throughout this Ordinance for those readers who are viewing this
Ordinance on a computer. Hyperlinks are identified with italicized text. Placing the cursor over
the hyperlink and clicking on the hyperlink will open another electronic document that can help
the reader further understand the provisions of this Ordinance. For example, all of the Wisconsin
Statutes referenced in this Ordinance are hyperlinked. Clicking on the hyperlink opens a window
that displays the linked Wisconsin Statute. Broken, misdirected, or conflicting hyperlinks shall
not invalidate the meaning of the provision.
Section 1.4 Integration of Principles of Sustainability
A. Intent
Pursuant to the goals, objectives, policies, and plans of the City of Ashland’s Comprehensive
Plan and pursuant to the City of Ashland’s Adopted Eco-Municipality Designation Resolution
(see Appendix A: Ashland Eco-municipality Resolution), it is the intent of the City of Ashland to
promote and apply principles of sustainability to the development and use
of land in the City of Ashland.
B. Principles of Sustainability
To the extent possible, property owners and their designated agents, as
well as review and approval authorities, should consider the following
principles of sustainability in the development and use of land in the City
of Ashland:
1. Reduce dependence upon fossil fuels and extracted underground
metals and minerals. In the development and use of land,
opportunities to reduce dependence upon fossil fuels and extracted
underground metals and minerals may include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
a. Promote a sensitive mixture of uses and compact development
in appropriate areas that reduce the need to drive fossil fuel
vehicles;
b. Promote energy efficient building and site design;
c. Promote the use of wind, solar, and other forms of renewable or regenerative energy
where feasible;
Sustainability Tip.
An eco-municipality
strives to be an
ecologically,
economically, and
socially healthy
community using the
Natural Step framework
as a guide, and a
democratic, highly
participatory process as
the method. For more
information on the Natural
Step framework, visit:
www.naturalstep.org
Part 1: General Provisions
Section 1.4: Integration of Principles of Sustainability
1-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
d. Allow appropriate opportunities for home occupations that reduce commuting needs;
and
e. Allow opportunities to produce and sell foods locally and reduce, reuse, and recycle
materials locally thereby reducing transportation.
2. Reduce dependence on chemicals and other manufactured substances that can
accumulate in nature. In the development and use of land, opportunities to reduce
dependence on chemicals and other manufactured substances that can accumulate in nature
may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. Encourage the use of building materials that are chemical and toxic-free;
b. Encourage the use of landscaping materials and practices that reduce the need for
pesticides and herbicides; and
c. Promote areas and standards to reduce, reuse, and recycle materials.
3. Reduce dependence on activities that harm life-sustaining eco-systems. In the
development and use of land, opportunities to reduce dependence on activities that harm
life-sustaining eco-systems may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. Encourage infill development and redevelopment at appropriate densities and
locations to help reduce sprawl and encroachment on nature;
b. Promote responsible storm water management and erosion control measures;
c. Protect trees, wetlands, floodplains, the waterfront, and other significant natural
resources from adverse development; and
d. Promote development patterns that respect natural systems.
4. Meet the hierarchy of present and future human needs fairly and effectively. In the
development and use of land, opportunities to meet the hierarchy of present and future
human needs fairly and effectively may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. Provide ample opportunities for public participation in significant development and
land use decisions;
b. Promote the local economy and community needs without adversely affecting the
natural environment;
c. Promote financial and social equity in the local economy;
d. Integrate opportunities for public and private community services throughout the
community, such as parks, emergency residential facilities, religious institutions, and
senior center; and
e. Provide a range of affordable housing that meets the diverse needs of the community.
Section1.5 Interpretation and Separability
A. Interpretation
1. Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection
of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
2. Supremacy of conflicting provisions. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of
this Ordinance are either more or less restrictive than comparable standards imposed by any
Part 1: General Provisions
Section1.5: Interpretation and Separability
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 1-7
other provisions of this Ordinance or of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution,
rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulation that is more restrictive or that imposes higher
standards or requirements shall govern.
3. Abrogation of existing regulations or agreement. This Ordinance is not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement, provided that, where
regulations of this Ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements
of this Ordinance shall govern.
4. Unlawful structures and uses on the effective date of this Ordinance. No building,
structure, or use not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance shall
become or shall be made lawful solely by reason of adoption of this Ordinance. To the
extent that said unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the requirements of
this Ordinance, said building, structure, or use remains unlawful hereunder.
5. Ordinance language. The language of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance
with the following rules of construction. Words in the present tense shall include the
future, the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word
“building” shall include the word “structure,” the word “used” shall include “arranged,
designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased” or “intended to be used.” The
word “may” is permissive, but not mandatory. The word “should” is encouraged and
discretionary, but not mandatory. The word “shall” is mandatory, but not discretionary.
6. Distances. All distances shall be measured horizontally except height, which shall be
measured vertically.
7. Undefined land uses. With respect to the classification of land uses that are not defined or
specifically listed within this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall make interpretations based on the most recent edition of the “North
American Industry Classification System” (NAICS) published by the United States Office
of Management and Budget.
B. Separability
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Common Council of the City of Ashland that the
several provisions of this Ordinance are separable, in accordance with the following:
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Ordinance not
specifically included in said judgment.
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision
of this Ordinance to a particular parcel, building, or structure, such judgment shall not
affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, building, or structure not
specifically included in said judgment.
Section 1.6 Transitional Provisions
A. Approvals Prior to the Effective Date of this Ordinance
1. General applicability. All work, structures, and uses authorized by permits issued prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto shall not be affected by this
Ordinance. Except as provided in the following Paragraphs below, no development permit
or building permit shall be issued following the effective date of this Ordinance or any
amendment thereto, unless the work, structure, or use for which the development permit or
Part 1: General Provisions
Section 1.6: Transitional Provisions
1-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
building permit is sought is made to fully comply with the applicable provisions of this
Ordinance or any such amendment thereto.
2. Right to complete approved development in progress. Nothing in this Ordinance, or any
amendment thereto, shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction, or
designated use of a structure if a development permit, building permit, and/or certificate of
occupancy for such structure was lawfully and properly issued prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance, or any such amendment thereto, and such development permit, building
permit, and/or certificate of occupancy has not by its own term expired prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, and construction pursuant to such permit is commenced
prior to the expiration date of such permit.
3. Development permits and building permits. Where a development permit and building
permit for a building or structure have been issued in accordance with law prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within six (6)
months of such effective date and the exterior of building or structure is completed within
one (1) year of such effective date, said building or structure may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the development permit and
building permit were issued; and further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a
certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the
nonconforming provisions of this Ordinance.
4. Right to occupy as a nonconformity. Upon completion of the work described in
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Subsection, such building or structure may be occupied by, and a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for, by the use designated on the certificate of
occupancy, subject thereafter, to the extent applicable, to the nonconforming provisions of
this Ordinance.
5. Preliminary plats. Any preliminary plat filed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
shall vest such approval rights as are afforded any subsequent final plat as authorized under
Section 236.11(1)(b) of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Pending Applications Submitted Prior to the Effective Date of this Ordinance
1. General applicability. Any complete application submitted to the City shall be processed
pursuant to the ordinances in effect on the date of the application submittal.
2. Withdrawal of original application and submittal of new application. If a complete
application submitted to the City has not received final action by the approval authority
before the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, then the applicant shall
have the option, if so desired, to officially withdraw the original application and submit a
new application (within sixty (60) days of the submittal of the original application) without
payment of additional fees.
Section 1.7 Applicable Codes Pertaining to Development
A. General Applicability
The City of Ashland has adopted various codes pertaining to development in the City.
B. Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling, Commercial, Plumbing and Electrical Codes
Refer to City of Ashland Ordinance 748.
C. Historic Building Code
Part 1: General Provisions
Section1.7: Applicable Codes Pertaining to Development
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 1-9
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Building Inspector, marked and
designated as the “Buildings constructed prior to 1914, SPS Chapters 375 – 379, Wisconsin
Administrative Code” is hereby adopted as the Historic Building Code for the City of Ashland.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 2-1
Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities describes the primary review and approval authorities in the City of Ashland. Certain
approvals for development and land use in the City of Ashland may require review and approval from other authorities, such as the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the United Stated Army Corps of Engineers, not specifically described herein.
Contact the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent for additional information.
PART 2
REVIEW AND APPROVAL
AUTHORITIES
Part 2: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 2.1 General Provisions ................................................................................................................... 3
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 3
B. Summary of Primary Review and Approval Authority ............................................................. 3
C. Conformity with Development Regulations .............................................................................. 3
D. Other Review and Approval Authorities and Powers and Duties .............................................. 3
Section 2.2 Zoning Administrator .............................................................................................................. 5
A. Establishment of Office ............................................................................................................. 5
B. Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent .................. 5
Section 2.3 Building Inspector .................................................................................................................... 5
A. Establishment of Office ............................................................................................................. 5
B. Powers and Duties ..................................................................................................................... 5
Section 2.4 Director of Public Works ........................................................................................................ 6
A. Establishment of Office ............................................................................................................. 6
B. Powers and Duties ..................................................................................................................... 6
Section 2.5 Plan Commission ...................................................................................................................... 6
A. Creation and Membership .......................................................................................................... 6
B. Meetings..................................................................................................................................... 6
Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities
Section 2.1: General Provisions
2-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
C. Powers and Duties ..................................................................................................................... 6
D. Actions Limited ......................................................................................................................... 7
Section 2.6 Common Council ..................................................................................................................... 7
A. Powers ........................................................................................................................................ 7
B. Duties ......................................................................................................................................... 7
Section 2.7 Zoning Board of Appeals ........................................................................................................ 7
A. Creation and Membership .......................................................................................................... 7
B. Meetings..................................................................................................................................... 7
C. Actions Limited ......................................................................................................................... 7
Part 2: List of Tables
Table Name Page
2.1.A Summary of Primary Review and Approval Authority ......................................................... 2-4
Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities
Section 2.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 2-3
Section 2.1 General Provisions
A. Intent
This part establishes review and approval authority under this Ordinance. Specific requirements
for each type of application or permit are described in Part 3: Application, Review, and Approval
Procedures.
B. Summary of Primary Review and Approval Authority
Table 2.1.A summarizes the primary review and approval authorities of
the primary departments, commissions, boards, and elected officials of
the City of Ashland as they relate to this Ordinance. If there is a
conflict between the review and approval authorities presented in Table
2.1.A and the provisions in Part 3: Application, Review, and Approval
Procedures of this Ordinance, the provisions in Part 3 of this
Ordinance shall prevail.
C. Conformity with Development Regulations
Every official and employee with the City of Ashland vested with the
duty or authority to issue a permit, certificate, or license under this Ordinance shall not issue such
for any use, building, or purpose that conflicts with any provision of this Ordinance. Any permit,
certificate, or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and
void.
D. Other Review and Approval Authorities and Powers and Duties
This Ordinance may reference various review and approval authorities that are not specifically
described in this Part. Such lack of description shall not invalidate such review and approval
authorities. Furthermore, the review and approval authorities may have additional powers and
duties beyond those specified in this Ordinance.
Helpful Note.
Contact information for the
review and approval
authorities as well as other
helpful planning and
development information can
be found on the City’s
website:
www.ci.ashland.wi.us/
Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities
Section 2.1: General Provisions
2-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
RA: Recommend Action; FA: Final Action * or Designated Authorized Agent
Table 2.1.A: Summary of Primary Review and Approval Authority
Application or Permit
Zoning
Administrator*
Building
Inspector*
Public Works
Director*
Plan
Commission
Zoning Board
of Appeals
Common
Council
Common Council Final Action
Comprehensive Plan Amendment RA RA FA
Zoning Map or Ordinance Amendment RA RA FA
Floodplain/Wetland Overlay Amendment RA RA FA
PUD General or Specific Develop. Plan RA RA RA FA
Conditional Use Permit RA RA RA FA
Discontinuance of a Public Way RA RA RA FA
Final Plat RA RA RA FA
Plan Commission Final Action
Site Plan Approval RA RA FA
Preliminary Plat RA RA RA FA
Zoning Board of Appeals Final Action
Variance RA FA
Appeal of Administrative Decision FA
Floodplain/Wetland Variances/Appeals RA FA
Administrative Final Action
Development Permit FA RA RA RA
Sign Permit FA RA RA
Sidewalk Sign Permit FA RA
Airport Overlay Certificate of Compliance FA
Wildlife Hazard Management Plan FA RA
Bed and Breakfast Establishment Permit FA RA RA
Floodplain Certificate of Compliance FA RA RA
Certified Survey Map w/o Public Dedication FA RA
Building Permit FA
Demolition Permit FA RA
Permit to Move a Building or Structure FA RA
Certificate of Occupancy RA FA
Fence Permit RA FA RA
Public Art Permit FA RA RA RA
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan RA RA FA
Storm Water Management Plan RA RA FA
R.O.W. Permit RA FA
Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities
Section 2.2: Zoning Administrator
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 2-5
Section 2.2 Zoning Administrator
A. Establishment of Office
There is hereby established the Office of Zoning Administrator.
B. Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall properly administer and enforce
this Ordinance. In addition and in furtherance of such authority, the powers and duties of the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. Receive, review, analyze, and develop written reports on all applications for development
permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, variances, amendments, or other development
matters;
2. Serve as staff to the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, and other appropriate
boards and commissions;
3. Issue development permits, sign permits and similar permits when the requirements of this
Ordinance have been met; and make and maintain records thereof;
4. Coordinate official development review processes with other governmental offices to the
maximum extent practical;
5. Conduct inspections to determine compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and to take
remedial action when required; and
6. Conduct other similar planning and zoning related activities as directed by the City
Administrator or Common Council.
Section 2.3 Building Inspector
A. Establishment of Office
There is hereby established the Office of the Building Inspector to include the positions of
Building Inspector and such other inspectors as the Common Council may from time to time
provide to supervise the construction of buildings and permanent equipment of buildings,
including utilities from buildings to the public right-of-way.
B. Powers and Duties
The Building Inspector shall have power and it shall be his or her duty to enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance, City of Ashland Ordinance 748 and of all other laws and lawful orders of the
State of Wisconsin and of all ordinances of the City of Ashland relating to buildings. The
Building Inspector may appoint Designated Authorized Agents who shall have the power and
duty to enforce all, or specific portions of, said ordinances and laws. In addition and in
furtherance of such authority, the powers and duties of the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Assist with the enforcement of zoning, health, and safety codes;
2. Inspect buildings, grounds, construction, maintenance, and repair activities to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance and Wisconsin Statutes;
3. Enter upon any private or public property during any reasonable hours to make inspections
thereof;
Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities
Section 2.3: Building Inspector
2-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
4. Review job specifications and plans;
5. Issue permits and citations and keep the following permit records in his or her office:
a. Applications for building permits numbered consecutively;
b. The number, description, and size of all buildings erected during his or her term of
office indicating the type of material used and the cost of each building;
c. All inspections made;
d. All removal and condemnations of buildings; and
e. All fees collected by him or her showing date of their receipt and delivery to the City
Treasurer;
6. Make a monthly report and an annual report to the Common Council regarding activities of
the Office of the Building Inspector; and
7. Perform other functions as required by the City Administrator or the Common Council.
Section 2.4 Director of Public Works
A. Establishment of Office
A Public Works Department is hereby established.
B. Powers and Duties
The Public Works Director shall have power and it shall be his or her duty to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance and of all other laws and lawful orders of the State of Wisconsin and
of all ordinances of the City of Ashland as specified in this Ordinance. The Public Works
Director may appoint Designated Authorized Agents who shall have the power and duty to
enforce all, or specific portions of, said ordinances and laws.
Section 2.5 Plan Commission
A. Creation and Membership
A Plan Commission is hereby established pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 38.
B. Meetings
Meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at least once a month, unless there is nothing to
come before it. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the
public. The Plan Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its
proceedings, showing the action of the Plan Commission and vote of each member upon each
question considered. The presence of four (4) members shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum. Special meetings may be requested by applicants with payment of fees per the City fee
schedule and shall be called by the Chairperson of the Plan Commission.
C. Powers and Duties
The Plan Commission shall have the following powers:
1. To review requests and hold public hearings on Comprehensive Plan Amendments, official
maps, and other long range planning studies, and make recommendations to the Common
Council on these items;
Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities
Section 2.5: Plan Commission
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 2-7
2. To review capital improvement programs for their coordination with the City's
Comprehensive Plan and make recommendations to the Common Council;
3. To review and hold public hearings on applications for conditional use permits, zoning
amendments, and planned unit developments, and make recommendations to the Common
Council on these items;
4. To review and decide on applications for site plan approval for major development and site
plan approval for moderate development; and
5. Perform other functions as identified in Section 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes and as
directed by the Common Council.
D. Actions Limited
The Plan Commission shall publish notices of meetings and follow procedures as established by
the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law.
Section 2.6 Common Council
A. Powers
The Common Council shall be constituted, have the powers, and conduct all activities in
accordance with Wisconsin law.
B. Duties
The duties of the Common Council as they relate to the administration of this Ordinance shall be
to exercise the legislative power of the City, to determine all matters of policy, to act on
recommendations of the Plan Commission and other commissions and boards, and to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance as specified in this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the
City.
Section 2.7 Zoning Board of Appeals
A. Creation and Membership
A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 62.23 (7) (e) of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Meetings
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at least once a month, unless there is
nothing to come before it. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open
to the public. Special meetings may be requested by applicants with payment of fees per the City
Fee Schedule and shall be called by the Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. Actions Limited
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall only make decisions during a public meeting or after a public
hearing conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Nothing herein contained shall be construed
to give or grant to the Zoning Board of Appeals the powers or authority to alter or change the
provisions of this Ordinance or the Zoning Map or to permit the establishment of a
nonconforming use.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-1
Part 3: Application, Review, and Approval Procedures describes the required applications, review, and approval procedures
associated with development in the City of Ashland. Information, such as applications, submittal requirements and application
deadlines are available from the Office of the Zoning Administrator or may also be available for downloading from the City’s official
website: www.ci.ashland.wi.us/. Some development may not have official application forms. In those cases, the applicant should
check with the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent for application and submittal requirements.
PART 3
Application, Review,
and Approval Procedures
Part 3: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 3.1 General Provisions ................................................................................................................... 6
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 6
B. General Types of Development ................................................................................................. 6
C. General Types of Development Reviews and Approvals .......................................................... 7
D. General Development Review Elements and Procedures .......................................................... 8
E. General Review and Approval Criteria ...................................................................................... 9
F. Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements ............................................................................ 10
G. General Procedures Associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices .................. 14
H. General Procedures associated with Administrative Review and Approval ............................ 16
Section 3.2 Comprehensive Plan Amendment ........................................................................................ 17
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 17
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 17
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 19
Section 3.3 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) ................................................................................... 19
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 19
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 20
C. Approval Criteria for a Zoning Map Amendment ................................................................... 21
Section 3.4 Unified Development Ordinance Text Amendment ........................................................... 21
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 21
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 22
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 23
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
Section 3.5 (Reserved) ............................................................................................................................... 23
Section 3.6 Map and/or Text Amendment to the Floodplain Overlay .................................................. 23
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 23
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 23
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 25
Section 3.7 Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay ..................................................... 25
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 25
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 26
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 28
Section 3.8 Creation of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District .................................... 28
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 28
B. General Review Process .......................................................................................................... 28
C. PUD – General Development Plan Review Process ................................................................ 28
D. PUD – Specific Implementation Plan Review Process ............................................................ 30
E. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 32
F. Conditions that may be Attached to a PUD ............................................................................. 33
G. Effect of the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan Approval ................................................. 33
H. Building Permit Restrictions .................................................................................................... 33
I. Changes or Alterations to an Approved PUD – Specific Implementation Plan ...................... 33
J. Expiration................................................................................................................................. 34
Section 3.9 Conditional Use Permit ......................................................................................................... 34
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 34
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 34
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 35
D. Conditions that may be Attached to Conditional Use Permit .................................................. 36
E. Conditional Use Permit Void ................................................................................................... 36
F. Revisions to an Approved Conditional Use Permit ................................................................. 36
Section 3.10 Variance .................................................................................................................................. 37
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 37
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 37
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 38
Section 3.11 Appeal of an Administrative Decision .................................................................................. 39
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 39
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 40
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 41
Section 3.12 Appeals, Variances, and Boundary Disputes in the Floodplain Overlay .......................... 41
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 41
B. Review Procedures .................................................................................................................. 41
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 42
Section 3.13 Appeals and Variances in the Wetland Overlay ................................................................. 43
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 43
B. Review Procedures .................................................................................................................. 44
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 45
Section 3.14 Discontinuance or Vacation of a Public Way ...................................................................... 45
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 45
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-3
Sections 3.15 –3.19 (Reserved for future applications requiring a public hearing.) ............................... 45
Section 3.20 Site Plan Approval ................................................................................................................. 45
A. Intent and Applicability ........................................................................................................... 45
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 46
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 49
Section 3.21 (Reserved) ............................................................................................................................... 51
Section 3.22 Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness ........................................................ 51
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 51
Section 3.23 Preliminary Plat ..................................................................................................................... 51
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 51
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 51
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 52
Section 3.24 Final Plat ................................................................................................................................. 53
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 53
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 53
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 54
Section 3.25 Public Art Permit ................................................................................................................... 54
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 54
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 54
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 55
Sections 3.26 - 3.29 (Reserved for future applications requiring a public informational meeting.) ...... 55
Section 3.30 Reserved .................................................................................................................................. 56
Section 3.31 Development Permit .............................................................................................................. 56
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 56
B. General Provisions ................................................................................................................... 56
C. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 56
D. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 57
Section 3.32 Building Permit ...................................................................................................................... 57
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 57
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 58
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 58
D. Applicant’s Responsibilities .................................................................................................... 58
Section 3.33 Demolition Permit .................................................................................................................. 59
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 59
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 59
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 59
D. Applicants Responsibilities ...................................................................................................... 60
Section 3.34 Permit to Move a Building or Structure .............................................................................. 60
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 60
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 60
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 61
D. Applicants Responsibilities ...................................................................................................... 61
Section 3.35 Certificate of Occupancy ....................................................................................................... 61
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 61
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
B. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 62
C. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 62
D. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy ....................................................................................... 62
E. Applicant’s Responsibilities .................................................................................................... 63
Section 3.36 Sign Permit ............................................................................................................................. 63
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 63
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 63
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 64
Section 3.37 Bed and Breakfast Establishment Permit ............................................................................ 64
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 64
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 64
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 65
D. Termination of Permit .............................................................................................................. 65
Section 3.38 Floodplain Certificate of Compliance .................................................................................. 65
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 65
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 65
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 66
D. Additional Approvals ............................................................................................................... 66
Section 3.39 Certified Survey Map without Public Dedication ............................................................... 66
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 66
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 66
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 67
Section 3.40 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan ..................................................................................... 67
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 67
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 67
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 68
Section 3.41 Storm Water Management Plan ........................................................................................... 68
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 68
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 68
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 68
Section 3.42 Right-of-Way Permit ............................................................................................................. 69
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 69
Section 3.43 Fence Permit ........................................................................................................................... 69
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 69
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 69
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 70
D. Fence Permit Appealed ............................................................................................................ 70
Section 3.44 Approval to Temporarily Place Items on Sidewalks .......................................................... 70
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 70
Section 3.45 Sign Permit for a Sidewalk Sign ........................................................................................... 70
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 70
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 70
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 71
D. Permit Expiration and Permit Fees .......................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
E. Revocation of Sidewalk Sign Permit ....................................................................................... 71
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-5
Section 3.46 Keeping of Animals Permit ................................................................................................... 70
A. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 70
B. Review Process ........................................................................................................................ 70
C. Approval Criteria ..................................................................................................................... 71
D. Permit Expiration and Fees ...................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
E. Revocation of a Keeping of Animals Permit ........................................................................... 71
Section 3.47–3.54 (Reserved for future applications requiring administrative approval.) .................... 72
Section 3.55 Other Required Permits and Approvals .............................................................................. 74
List of Tables
Table Title Page
3.1.A Summary of Responsibility to Conduct a Public Hearing ................................................... 3-11
3.1.B Summary of Public Hearing Notice Requirements .............................................................. 3-12
3.1.C Summary of Responsibility to Conduct Public Informational Meeting ............................... 3-15
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
Section 3.1 General Provisions
A. Intent
The intent of this Part of the Unified Development Ordinance is to establish application
procedures, internal review procedures, public notice and hearing procedures, and approval
criteria for the processing of applications and actions that affect the development and use of
property subject to the jurisdictions of the City of Ashland.
B. General Types of Development
1. Development defined. Except where the context otherwise requires, and in absence of a
more limiting provision in this Ordinance, development means the performance of any
building or mining operation, or the making of any material change in the use or
appearance of any structure or land. All development within the City of Ashland, except as
hereinafter specified, shall be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and only after a development permit is issued, if required by this Ordinance. All
development shall be categorized as one of the following types of development:
a. General Development. Development for which a development permit or building
permit will be granted as a right on compliance with the terms of this Ordinance,
hereinafter called General Development.
b. Conditional Development. Development for which a development permit will be
granted only after exercise of discretion in accordance with the criteria of this
Ordinance, hereinafter called Conditional Development or Conditional Use.
c. Exempt Development. Development that is exempt from the regulations of this
Ordinance, as specified in Section 3.1, B., 3.: Exempt Activities.
2. Permits required. The following activities or uses shall be taken to involve development
and shall require a development, building, sign and/or other applicable permit, unless
expressly excluded by this Ordinance:
a. A change in type of use of a structure or land, a change from one use to a more
intense use, or a change from one use sector to a use in another sector as designated
by the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS);
b. A reconstruction, or alteration of the size, or material change in the external
appearance, of a structure on land;
c. A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number
of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure
on land;
d. Commencement of mining or excavation on a parcel of land;
e. Demolition or moving of a structure;
f. Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, junk, or fill on a parcel of land;
g. In the connection with the use of land, the making of any material change in noise
levels, thermal conditions, emissions of waste material, or other objectionable
element;
h. Commencement or change in the location of street graphics or use of land, and the
commencement or change in the location of advertising on the external part of a
structure;
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-7
i. Alteration of a shore, bank, floodplain of a stream, lake, pond, or artificial body of
water;
j. Reestablishment of a nonconforming or conditional use that has not been used for
one (1) year;
k. Departure from the normal use for which development permission has been granted,
or failure to comply with the conditions of this Ordinance granting the development
permission under which the development was commenced or is continued; or
l. Earth grading, filling, and/or excavation activities for the purpose of altering the
parcel or site for future development.
3. Exempt activities. The following operations or uses do not constitute development for the
purposes of this Ordinance:
a. The maintenance or improvement of a public road or railroad track not involving
substantial engineering redesign if the work is carried out on land within the
boundaries of the right-of-way;
b. Work by any utility not involving substantial engineering redesign for the purpose of
inspection, repair, renewal, or construction on an established right-of-way of any
sewers, mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, power lines, towers, poles, tracks, or the
like;
c. Work for the maintenance, renewal, improvement, or alteration of any structure, if
the work affects only the interior where the costs of such work (including labor) is
less than five-thousand dollars ($5,000), or affects only the color of the structure or
decoration of the exterior of the structure, but does not otherwise materially affect the
external appearance of the structure;
d. The use of any structure or land devoted to dwelling uses for any purposes
customarily incidental to enjoyment of the dwelling;
e. The use of any land for the purpose of growing plants, crops, trees, and other
agricultural or forestry products or for other agricultural purposes, except the
growing or storage of livestock;
f. A change in the use of land or structure from a use within a use group specified in
this Ordinance to another use in the same use group; or
g. Official public information street graphics installed by or at the discretion of the City
of Ashland, Ashland County, or the State of Wisconsin.
C. General Types of Development Reviews and Approvals
There shall be the following three (3) general types of reviews and approvals associated with
development in the City of Ashland:
1. Public hearing. Development or actions that require special opportunities for broad public
input require a public hearing pursuant to Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
2. Public informational meeting. Development that requires action by an elected or
appointed body, but does not require a public hearing, may cause a public informational
meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, G.: General Procedures Associated with Public
Informational Meetings.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
3. Administrative review and approval. Development or action that requires administrative
review and approval in lieu of review and approval by an elected or appointed body. Refer
to Section 3.1, H.: General Procedures Associated with Administrative Reviews and
Approvals for additional information.
D. General Development Review Elements and Procedures
1. Pre-application meeting. Prior to the submission of an application as required by this
Ordinance, a pre-application meeting may be required by this Ordinance or encouraged by
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent as follows:
a. Purpose of the meeting. A pre-application meeting is a meeting between a potential
applicant and the Zoning Administrator and/or other City Staff. The meeting
provides an opportunity for an applicant to describe the proposed development and
for the Zoning Administrator and/or other City Staff to indicate which application is
appropriate and what criteria will be used to determine whether the application
should be approved.
b. Meeting format. Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, there is no required
format for a pre-application meeting.
c. Combined meetings. Pre-application meetings may be combined when an applicant
anticipates making simultaneous applications for the same project.
d. No approval action. Participation in a pre-application meeting does not imply or
assume subsequent approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application.
2. Application forms and fees. The following provisions shall
apply to all required applications pursuant to this Ordinance:
a. Forms. Applications shall be submitted on forms, with
any requested information and attachments, and in such
numbers, as required by the City, including any checklists
for submittals. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall have the authority to request any
other pertinent information required to ensure compliance
with this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall make the required
forms available to all applicants. The forms may be
available for downloading from the City’s official website.
b. Application fees. Fees for those applications required by this Ordinance shall be in
accordance with the City’s current fee schedule, which the Common Council may
update from time to time. The fees are intended to cover the City’s actual costs in
processing the application. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, filing the
application, publishing notices, and mailing notices regarding the application.
c. Review costs. In addition to the costs incurred by the City in processing an
application, the City may incur costs to review an application. The cost for all such
reviews shall be borne by the applicant. The City reserves the right to require an
escrow account be established to provide funds for anticipated review costs.
d. Refundability of fees. Planning, zoning, and building permit/license fees are
refundable if a permit is not issued. Application review fees, fees for permits
requiring Plan Commission approval, publication fees and issued permit/license fees
are non-refundable.
Helpful Note.
Contact the Zoning
Administrator to discuss review
procedures in more detail.
See the City’s official website:
www.ci.ashland.wi.us/
for contact information. Some
application forms may also be
available for download from
the City’s website.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-9
3. Application deadline. All applications shall be completed and submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent in accordance with a schedule established
annually by the City. An application shall not be considered officially submitted until it
has been determined to be complete pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
4. Application completeness.
a. Completeness requirements. An application shall be considered submitted only after
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined it is
complete, it is in the required form, it includes all mandatory information (including
all exhibits), and it is accompanied by the applicable fee.
b. Completeness review period. A determination of application completeness shall be
made by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent within fifteen
(15) working days of the City’s receipt of the application.
c. Incomplete application. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall provide written notice to the
applicant along with an explanation of the application’s deficiencies. No further
processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
5. Limit of time relating to final action. Upon receipt of a complete application, the City
and the applicable review authorities shall review the application and take final action on
the application in a timely manner consistent with Wisconsin Statutes. The allowable time
to take final action on an application is specified in the review procedures of the
application. However, the allowable time to take final action may be extended in writing
by mutual acceptance of the approval authority and the applicant and consistent with
Wisconsin Statutes.
6. Limit of time to commence work after approvals. Approvals made by the applicable
approval authorities, unless otherwise stated in this ordinance or the approval, shall be void
after twelve (12) months from the date of such approval if work on the related project has
not commenced, unless an extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator, other
Approval Authority, or Designated Authorized Agent.
7. Limit on reapplication. If any application is denied by the approval authority as specified
in this Ordinance, another application or petition for the same permit, approval, or
amendment for the same property (or any portion thereof) may not be filed within a period
of ninety (90) days from the date of final denial, unless allowed by the appropriate approval
body and based on the demonstration of any of the following conditions:
a. Change in circumstances. There is substantial change in circumstances relevant to
the issues and/or facts considered during the review of the application that might
reasonably affect the approval body’s application of the relevant review standards to
the development proposed in the application; or
b. New information. New or additional information is available that was not available
at the time of the review that might reasonably affect the approval body’s application
of the relevant review standards to the development proposed; or
c. Significant difference. A new application is proposed to be submitted that is
significantly different from the prior application; or
d. Mistake made. The final decision on the application was based on a mistake of fact.
E. General Review and Approval Criteria
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
1. Required review and approval criteria. In reviewing and taking final action on an
application or permit request, the review and approval authorities shall consider all
approval criteria as specified in this Ordinance and shall consider all pertinent facts, public
comments, and consistency with all applicable laws.
2. Conditions that may be attached to approval. Conditions may be attached to approval of
permits to address any of the following conditions or other applicable conditions not herein
listed:
a. Minimize any adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the
hours of use and operation and the type and intensity of activities that may be
conducted;
b. Control the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and
completed;
c. Control the duration of use of development and the time within which any structures
must be removed;
d. Ensure that development, open spaces, private roads and utilities are maintained
properly in the future;
e. Designate the exact location and nature of development;
and
f. Establish more detailed records by submission of drawings,
maps, plats, or specifications.
3. Consideration of principles of sustainability in the review and
approval process. Pursuant to the City of Ashland’s
commitment to sustainability as described in Section 1.4:
Integration of Principles of Sustainability, the review and
approval process shall consider, to the extent reasonable, how an
application or permit relates to the principles of sustainability as
adopted by the City of Ashland and as specified in Section 1.4:
Integration of Principals of Sustainability. Except as specified
otherwise in this Ordinance, it is not the intent of this Ordinance
to deny an application based exclusively on how the application
relates to principles of sustainability. Instead, it is the intent of
this Ordinance to assist in clarifying principles of sustainability that can help strengthen the
proposed development and move the City towards sustainability.
F. Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements
1. Intent of a public hearing. A public hearing is a special type of
public meeting that is intended to provide the public with a formal
opportunity to express their views and concerns on certain matters
before the Plan Commission, the Common Council, or other
elected or appointed bodies.
2. Required public hearing. Wherever Wisconsin Statutes or this
Ordinance requires that a public hearing be held, the public
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes
and the provisions of this Ordinance. Table 3.1.A, Summary of
Responsibility to Conduct a Public Hearing, identifies the types
of applications that require a public hearing and the elected or
Sustainability Tip.
Consideration of principles of
sustainability in the
development review and
approval process
acknowledges the City’s
commitment to sustainability
and helps move the City and
property owners towards
integrating sustainability in all
development and land use
decisions.
Helpful Note.
Wisconsin statutes require
that a public hearing be held
before certain types of
decisions are made. A public
hearing helps to ensure that
all who may be affected by a
decision have an opportunity
to express their opinions to
the approval authorities
before the final decisions are
made.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-11
appointed body responsible for conducting the public hearing. If the information in Table
3.1.A conflicts with the information specified in Sections 3.2 through 3.19 of this
Ordinance, the information in Sections 3.2 through 3.19 shall take precedence.
Table 3.1.A: Summary of Responsibility to Conduct a Public Hearing
Application Procedure
Plan
Commission
Zoning
Board of
Appeals
Common
Council
Comprehensive Plan Amendment Required No Optional
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) Required No Optional
Ordinance Text Amendment Required No Optional
Floodplain Overlay Map or Text
Amendment
Required No Optional
Wetland Overlay Map or Text Amendment Required No Optional
PUD General Development Plan Required No Optional
PUD Specific Implementation Plan Optional No Optional
Conditional Use Permit Required No Optional
Variance No Required No
Appeal of a Administrative Decision No Required No
Appeals, Variances, and Boundary
Dispute Resolution relating to the
Floodplain Overlay
No Required No
Appeals, Variances, and Conditional Use
Permits relating to the Wetland Overlay No Required No
Discontinuance/Vacation of a Public Way No No Required
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
3. General public hearing noticing requirements.
a. Summary of notice required. Public hearing notice shall be made as shown below in
Table 3.1.B.: Summary of Public Hearing Notice Requirements.
Table 3.1.B: Summary of Public Hearing Notice Requirements
Application Procedure Published Mailed
Posted on
Property
Posted in
Public Place
Comprehensive Plan Amendment Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Ordinance Text Amendment Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Floodplain Overlay Map or Text Amendment Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Wetland Overlay Map or Text Amendment Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
PUD General Development Plan Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
PUD Specific Implementation Plan (public
hearing only if required)
Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Conditional Use Permit Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Variance Class 1 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Appeal of a Administrative Decision Class 1 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Appeals, Variances, and Boundary Dispute
Resolution relating to the Floodplain Overlay
Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Appeals, Variances, and Conditional Use
Permits relating to the Wetland Overlay
Class 2 Discretionary Discretionary Discretionary
Discontinuance or Vacation of a Public Way Class 3 Required Discretionary Discretionary
b. Published notice. At least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the public hearing, a
Notice of Public Hearing shall be published in the local newspaper designated by the
Common Council. In the case of a Comprehensive Plan Amendment, a Notice of
Public Hearing shall be published at least thirty (30) days prior to the date set for the
public hearing. There shall be three (3) classes of legal notices pursuant to Chapter
985of the Wisconsin Statutes, as follows. The class of notice required for the
application procedure shall be as specified in Table 3.1.A.: Summary of Public
Hearing and Notice Requirements.
(1) Class 1 Notice: Requires one (1) insertion in the local newspaper designated
by the Common Council.
(2) Class 2 Notice: Requires two (2) insertions in the local newspaper designated
by the Common Council.
(3) Class 3 Notice: Requires three (3) insertions in the local newspaper designated
by the Common Council.
c. Mailed notice. A mailed Notice of Public Hearing shall not be required (except
where otherwise specified in this Ordinance). However, when deemed feasible and
appropriate by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, the City
may mail such notices by U.S. mail to the owners of record of real property within
two hundred (200) feet of the property under consideration as. Such notice may be
served by its deposit in the municipality, properly addressed with postage paid, in
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-13
U.S. mail, preferably at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the public hearing.
Additional mailed notices may also be mailed pursuant to provisions of the specific
application and development review procedures specified elsewhere in this
Ordinance.
d. Posted notice on property. A Notice of Public Hearing shall not be required to be
posted on the property under consideration, but when deemed feasible and
appropriate by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, the City
may post such notice or cause such notice to be posted. Such posting shall be in a
format approved by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent and
shall occur on a date specified by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent, preferably at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the
public hearing.
e. Posted notice in public place. A Notice of Public Hearing shall not be required to be
posted in a public place, but when deemed feasible and appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, the City may post such notices,
preferably at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the public hearing and
preferably in three (3) public places in the City of Ashland as determined by the
Common Council.
f. Content of notice. Published or mailed notices shall contain at least the following
information:
(1) The legal description or street address of the property that is the subject of the
application;
(2) The substance of the application, including the type of proposed development
and the current zoning district (if applicable);
(3) The time, date, and location of the public hearing with a statement that
interested parties may appear at the public hearing; and
(4) A phone number to contact the City.
g. Constructive notice. Minor defects in notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate
proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply
with applicable notice requirements.
4. Conduct of public hearing.
a. Public comment. Any party may appear and be heard in person or through an agent
or attorney at the public hearing. Written comments may be submitted to the
applicable review and approval authorities prior to or during the hearing.
b. Modification of an application at a public hearing.
(1) The applicant may agree to modify the application, including the plans and
specifications submitted, in response to questions or comments by persons
appearing at the public hearing or to suggestions or recommendations by the
recommending or approval body holding the public hearing.
(2) Unless such modifications are so substantial that the recommending or
approval body cannot reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact
of the proposed changes without revised application materials before it, or
unless such modifications are so substantial that a new public hearing must be
noticed and held, then the approval body may approve the application with the
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-14 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
stipulation that the final approval will not be effective until materials reflecting
the agreed upon changes are submitted to the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent.
(3) Where deemed appropriate by the approval body, modifications may be
referred back to the recommending body for review, prior to further
consideration. The approval body shall either continue the hearing at a certain
new date and time or close the hearing and republish notice of any future
public hearing.
c. Continuing the hearing. A public hearing may be continued without additional
mailed or published notice, provided that the motion to continue the public hearing is
made in open session, specifies the date and time when the public hearing will
continue, and notice is provided consistent with Sections 19.81-19.98 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, dealing with Wisconsin open meeting law.
d. Findings and conclusions. All findings and conclusions shall be based on reliable
evidence as reasonably available.
e. Record. A record shall be made of all public hearings. All documentary evidence
presented at public hearings shall be made part of the record.
G. General Procedures Associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices
1. Intent of a public informational meeting. A public
informational meeting is a meeting held by the Plan
Commission, the Common Council, or other elected or
appointed bodies. The public can attend the meetings and
may be encouraged to express their views and concerns on
certain matters before the elected or appointed bodies.
However, unlike a public hearing, a public informational
meeting does not require a formal opportunity for the public
to provide input, but generally does allow for comment.
2. Required public informational meetings. Table 3.1.C
below summarizes the types of applications that may cause a
public informational meeting and the body responsible for
conducting the public informational meeting. The public
informational meeting may occur at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the public body.
Helpful Note.
A public informational meeting
is similar to a public hearing,
except that it is not required
by Wisconsin Statutes and it
has slightly different noticing
requirements. Although an
opportunity for formal public
input is not required, the
elected or appointed body
may solicit public input before
making its decision.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-15
Table 3.1.C: Summary of Responsibility to Conduct a Public Informational
Meeting
Application Procedure Plan Commission
Zoning
Board of
Appeals Common Council
Site Plan Approval Encouraged for
developments of
75,000 sq. ft. or
larger
No No
PUD - Site Specific Plan
Required - or public
hearing in lieu of No
Required – or public
hearing in lieu of
Preliminary Plat
Required – or public
hearing in lieu of No No
Final Plat
Required – or public
hearing in lieu of No
Required – or public
hearing in lieu of
3. General noticing requirements. Wherever this Ordinance requires that a public
informational meeting be held, the meeting shall be conducted in accordance with the
Wisconsin open meeting law as specified in Sections 19.81-19.98 of the Wisconsin Statutes
and as follows:
a. Published notice. Published notice of a public informational meeting shall be
consistent with the Wisconsin open meeting law. The notice shall be published in the
local newspaper designated by the Common Council (and other news media per their
request) at least twenty-four (24) hours, but preferably at least seven (7) days, in
advance of the public informational meeting.
b. Mailed notice. A mailed notice of a public informational meeting shall not be
required, but when deemed feasible and appropriate by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent, the City may mail such notices by U.S. mail to the
owners of record of real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property under
consideration as. Such notice may be served by its deposit in the municipality,
properly addressed with postage paid, in U.S. mail, preferably at least ten (10) days
prior to the date set for the public informational meeting. Additional mailed notices
may also be mailed pursuant to provisions of the specific application and
development review procedures specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
c. Posted notice on property. A notice of a public informational meeting shall not be
required to be posted on the property under consideration, but when deemed feasible
and appropriate by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, the
City may post such notice or cause such notice to be posted. Such posting shall be in
a format approved by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent and
shall occur on a date specified by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent, preferably at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the
public informational meeting.
d. Posted notice in public place. A notice of a public informational meeting shall not be
required to be posted in a public place, but when deemed feasible and appropriate by
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, the City may post such
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.1: General Provisions
3-16 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
notices, preferably at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the public
informational meeting and preferably in three (3) public places in the City of Ashland
as determined by the Common Council.
e. Content of notice. Published or mailed notices shall contain at least the following
information:
(1) The legal description or street address of the property that is the subject of the
application;
(2) The substance of the application, including the type of proposed development
and the current zoning district (if applicable);
(3) The time, date, and location of the public informational meeting with a
statement that interested parties may appear at the public informational
meeting; and
(4) A phone number to contact the City.
f. Constructive notice. Minor defects in notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate
proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply
with applicable notice requirements.
4. Conduct of public informational meetings.
a. Modification of an application at a public informational meeting.
(1) The applicant may agree to modify the application, including the plans and
specifications submitted, in response to questions or comments by persons
appearing at the public informational meeting or to suggestions or
recommendations by the body holding the public informational meeting.
(2) Unless such modifications are so substantial that the approval body cannot
reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact of the proposed
changes without revised application materials before it, or unless such
modifications are so substantial that a new public informational meeting must
be noticed and held, the approval body may approve the application with the
stipulation that the final approval will not be effective until materials reflecting
the agreed upon changes are submitted to the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent.
b. Continuing the public informational meeting. A public informational meeting may
be continued without additional mailed or published notice, provided that the motion
to continue the meeting is made in open session, specifies the date and time when the
public informational meeting will continue, and notice is provided consistent with
Sections 19.81-19.98 of the Wisconsin Statutes, dealing with Wisconsin open meeting
law.
c. Findings and conclusions. All findings and conclusions shall be based on reliable
evidence as reasonably available.
d. Record. A record shall be made of all public informational meetings. All
documentary evidence presented at the meetings shall be made part of the record.
H. General Procedures associated with Administrative Review and Approval
1. Intent of administrative review and approval. Administrative review and approval is
intended to allow a quicker and less costly review and approval process for development
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-17
and land use matters that are not expected to have an adverse impact on neighboring
properties or the broader community.
2. Required administrative review and approval. Wherever this Ordinance requires
administrative review and approval, the review and approval
process shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance. Table 2.1.A in Section 2.1: General
Provisions summarizes the types of applications that require
administrative review and the administrative staff that has the
primary responsibility for reviewing and approving the
application. However, administrative review and approval
may be conducted by a Designated Authorized Agent.
Consequently, Table 2.1.A in Section 2.1: General Provisions
should be referred to a general guide and the responsibilities
listed may be modified based on the unique characteristics of
the applications.
3. General noticing requirements. There shall be no required noticing associated with
administrative review and approval. However, at their discretion, administrative staff may
notify adjacent property owners of pending development.
4. Conduct of administrative review and approval. Administrative staff shall have the
opportunity to consult with other staff and government agencies in reviewing and
processing an application. The applicant shall have the opportunity to refine the
application submittal as necessary to ensure that the application is consistent with this
Ordinance.
Section 3.2 Comprehensive Plan Amendment
A. Applicability
Amendments to the City’s Comprehensive Plan may be made from
time to time to help guide the City in establishing and maintaining
sound, sustainable, and desirable development within the city.
Amendments may also be made to correct errors in the text or maps of
the Comprehensive Plan or to address changed or changing conditions
in a specific area or in the city generally.
B. Review Process
The review process shall be consistent with Chapter 66 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, Comprehensive Planning and as follows:
APPLICATIONS REQUIRING A PUBLIC HEARING
Sections 3.2. through 3.19. describe the applications and development review procedures that require a public hearing. Public
review and comment on these applications is strongly encouraged.
Helpful Note.
Relatively minor development
and land use matters that are
consistent with this Ordinance
and that are not expected to
have a major impact on the
public interest may be
processed administratively.
Helpful Note.
This Ordinance is intended to
reflect the vision and policies
of the Comprehensive Plan.
Consequently, no significant
changes should be made to
this Ordinance that are not
consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
Likewise changes to the
Comprehensive Plan may
require changes to this
Ordinance or the Zoning Map.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.2: Comprehensive Plan Amendment
3-18 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
1. Pre-application meeting. If a proposed development requires a Comprehensive Plan
Amendment, the property owner or their designated agent is encouraged to request a preapplication
meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting.
2. Initiation. A Comprehensive Plan Amendment may be
initiated by any of the following:
a. The Plan Commission;
b. The Common Council;
c. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent; or
d. The property owner or their designated agent
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.:
Application Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.:
Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following review
tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
b. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
c. Review the application, considering the approval
criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan Commission
with a recommendation for final action.
5. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan
Commission shall complete the following tasks:
a. Hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
b. Considering the approval criteria, deny the request or approve the request (by
majority vote of the entire Plan Commission) recommending that the Common
Council enact an ordinance approving the Comprehensive Plan Amendment.
6. Common Council action.
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Common Council
may order a second public hearing before the Common Council pursuant to Section
3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application and
considering the Plan Commission recommendation and the approval criteria, the
Common Council shall deny the request or adopt an ordinance that amends the
Comprehensive Plan unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to Section
3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final Action.
c. Adoption of an ordinance shall require a majority vote of the entire Common Council.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.2: Comprehensive Plan Amendment
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-19
7. Distribution of approved amendment. One copy of the adopted Comprehensive Plan
Amendment shall be sent to all of the following:
a. Every governmental body that is located in whole or part within the boundaries of the
City;
b. The clerk of every local governmental unit that is adjacent to the City;
c. The Wisconsin Department of Administration;
d. The Northwest Regional Planning Commission; and
e. The Vaughn Public Library.
C. Approval Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Comprehensive Plan
Amendment, the following approval criteria shall be considered:
1. The Comprehensive Plan Amendment helps guide and accomplish coordinated
development that is harmonious with existing development in the City of Ashland, which
will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety,
morals, and the general welfare, as well as the efficiency and economy in the process of
development;
2. The Comprehensive Plan Amendment is consistent with the requirements and elements of
Chapter 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes;
3. The Comprehensive Plan Amendment review process has provided adequate opportunity
for public review and comment;
4. The Comprehensive Plan Amendment is generally consistent with the principles of
sustainability as specified in Section 1.4: Integration of Principles of Sustainability.
Section 3.3 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
A. Applicability
1. General applicability. The Zoning Map may be amended
whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or
good zoning practice require. Amendments may also be made to
correct errors in the Zoning Map or to address changed or
changing conditions in a specific area or within the city
generally. All Zoning Map Amendments must be consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan and the provisions of this Section,
except as modified by the special Zoning Map Amendment
procedures specified in this Section.
2. Special Zoning Map amendment procedures. Due to the
special requirements of specific zoning districts, Zoning Map
Amendments relating to the following shall comply with the
provisions specified below:
a. Floodplain Overlay. An amendment to the Floodplain
Overlay shall be pursuant to Section 3.6: Map and/or Text
Amendment to the Floodplain Overlay.
Helpful Note.
The City’s Zoning Map must
be consistent with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan. Any
rezoning request that is not
consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan shall
also include a request to
amend the Comprehensive
Plan. The requests can be
processed together, but
action on the Comprehensive
Plan must occur before action
on the rezoning.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.3: Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
3-20 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
b. Wetland Overlay. An amendment to the Wetland Overlay shall be pursuant to
Section 3.7: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay.
c. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District. The creation of a Planned Unit
Development (PUD) Overlay District shall be pursuant to Section 3.8: Creation of a
Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. If a proposed development requires
a Zoning Map Amendment (rezoning), the property owner or
their designated agent is encouraged to request a preapplication
meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Preapplication
Meeting.
2. Initiation. A Zoning Map Amendment may be initiated by
any of the following:
a. The property owner or their designated agent;
b. The Plan Commission;
c. The Common Council; or
d. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following review tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
b. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
c. Review the application, considering the approval
criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan Commission
with a recommendation for final action.
5. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
a. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
b. Within sixty (60) days after referral to the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission
(considering the approval criteria) shall recommend such action to the Common
Council as the Plan Commission deems proper.
6. Common Council final action.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.3: Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-21
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Common Council
may order a second public hearing before the Common Council pursuant to Section
3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Common
Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the requested ordinance amending the Zoning Map unless the deadline for
action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final
Action.
c. Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require a majority vote of the entire
Common Council.
C. Approval Criteria for a Zoning Map Amendment
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a Zoning
Map Amendment (rezoning), the following criteria shall be considered:
1. The Zoning Map Amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
2. The Zoning Map Amendment promotes public health, safety, morals, and the general
welfare, as well as the efficiency and economy in the process of development;
3. The Zoning Map Amendment is compatible with the present zoning and conforming uses
of nearby property and with the character of the neighborhood;
4. The property to be amended (rezoned) is suitable for the uses permitted by the Zoning
District that would be applied by the proposed Zoning Map Amendment; and
5. The Zoning Map Amendment is generally consistent with the principles of sustainability
specified in Section 1.4: Integration of Principles of Sustainability.
Section 3.4 Unified Development Ordinance Text Amendment
A. Applicability
1. General applicability. The text of the Unified Development
Ordinance may be amended whenever the public necessity,
convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require.
Amendments may also be made to correct errors in the text of
the Unified Development Ordinance or to address changed or
changing conditions affecting the City. All text amendments
must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
2. Special Unified Development Ordinance text amendment
procedures. Due to the special requirements of specific
zoning districts, text amendments relating to the following
shall comply with the provisions specified below:
a. Floodplain Overlay District. An amendment to the
Floodplain Overlay District shall be pursuant to Section
3.6: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Floodplain
Overlay District.
b. Wetland Overlay District. An amendment to the Wetland Overlay District shall be
pursuant to Section 3.7: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay
District.
Helpful Note.
If a development application
is inconsistent with the Unified
Development Ordinance, an
application to amend the
Ordinance can be made
simultaneously with an
application for the proposed
development. However, the
development would not be
able to be approved until the
Ordinance amendment is first
approved.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.4: Unified Development Text Ordinance Amendment
3-22 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. If a proposed development requires a text amendment to the
Unified Development Ordinance, the property owner or their designated agent is
encouraged to request a pre-application meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Preapplication
Meeting.
2. Initiation. A text amendment may be initiated by any of the
following:
a. The Plan Commission;
b. The Common Council;
c. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent; or
d. The property owner or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application
Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following review tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
b. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
c. Review the application, considering the approval
criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan Commission
with a recommendation for final action.
5. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission
shall complete the following tasks:
a. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing
pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and
Noticing Requirements; and
b. Within sixty (60) days after referral to the Plan
Commission, the Plan Commission (considering the
approval criteria) shall recommend such action to the
Common Council as the Plan Commission deems
proper.
6. Common Council final action.
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the Common Council may order a second public hearing before the
Common Council pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.4: Unified Development Ordinance Text Amendment
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-23
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Common
Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the requested Ordinance Amendment.
c. Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require a majority vote of the entire
Common Council.
C. Approval Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a text
amendment to the Unified Development Ordinance, the following criteria shall be considered:
1. The text amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
2. The text amendment promotes public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare, as
well as efficiency and economy in the process of development;
3. The text amendment is compatible with the present zoning and conforming uses of property
and the character of neighborhoods; and
4. The text amendment is generally consistent with the principles of sustainability specified in
Section 1.4: Integration of Principles of Sustainability.
Section 3.5 (Reserved)
Section 3.6 Map and/or Text Amendment to the Floodplain Overlay
A. Applicability
The Common Council may change or supplement the Floodplain Overlay boundaries and the
provisions of the Floodplain Overlay in accordance with this Ordinance and all applicable state
and federal laws. Actions that require an amendment include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Any change to the Official Floodplain Zoning Map, including the floodway line or
boundary of any floodplain area;
2. Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain zoning maps;
3. Any fill in the floodplain that raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above
the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
4. Any fill or floodplain encroachment that obstructs flow, increasing regional flood height
0.01 foot or more;
5. Any amendment to the floodplain text of this Ordinance as
required by NR 116.05, Wisconsin Administrative Code, or
otherwise required by law, or as required by this Ordinance;
6. All channel relocations and any change to the maps to alter
floodway lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the
floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation from a
Flood Insurance Rate Map requires prior approval of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. The property owner of a proposed
Helpful Note.
For more information on
FEMA and the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, visit
their website at:
www.fema.gov, and for more
information on WI DNR
requirements visit:
www.dnr.state.wi.us.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.6: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Floodplain Overlay District
3-24 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
development that may involve a proposed amendment to the boundaries and/or the
provisions of the Floodplain Overlay is encouraged to request a pre-application meeting
with the Zoning Administrator and other applicable Designated Authorized Agents of the
City, pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting. The pre-application
meeting may also involve pertinent representatives from the Regional Office of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
2. Initiation. A Map Amendment to the Overlay Map relating to the Floodplain Overlay may
be initiated by any of the following:
a. The property owner or their designated agent;
b. The Plan Commission;
c. The Common Council; or
d. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application
Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
b. Within seven (7) days of the City having received a
complete application, submit a copy of the proposed
map and/or text amendment to the Regional Office of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
c. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
d. Review the application, considering the approval
criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan Commission
with a recommendation for final action.
5. FEMA review. Where the flood profiles are based on
established base flood elevations from a Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) must also review and approve any map amendment.
6. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources review and
action. The Regional Office of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources shall review the requested amendment and
provide comments to the City of Ashland at or prior to the
public hearing as appropriate.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.6: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Floodplain Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-25
7. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
a. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
b. Within sixty (60) days after referral to the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission
(considering the approval criteria) shall recommend such action to the Common
Council as the Plan Commission deems proper.
8. Common Council final action.
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Common Council
may hold a second public hearing before the Common Council pursuant to Section
3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Common
Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the requested amendment unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final Action.
c. Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require a majority vote of the entire
Common Council and shall be contingent on all required approvals from the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
9. Follow through on Common Council action. Within thirty (30) days following final
action by the Common Council, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
shall submit a copy of the final action to the Regional Office of the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources and to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). No
amendment shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the Regional Office of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
C. Approval Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for an
amendment to the Floodplain Overlay, the following criteria shall be considered:
1. The amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
2. The amendment promotes public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare, as well as
efficiency and economy in the process of development;
3. The amendment is compatible with the present zoning and conforming uses of nearby
property and with the character of the neighborhood;
4. The amendment does not adversely affect the waters of Lake Superior and its tributaries;
5. The amendment is consistent with all applicable state and federal laws relating to the
floodplain; and
6. The amendment is generally consistent with the principles of sustainability specified in
Section 1.4: Integration of Principles of Sustainability.
Section 3.7 Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay
A. Applicability
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.7: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay District
3-26 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
The Common Council may change or supplement the Wetland
Overlay boundaries and the provisions of the Wetland Overlay in
accordance with this Ordinance and all applicable state and federal
laws.
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. The property owner of a proposed
development that may involve a proposed amendment to the
boundaries and/or the provisions of the Wetland Overlay is
encouraged to request a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator and other
applicable Designated Authorized Agents, pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application
Meeting. The pre-application meeting may also involve pertinent representatives from the
Regional Office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
2. Initiation. A Map Amendment to the Overlay Map relating to the Wetland Overlay may
be initiated by any of the following:
a. The property owner or their designated agent;
b. The Plan Commission;
c. The Common Council; or
d. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness;
b. Submit a copy of the proposed map and/or text amendment to the Regional Office of
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resource within seven (7) days of the City
having received a complete application;
c. Notice the public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements;
d. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a report to the
Plan Commission with a recommendation for final action; and
e. At least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, provide the Regional Office of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources with written notice of the public hearing
and a copy of the staff report to the Plan Commission.
5. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources review. The Regional Office of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources shall review the proposed map and/or text
amendment. Where the Regional Office determines that the proposed rezoning may have a
significant adverse impact upon any of the approval criteria specified in this Section, the
Regional Office shall so notify the City of Ashland of its determination either prior to or
during the public hearing held on the proposed amendment.
Helpful Note.
The provisions and
boundaries of the Wetland
Overlay are described in
Section 4.51: WET-O
Wetland Overlay.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.7: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-27
6. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
a. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing
pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and
Noticing Requirements;
b. Within sixty (60) days after referral to the Plan
Commission, the Plan Commission (considering the
approval criteria) shall recommend such action to
the Common Council as the Plan Commission
deems proper.
7. Common Council final action.
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the Common Council may hold a
second public hearing before the Common Council
pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and
Noticing Requirements.
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a
complete application, the Common Council
(considering the approval criteria) shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the requested
amendment unless the deadline for action is
extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of
Time Relating to Final Action.
c. Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require
a majority vote of the entire Common Council and
shall be contingent on all required approvals from
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
8. Follow Through on Common Council final action.
a. Within thirty (30) days following final action of the
Common Council, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall submit a copy of
the final action to the Regional Office of the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
b. If the Common Council approved the amendment
and the amendment is inconsistent with the
Department of Natural Resources recommendation
regarding the amendment, then the amendment shall
not become effective until more than thirty (30) days
have elapsed following receipt of notification of the
final action to the Department of Natural Resources.
c. If within the thirty (30) days, the Department of
Natural Resources notifies the City of Ashland that
the Department of Natural Resources intends to adopt a superseding wetland overlay
ordinance for the City of Ashland as provided by Section 62.231(6) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, then the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the ordinance
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.7: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay District
3-28 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
adoption procedure under Section 62.231(6) of the Wisconsin Statutes is completed or
otherwise terminated.
C. Approval Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a map and/or text
amendment to the Wetland Overlay, the Plan Commission and Common Council shall consider
the approval criteria specified in Section 3.3: Zoning Map Amendment. In addition, in order to
ensure that this Ordinance will remain consistent with the shoreland protection objectives of
Section 281.31 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Common Council shall not rezone a wetland in the
Wetland Overlay, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a significant
adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions:
1. Storm and flood water storage capacity;
2. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of groundwater to a wetland, the
recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another area, or the flow of groundwater
through a wetland;
3. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, or organic compounds that would
otherwise drain into navigable waters;
4. Shoreline protection against erosion;
5. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery, or feeding grounds;
6. Wildlife habitat; or
7. Areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific interest, including scarce wetland types
and habitat of endangered species.
Section 3.8 Creation of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay
District
A. Applicability
1. A tract of land proposed to be developed as a Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall be
under the control of a single owner, partnership, or corporation, where each owner agrees in
advance to be bound by the conditions and regulations that will be effective within the
district and to record such covenants, easements, and other provisions with the County.
2. The provisions of this Section are generally intended for application to larger and/or unique
sites where a flexible approach to zoning regulations would facilitate more efficient use of
the site and protection of natural resources achieved through clustering development and
other innovative site planning and design techniques.
B. General Review Process
The review process for the creation of a PUD Overlay District involves two phases: review of a
PUD – General Development Plan (PUD-GDP) and review of a PUD – Specific Implementation
Plan (PUD-SIP). The following describes each review phase. An applicant has the option to
submit an application for a PUD – Specific Implementation Plan at the same time as an
application for a PUD – General Development Plan. Upon approval of the PUD-SIP, the Overlay
District Map shall be amended to reflect the new PUD.
C. PUD – General Development Plan Review Process
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-29
1. Pre-application meeting. The property owner of a proposed development that is intended
to proceed as a PUD is encouraged to request a pre-application meeting pursuant to Section
3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting.
2. Initiation. Application for a PUD-General Development Plan (PUD-GDP) shall be
initiated by the property owner or their designated agent. The applicant shall have control
of all property in the proposed PUD.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent for
approval of a PUD-General Development Plan pursuant
to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application Forms and Fees and
Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline. The
application shall contain the following information:
a. Context map. A map of the project including its
relationship to the surrounding properties,
topography, or other prominent site features;
b. Statement. A statement as to why the planned unit
development (PUD) zoning is proposed. The
statement shall identify reasons why planned unit
development (PUD) zoning is preferable to
development under standard zoning districts.
c. Site plan. A site plan of the planned unit
development (PUD) at a scale of not less than one
inch equals one hundred feet (1” = 100’) showing
the following:
(1) Land uses and development densities;
(2) The size, arrangement, and location of
parcels;
(3) The proposed general location of buildings or
groups of buildings;
(4) The location, design, and construction of
public and private streets;
(5) The location of recreational areas and open
space and a description of who will own and
maintain the spaces;
(6) A general landscaping plan;
(7) A general grading plan, indicating onsite
storm water management facilities and
indicating the amount and location of off-site
drainage;
(8) Identification of mature vegetation on the site and a proposal to preserve such
vegetation worthy of protection;
(9) Identification and/or delineation of wetlands and floodplains within the site and
a proposal to protect such areas from encroachment or degradation;
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
3-30 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
(10) Statistical data on the size of the development, density/intensity of various subareas,
and expected phasing or staging.
(11) A description of the intended organizational structure for a property owner’s
association, if any; and
(12) A description of the deed restrictions or restrictive covenants, if any.
d. Additional plans. The Plan Commission or Common Council may require other
special studies, plans, or additional information that would aid in consideration of the
proposed development.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness;
b. Notice the public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements; and
c. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a report to the
Plan Commission with a recommendation for final action.
5. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
a. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
b. Within sixty (60) days after the City has received a complete application and within
forty (40) days after the public hearing, the Plan Commission (considering the
approval criteria) shall recommend to the Common Council approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the request.
6. Common Council final action.
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Common Council
may hold a second public hearing before the Common Council pursuant to Section
3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Common
Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the requested ordinance amending the Zoning Map and approving the PUD –
General Development Plan unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final Action. The ordinance
associated with the PUD – General Development Plan is an interim zoning
classification that does not enable any development until the PUD – Specific
Implementation Plan is approved.
c. Approval, or approval with conditions of the PUD – General Development Plan shall
require a majority vote of the entire Common Council.
D. PUD – Specific Implementation Plan Review Process
1. Initiation. Application for a PUD-Specific Implementation Plan (PUD-SIP) shall be
initiated by a property owner or their designated agent. The Applicant shall have control of
all property in the proposed PUD.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-31
2. Application submittal.
a. A complete application shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent for approval of a PUD-Specific
Implementation Plan pursuant to Section 3.1, D.,
2.: Application Forms and Fees and Section 3.1,
D., 3.: Application Deadline. The application shall
contain all the information required for the General
Development Plan review specified in this Section,
except that the information shall be in final and
detailed form. In addition, the applicant shall
submit all other required plans for review and
action.
b. The application shall be submitted within twelve
(12) months of approval of the PUD – General
Development Plan. Failure to provide the PUD –
Specific Implementation Plan within twelve (12)
months of approval of the PUD – General
Development Plan shall result in the automatic
repeal of the previously approved PUD – General
Development Plan.
c. If required, a final plat, or a final plat of that
segment to be developed, in compliance with this
Ordinance, shall be submitted prior to issuance of
the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan.
3. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant
to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
and
b. Review the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan for substantial consistency with the
approved PUD – General Development Plan. If the PUD – Specific Implementation
Plan is consistent with the PUD – General Development Plan, then the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall prepare a report and a
recommendation to the Plan Commission that directs the Plan Commission to hold a
public informational meeting or a public hearing to take their final action on the plan.
c. If the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan is not consistent with the PUD – General
Development Plan, then the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
shall prepare a report to the Plan Commission that identifies the discrepancies and
directs the Plan Commission to hold a public hearing pursuant to the public hearing
requirements for the PUD – General Development Plan.
4. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
a. If the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent’s report identifies that
the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan is substantially consistent with the approved
PUD – General Development Plan, then the Plan Commission (considering the
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
3-32 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
approval criteria) shall hold a public informational meeting or a public hearing and
make a recommendation to the Common Council to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan.
b. If the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent’s report identifies that
the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan is substantially inconsistent with the
approved PUD – General Development Plan, then the Plan Commission shall hold a
public hearing pursuant to the public hearing requirements for the PUD – General
Development Plan. Following the public hearing, the Plan Commission (considering
the approval criteria) shall make a recommendation to the Common Council to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan.
5. Common Council final action.
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Common Council
may order another public hearing before the Common Council pursuant to Section
3.1, F., 2.: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Common
Council (considering the approval criteria) shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the requested ordinance amending the Zoning Map and approving the PUD –
Specific Implementation Plan unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final Action. The ordinance
associated with the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan shall incorporate the
Specific Implementation Plan, including any conditions or restrictions that may be
imposed by the Common Council.
c. Approval, or approval with conditions, shall require a majority vote of the entire
Common Council.
E. Approval Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a PUD – General
Development Plan or a PUD – Specific Implementation Plan, the Plan Commission and Common
Council shall consider the approval criteria for a Zoning Map Amendment as specified in Section
3.3: Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) as well as the following approval criteria with special
consideration given to whether the plan would or would not be in the public interest:
1. Comprehensive Plan. Consistency with the City of Ashland Comprehensive Plan.
2. Consistency with this Ordinance. The extent to which the plan departs from the
provisions of this Ordinance otherwise applicable to the subject property, including, but not
limited to, density, bulk, and use, and the reasons why such departures are or are not
deemed to be in the public interest.
3. Provisions for services. The manner in which the plan does or does not make adequate
provisions for public services and utilities, drainage, traffic and multiple modes of
transportations, and recreational amenities.
4. Open space. The nature and extent of open space, the reliability and sufficiency of the
proposal for maintenance and conservation of the common open space, and the adequacy of
the amount and function of the open space in terms of the densities proposed in the plan.
5. Effect on the neighborhood. The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the planned
development project upon the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-33
6. Phasing. In the case of a plan that proposes development over a period of years, the
sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect and maintain the integrity of the
plan.
7. Relationship to existing structures. In developed areas, the suitability of the proposed
structures in relation to existing structures to remain and anticipated future development of
the area.
F. Conditions that may be Attached to a PUD
The Common Council may attach any conditions to the approval of a PUD – General
Development Plan and/or the approval of a PUD – Specific Implementation Plan that it deems
necessary to address any of the following conditions or other applicable conditions not herein
listed:
1. Minimize any adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the hours of
use and operation and the type and intensity of activities that may be conducted;
2. Control the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and
completed;
3. Control the duration of use of development and the time within which any structures must
be removed;
4. Ensure that development, open spaces, private roads and utilities are maintained properly in
the future;
5. Designate the exact location and nature of development; and
6. Establish more detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats, or specifications.
G. Effect of the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan Approval
The approved PUD – Specific Implementation Plan, together with the conditions and restrictions
imposed by the Common Council, shall constitute the final zoning for the subject property. The
zoning provisions applicable to the underlying zoning district shall continue to be applicable
where consistent with the approved PUD – Specific Implementation Plan.
H. Building Permit Restrictions
Development permits and building permits for a Planned Unit Development shall not be issued
until the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan is approved by the Common Council. No building
permit shall be issued for any structure within the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan District
until the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent certifies that it conforms to the
provisions of the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan and all other applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
I. Changes or Alterations to an Approved PUD – Specific Implementation Plan
Any change of the PUD – General Development Plan or the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan
prior to approval of the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. If the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent determines that the change constitutes a substantial modification, the applicant
or developer will be required to amend the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan, and if
necessary, the PUD – General Development Plan, following the review procedures set forth in
this Section. If in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, such
changes do not constitute a substantial alteration of either the PUD – General Development Plan
or the PUD – Specific Implementation Plan, the change may be accomplished by approval of the
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District
3-34 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. Such approved changes or modifications
shall be documented and recorded in the official file of the City on the Planned Unit
Development.
J. Expiration
Unless specified otherwise in an approved PUD agreement, if substantial development progress
has not occurred within twelve (12) months of a PUD – Specific Implementation Plan approval,
the PUD – General Development Plan and PUD – Specific Implementation Plan approval shall be
void and the site zoning will revert to its previous zoning district classification. An extension
may be granted by the Common Council.
Section 3.9 Conditional Use Permit
A. Applicability
1. General applicability. A conditional use permit is required for development that would
generally not be appropriate within a district, but might be allowed within certain locations
within the district if specific requirements are met. The
compatibility must be judged on the basis of the
particular circumstances and may require the imposing
of conditions before development or occupancy is
permitted. The intent is to allow a reasonable degree of
discretion in determining the suitability of a particular
development at a specific location.
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. If a proposed development
requires the issuance of a conditional use permit, then
the property owner or their designated agent is
encouraged to request a pre-application meeting
pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a conditional use permit may be
made upon application of the property owner or their
designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.:
Application Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.:
Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant
to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
b. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
c. Review the application, considering the approval
criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan
Commission with a recommendation for final action.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-35
5. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
a. Conduct a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements; and
b. Within sixty (60) days after referral to the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission
(considering the approval criteria) shall recommend such action to the Common
Council as the Plan Commission deems proper.
6. Common Council final action.
a. After reviewing the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Common Council
may hold a second public hearing before the Common Council pursuant to Section
3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
b. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Common
Council shall review the request, the Plan Commission’s recommendation, and the
approval criteria and take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
request unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.:
Limit of Time Relating to Final Action.
c. A conditional use permit may be approved by an affirmative vote of a simple
majority of the Common Council.
7. Effective date of conditional use permit.
a. The Planning and Development office shall provide notice to the applicant within five
business days of the approval of an application by the Common Council. The
applicant shall be required to sign a copy of the resolution approving the conditional
use permit, indicating the applicant’s understanding and acceptance of the conditions
contained therein. The conditional use permit shall be effective upon the applicant’s
signature.
b. In this section, “provide notice” means to inform the applicant in person, by
telephone, by email, or to place in the United States mail, with adequate first-class
postage affixed, using the phone number, email address, or mailing address provided
by the applicant on the application.
C. Approval Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for issuance of a
conditional use permit, the Plan Commission and the Common Council shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this Ordinance, including standards for specific requirements
for certain land uses and activities. If an applicant for a conditional use permit meets or agrees to
meet all of the requirements and conditions specified in this chapter or imposed by the city, the
city shall grant the conditional use permit. The applicant must demonstrate by substantial
evidence that the application and all requirements and conditions established by the city are or
shall be satisfied. The decision to approve or deny the permit must be based on substantial
evidence. In addition, the following approval criteria shall apply:
1. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The relationship of the proposed use to the
goals, objectives, and policies of the City of Ashland Comprehensive Plan.
2. Compatibility. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development within
two hundred (200) feet of the proposed use and within five hundred (500) feet along the
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit
3-36 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
same street and development anticipated in the foreseeable future within the neighborhood
and conditions that would make the use more compatible.
3. Importance of services to the community. The importance of the services provided by
the proposed facility to the community, if any, and the requirements of the facility for
certain locations, if any, and without undue inconvenience to the developer, and the
availability of alternative locations equally suitable.
4. Neighborhood protections. The sufficiency of terms and conditions proposed to protect
and maintain the uses in the surrounding neighborhood.
5. Conformance with other requirements of this Ordinance. The conformance of the
proposed development with all provisions of this Ordinance.
6. Other factors. Other factors pertinent to the proposed use, site conditions, or surrounding
area considerations that the Plan Commission or the Common Council feels are necessary
for review in order to make an informed and just decision.
D. Conditions that may be Attached to Conditional Use Permit
The Common Council may attach any conditions to the approval of a conditional use permit that
it deems necessary to address any of the following conditions or other applicable conditions not
herein listed. Conditions as to the permit’s duration, transfer, or renewal may also be included.
All conditions must be reasonable and, to the extent practicable, measurable. Any condition
imposed must be related to the purpose of the evidence and be based on substantial evidence.
1. Minimize any adverse impact of the development upon other land, including the hours of
use and operation and the type and intensity of activities that may be conducted;
2. Control the sequence of development, including when it must be commenced and
completed;
3. Control the duration of use of development and the time within which any structures must
be removed;
4. Ensure that development is maintained properly in the future;
5. Designate the exact location and nature of development; and
6. Establish more detailed records by submission of drawings, maps, plats, or specifications.
E. Conditional Use Permit Void
1. In any case where the holder of a conditional use permit issued under this ordinance has not
instituted the use or begun construction within one year of the date of approval, the permit
shall be null and void.
2. Any use, for which a conditional use permit has been issued, upon its cessation or
abandonment for a period of one year, will be deemed to have been terminated and any
future use shall be in conformity with this ordinance.
F. Revisions to an Approved Conditional Use Permit
Revisions to an approved conditional use permit shall follow the same procedure stated in Section
3.9 Conditional Use Permit, Subsections A. – D.
G. Definition.
“Substantial evidence” as used in this Section means facts and information, other than mere
personal preferences or speculation, directly pertaining to the requirements and conditions an
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-37
applicant must meet to obtain a conditional use permit and that reasonable persons would accept in
support of a conclusion.
Section 3.10 Variance
A. Applicability
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to hear and grant requests for area
variances and use variances from the provisions of this Ordinance, except as otherwise specified
in this Ordinance.
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. If a proposed development requires the approval of a variance,
then the property owner or their designated agent is encouraged to request a pre-application
meeting with the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a variance may be made upon application of the property owner or
their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following review tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
5. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements; and
6. Review the application, considering the approval criteria,
and prepare a report to the Zoning Board of Appeals with
a recommendation for final action.
7. Zoning Board of Appeals final action. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall complete the following tasks:
a. Conduct a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1,
F.: Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements;
and
8. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete
application, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take action
to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variance
request based on the approval criteria specified in this
Section unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant
to Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final
Action. In granting any provision under this Section, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall designate such conditions
that will secure substantially the objectives of the
regulations or provisions in the application of which the
variance is granted as to light, access to direct sunlight for
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.10: Variance
3-38 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
solar energy systems, air, character of the neighborhood, conformity to the Comprehensive
Plan, and, generally, the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
9. Approval or approval with conditions shall require an
affirmative vote of four (4) or more of the members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. Approval Criteria
1. Area variance. No area variance from the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be authorized unless all of the following facts
and conditions exist:
a. Exceptional circumstances. That there are exceptional
or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying
to the property in question or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties
or classes of uses in the same zoning district.
2. Natural causes. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has
not resulted from the actions of the applicant.
3. Preservation of property rights. That such variance is
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial
property rights possessed by other properties in the same
zoning district and in the same vicinity, including, but not
limited to, the use of solar energy systems. .
4. Absence of detriment. That the authorizing of such variance
will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and
will not materially impair the purposes of this Ordinance or
the public interest.
5. General nature. No variance shall be authorized unless the
Zoning Board of Appeals specifically finds that the condition,
situation, or intended use of the subject property is not so
general or recurrent in a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to cover
such cases.
6. Minimum variance required. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall find that the variance is the minimum variance that will
make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or
structure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be satisfied by
the evidence heard before it that the granting of such variance
will alleviate a hardship approaching confiscation as
distinguished from a special privilege sought by the owner.
7. Unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be granted unless
the property owner can show that compliance with the strict
letter of the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage,
height, bulk, or density would unreasonably prevent the
owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with
such restriction unnecessarily burdensome. Furthermore, no variance shall be granted
unless the property owner can show that the condition causing such unnecessary hardship is
Helpful Note.
An “area variance” allows a property
owner an exception from a physical
requirement such as parcel area,
setbacks, height, frontage, and
similar requirements. A “use
variance” allows a property owner to
put a property to an otherwise
prohibited use.
Granting a “use variance” requires a
finding that there can be no
reasonable use of the property
without the requested variance. This
is typically difficult to find in favor of.
Consequently, a property owner
could consider requesting a
Comprehensive Plan amendment
and rezoning in lieu of a use
variance.
An “area variance” allows the Zoning
Board of Appeal greater flexibility
and discretion in granting the
variance request in that the Board
does not have to conclude that no
reasonable use of the property exists
without the variance, rather the
Board has to find that regulation
unnecessarily burdens or
unreasonably prevents the proposed
activity. In addition, the Board must
find that variance request relates to a
unique property condition and that
granting the variance will cause no
harm to the public interest.
Refer to the League of Wisconsin
Municipalities for additional
information: www.lwm-info.org/
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.10: Variance
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-39
unique to the property for which a variance has been applied. The unique condition is one
that is not a condition in common with neighboring properties and relates not to the owner,
but to the physical characteristics of the property, such as slope, soil type, or wetlands.
8. Use Variance. No use variance from the provisions of this Ordinance shall be authorized
unless all of the conditions and facts exist:
a. Exceptional circumstances. That there are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question or to the intended
use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties or classes of uses in
the same zoning district.
9. Natural causes. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not resulted from the actions of
the applicant.
10. Preservation of property rights. That such variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same zoning
district and in the same vicinity, including, but not limited to, the use of solar energy
systems.
11. Absence of detriment. That the authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property, and will not materially impair the purposes of this
Ordinance or the public interest.
12. General nature. No variance shall be authorized unless the Zoning Board of Appeals
specifically finds that the condition, situation, or intended use of the subject property is not
so general or recurrent in a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a
general regulation to cover such cases.
13. Minimum variance required. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that the variance is
the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or
structure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be satisfied by the evidence heard before it
that the granting of such variance will alleviate a hardship approaching confiscation as
distinguished from a special privilege sought by the owner.
14. Unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be granted unless the property owner can show
that without the requested variance, the property has no reasonable use of the property. No
variance shall be granted unless can show that the condition preventing any reasonable use
of the property is unique to the property for which the variance has been applied. The
unique condition is one that is not a condition in common with neighboring properties and
relates not to the owner, but to the physical characteristics of the property, such as slope,
soil type, or wetlands.
D. Variance Granted Void.
If the action authorized by a granted variance is not commenced or completed by the specified
date in the Zoning Board of Appeals’ decision, the variance shall be null and void.
Section 3.11 Appeal of an Administrative Decision
A. Applicability
1. General applicability. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide an appeal that
alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this Ordinance. In exercising its authority under this Section,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.11: Appeal of an Administrative Decision
3-40 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
administrative official’s order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an
appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for
that purpose the Zoning Board of Appeals has the same authority as the administrative
official.
2. Special procedures for appeal of certain administrative decisions. Due to the special
requirements of specific zoning districts, appeals of administrative decisions relating to the
following shall comply with the provisions specified below:
a. Floodplain Overlay District. An appeal of an administrative decision relating to the
Floodplain Overlay District shall be pursuant to Section 3.12: Appeals, Variances,
and Boundary Disputes relating to the Floodplain Overlay District; and
3. Wetland Overlay District. An appeal of an administrative decision relating to the Wetland
Overlay District shall be pursuant to Section 3.13: Appeals, Variances, and Conditional
Use Permits relating to the Wetland Overlay District.
B. Review Process
1. Initiation. Within thirty (30) days after the date of the administrative decision (unless
specified otherwise elsewhere in this Ordinance), appeal of an administrative decision may
be initiated by any person aggrieved by the administrative decision, or any officer,
department, commission, or board of the City affected by the decision.
2. Pre-application meeting. The aggrieved person may request
a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.:
Pre-application Meeting.
3. Application submittal. A request for an appeal of an
administrative decision shall be made in writing to the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. The
request shall provide sufficient information for the Zoning
Board of Appeals to make an informed and just decision.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
b. After receipt of a request for an appeal of an
administrative decision, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall review the evidence
and make a report of the facts to the Zoning Board of
Appeals; and
5. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
6. Zoning Board of Appeals final action. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall complete the following tasks:
a. Conduct a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.11. Appeal of an Administrative Decision
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-41
7. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consider the evidence and with an affirmative vote of four (4) or more
members, may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official’s
order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the
correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the Zoning
Board of Appeals has the same authority as the administrative official. The deadline for
action may be extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final
Action.
C. Approval Criteria
In determining whether an administrative official’s actions were appropriate, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consider the details of the case presented by the Applicant and the administrative
officials, and the Board shall consider the requirements of this Ordinance. All findings of fact
and conclusions shall be based on reliable evidence.
Section 3.12 Appeals, Variances, and Boundary Disputes in the
Floodplain Overlay
A. Applicability
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the following as they relate to the Floodplain
Overlay:
1. Appeal. An appeal of an administrative decision that alleges error in an order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay.
2. Variance. Variance requests from the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay.
3. Boundary dispute. Resolution of floodplain boundary disputes.
B. Review Procedures
1. Initiation. Initiation of an appeal of administrative decision (within thirty (30) days after
the date of the administrative decision), variance, or boundary
dispute resolution may be made upon application of the
property owner or their designated agent.
2. Pre-application meeting. The property owner or their
designated agent may request a pre-application meeting with
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
5. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements. In addition to the
noticing requirements specified in Section 3.1, F., a notice of
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.12: Appeals, Variances, and Boundary Disputes relating to the Floodplain Overlay District
3-42 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
the request shall be sent to the Regional Office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing; and
6. Review the application, considering the approval for criteria, and prepare a report to the
Zoning Board of Appeals with a recommendation for final action.
7. Zoning Board of Appeals final action. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall complete the
following tasks:
a. Conduct a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public Hearing and Noticing
Requirements.
8. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application (unless the deadline
for action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final
Action) the Zoning Board of Appeals, with an affirmative vote of four (4) or more
members, shall take action on any of the following as applicable:
(1) Appeal of an administrative decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official’s
order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken
and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for
that purpose the Zoning Board of Appeals has the same authority as the
administrative official.
(2) Variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals may make a finding of fact and shall
take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variance request
based on the approval criteria specified in this Section. When a floodplain
variance is granted, the Zoning Board of Appeals or Designated Authorized
Agent shall notify the applicant in writing that it may increase flood insurance
premiums and risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be
maintained with the variance record.
(3) Boundary Dispute. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall affirm the validity of
the boundaries of the official floodplain map or may direct the Plan
Commission and Common Council to amend the boundaries of the floodplain
pursuant to Section 3.6: Map and/or Text Amendment to the Floodplain
Overlay District.
C. Approval Criteria
1. Appeal. In determining whether an administrative official’s actions were appropriate, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the details of the case presented by the Applicant
and the administrative officials, and the Board shall consider the requirements of this
Ordinance. All findings of fact and conclusions shall be based on reliable evidence.
2. Variance.
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant of variance from the provisions of the
Floodplain Overlay pursuant to Section 3.10, C.: Variance- Approval Criteria. In
addition, in order to approve a variance, an applicant must convincingly demonstrates
the following:
(1) Literal enforcement of the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay will cause
unnecessary hardship;
(2) The hardship is due to the adoption of the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay
and unique property conditions, not common to the adjacent parcels or
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.12: Appeals, Variances, and Boundary Disputes relating to the Floodplain Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-43
property. In such case the Ordinance and/or map must be amended pursuant to
the procedures of this Ordinance;
(3) The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(4) The variance is consistent with the intent of the Floodplain Overlay.
3. In addition to the criteria above, to qualify for a variance under the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) regulations, the following criteria must be met:
(1) The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood elevation;
(2) Variances can only be granted for parcels that are less than one-half acre and
are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the regional flood
elevation; and
(3) Variances shall only be granted upon showing of good and sufficient cause,
shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased risk to public
safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue and relief efforts, and
shall not be contrary to the intent of the Floodplain Overlay.
4. A variance shall not:
(1) Grant, extend, or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district;
(2) Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss;
(3) Be granted for a hardship that is self-created;
(4) Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area;
(5) Allow actions without the amendments to this Ordinance or map(s) pursuant to
the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay; and
(6) Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its use, which would
preclude its continued designation as an historic structure.
5. Boundary dispute.
a. If a floodplain boundary is established by approximate or detailed floodplain studies,
the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the boundary. If none exist,
other evidence may be examined.
6. In all cases, the person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 3.13 Appeals and Variances in the Wetland Overlay
A. Applicability
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the following as they relate to the Wetland
Overlay:
1. Appeal. An appeal of an administrative decision that alleges error in an order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of the provisions of the Wetland Overlay. In exercising its authority under
this Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or
modify the administrative official’s order, requirement, decision, or determination from
which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.13: Appeals and Variances in the Wetland Overlay District
3-44 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
determination, and for that purpose the Zoning Board of Appeals has the same authority as
the administrative official.
2. Variance. Any variance from the provisions of the Wetland Overlay shall be permitted
only after the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Review Procedures
1. Initiation. Initiation of an appeal of administrative decision, or a request for a variance
relating to the Wetland Overlay may be made upon application of the property owner or
their designated agent.
2. Pre-application meeting. The property owner or their designated agent may request a preapplication
meeting with the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.:
Application Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.:
Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
5. Notice a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements. In addition to the
noticing requirements specified in Section 3.1, F.: Public
Hearing and Noticing Requirements, a notice of the request
shall be sent to the Regional Office of the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources at least ten (10) days in
advance of the public hearing; and
6. Review the application, considering the approval for criteria,
and prepare a report to the Zoning Board of Appeals with a
recommendation for final action.
7. Zoning Board of Appeals final action. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall complete the following tasks:
a. Conduct a public hearing pursuant to Section 3.1, F.:
Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements.
8. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete
application (unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit
of Time Relating to Final Action) the Zoning Board of Appeals, with an affirmative vote of
four (4) or more members, shall take action on any of the following as applicable:
(1) Appeal of an administrative decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official’s
order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken
and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for
that purpose the Zoning Board of Appeals has the same authority as the
administrative official.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.13: Appeals and Variances in the Wetland Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-45
APPLICATIONS NOT REQUIRING A PUBLIC HEARING OR A PUBLIC INFORMATIONAL MEETING
Sections 3.20. through 3.30. describe applications and review procedures that do not require a public hearing, but require review
and approval by an elected or appointed body and public input, either through a public hearing or a public informational meeting.
The public is encouraged to attend public informational and committee meetings and provide comments as may be appropriate.
(2) Variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall take action to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the variance request based on the approval criteria
specified in this Section.
C. Approval Criteria
1. Appeal. In determining whether an administrative official’s actions were appropriate, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the details of the case presented by the Applicant
and the administrative officials, and the Board shall consider the requirements of this
Ordinance. All findings of fact and conclusions shall be based on reliable evidence.
2. Variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve in specific cases, such variances
from the terms of this Ordinance as shall not be contrary to the public interest, where
owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship. The approval criteria shall be as specified in Section 3.10, C.:
Variance - Approval Criteria.
Section 3.14 Discontinuance or Vacation of a Public Way
A. Applicability
By property owner petition or by a Common Council resolution, a public right-of-way may be
discontinued or vacated in its entirety or in part pursuant to the provisions City of Ashland
Ordinance 618 and Section 66.1003 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Sections 3.15 –3.19 (Reserved for future applications requiring a public hearing.)
Section 3.20 Site Plan Approval
A. Intent and Applicability
1. Intent. The provisions of this Section are intended to establish appropriate procedure for
development that has the potential to create moderate to significant impacts on areas
surrounding the site or in the community. More specifically, site plan approval is required
for the following reasons:
a. Provide the Plan Commission with a clear understanding of the proposed
development before construction is started;
2. Determine how the project relates to nearby land uses;
3. Ensure that the provisions of this Ordinance are fully complied with;
4. Ensure that the development can be adequately served by public utilities as may be
required;
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval
3-46 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
5. Determine the impact of the project on public facilities, such as streets, utilities, parks,
schools, drainage, and other public services; and
6. Identify adverse environmental issues and develop appropriate plans to avoid, reduce or
offset environmental impacts.
7. Applicability. Site plan approval is required for all development, except that the following
shall not require site plan approval, but may require a development permit, building permit,
and/or other applicable approvals as specified in this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator
or Designated Authorized Agent may require submittal of a site plan for approval by the
Plan Commission if the proposed development activity has the potential of having a major
impact on the property, neighboring parcels or the community.
a. The development activities described in Section 3.1, B., 3.: General Types of
Development – Exempt Activities.
b. New, remodeled, or additions for single or two-family residential uses and accessory
structures.
c. Minor nonresidential development including but not limited to:
(1) Construction, reconstruction, or addition of a fence regulated under Section
6.5: Fences which is one hundred (100) linear feet in length feet or less and is
eight feet or less in overall height.
(2) Construction of detached accessory structures one thousand (1000) square feet
or less, or principal structure expansions 15% or less of the principal structure’s
total area before the expansion.
(3) Handicap access/ramp.
(4) Grading, filling, or paving pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, Filling, and/or
Excavation.
(5) Landscaping structures, raised beds and related enhancements added to existing
lawful uses.
(6) Changes in the use of land and structures meeting other applicable criteria of
this sub-paragraph and this ordinance.
d. Other development activities that, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent, would have minimal impact on the site, its
surroundings, and the broader community, and for which the City would not
significantly benefit by having public review of the proposed development. Such
development activities may include, but shall not be limited to a vestibule addition to
an existing building, minor changes to the exterior of the building (for example,
roofing, siding, additional doors, windows, or dormers), minor changes to parking
and circulation, and similar types of development.
8. Further actions on the subject property. No person shall commence any use, erect any
structure, obtain a development permit, or file a condominium plat with the Ashland
County Register of Deeds without first obtaining site plan approval as set forth in this
Section. No use shall be carried on and no structure erected or enlarged, except as shown
upon an approved site plan.
B. Review Process
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-47
1. Pre-application meeting. The property owner or their designated agent is encouraged to
request a pre-application meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting
for any proposed development that is expected to have significant impact on areas
surrounding the site or in the community.
2. Initiation. Initiation of site plan approval may be made upon application of the property
owner or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline. The application for Site
Plan Approval for sites with more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of proposed
impervious surface shall be submitted with a digital copy of the full site plan set. The
application shall include the following information as applicable or as directed by the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent:
a. Site plan. A site plan drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1” = 100’). The site plan shall be certified by a registered land surveyor,
professional engineer, planner, or architect and shall show the following:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner, developer, and
designer;
(2) A legal description of the site;
(3) The location and dimension of the site parcel
lines. Adjacent parcel lines within one
hundred (100) feet shall also be shown;
(4) All required setbacks. Indicate with a dashed
line and label the required and proposed
setback dimensions;
(5) All existing and proposed right-of-ways and
public easements adjacent to and within the
site. Label the widths of all right-of-ways and
easements;
(6) All existing and proposed street improvements
including streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and
trails. Identify connections to existing and
proposed sidewalks and trails for pedestrian
and bicycle circulation. Label proposed
bicycle facilities and the widths of pedestrian
facilities and other improvements;
(7) Existing and proposed driveways, parking spaces, and loading spaces. Indicate
the direction of travel for one-way drives and inside radii for all curves. The
dimensions of driveways and parking spaces shall be noted. The total number
of parking spaces required and provided shall be listed. Identify areas for snow
stacking and storage;
(8) The shape, size, location, height, and floor area of all structures, and the main
and basement floor grades;
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval
3-48 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
(9) Existing and proposed grades, drainage systems, and structures with
topographic contours at intervals not exceeding two (2) feet;
(10) Natural features such as mature vegetation, wooded areas, drainage ways,
wetlands, floodplains, streams, lakes, and ponds with indication as to which are
to be retained an which removed or altered;
(11) All existing and proposed signage on the site;
(12) Existing or proposed septic systems, drain fields, tanks, and wells, if
applicable; and
(13) Any additional information as required by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent, or the Plan Commission.
4. Vicinity plan. A vicinity plan showing the location of the site in relation to the street
system and neighborhoods. Label the land uses and ownerships of adjacent properties.
5. Utilities plan.
(1) The size and location of all existing and proposed public and private utilities.
Note which utilities are above ground and below ground.
(2) The anticipated resident population contained within the project or the number
of employees anticipated to be generated by the project. The estimated daily
volumes or use of public utilities by the project shall be identified.
(3) Provide calculations to determine the projected demand for water including the
requested water meter size. Describe how new or existing mains will meet this
projected demand.
(4) If new impervious surfaces will be added, provide storm water calculations to
document that that the existing storm sewer can properly dispose of the
increased flows. Show any onsite retention systems that will be utilized to
control the influx into the storm sewer. Describe how any onsite retention
systems will be maintained following project completion.
(5) Fire protection strategies showing a knox box, fire alarm system, standpipes,
and other fire protection systems. For the Fire Department’s pre-fire planning
of the site and structure’s layout, the applicant shall provide a digital copy (in a
.dxf or .dwg format) of the following plans:
? Building Floor Plan Layout, including: exterior dimensions of the building;
floor plan with room names & numbers identified (if applicable); doors;
windows; stairways; location of hazardous materials storage areas; location
of water utility service connection to the building; location of fire
department connection, knox box, alarm panel, and annunciator panel.
? Building Elevations.
? Site Plan, including: adjacent streets; property boundaries; building
footprints; parking areas; driveways/internal streets; location of natural gas
and electric connections to the building; location of hazardous materials
storage areas; location of water utility service line & connection to
building; locations of fire department connection, knox box, alarm panel,
and annunciator panel.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-49
6. Landscaping, buffers, and screening. A landscape plan, illustrating the existing and
proposed landscaping, shall be provided as specified in Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening.
7. Architectural plans. These drawings and plans should show sufficient detail to indicate the
architectural design of the proposed buildings, but all design and construction details are
not required at this stage.
(1) Architectural renderings and general floor plans shall be provided for all new
buildings.
(2) Show all existing and proposed exterior building lighting and signs.
(3) Indicate existing and proposed materials and colors.
8. Lighting plan. A lighting plan showing the lighting of parking areas, walkways, driveways,
and onsite security lighting shall be provided. If the project is adjacent to residential uses,
the method of shielding light from the residential properties and the intensity of light levels
around the site and at the parcel lines shall be provided.
9. Additional information. Provide an erosion control plan, phasing plan, economic impact
statement, and all other information as determined by the Plan Commission, Zoning
Administrator, or Designated Authorized Agent necessary to accomplish compliance with
this Ordinance and other applicable laws and regulations.
10. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following review tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness;
11. Notice a public informational meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, G.: General Procedures
associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices; and
12. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan
Commission with a recommendation for final action.
13. Plan Commission final action. The Plan Commission shall complete the following tasks:
a. Conduct a public informational meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, G.: General
Procedures associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices.
14. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Plan
Commission shall take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for
site plan approval unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.:
Limit of Time Relating to Final Action.
15. Approval or approval with conditions of a site plan shall require an affirmative vote of the
majority of the entire Plan Commission.
C. Approval Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for site plan
approval, the Plan Commission shall consider all relevant factors specified in all applicable
sections of this Ordinance, including standards for specific requirements for certain land uses and
activities. In addition, the following approval criteria shall apply:
1. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The relationship of the proposed use to the
goals, objectives, and policies of the City of Ashland Comprehensive Plan.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval
3-50 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
2. Project compatibility. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed use and within five hundred (500) feet along
the same street and development anticipated in the foreseeable future within the
neighborhood and conditions that would make the use more compatible.
3. Site design.
a. Site organization. The organization of buildings, driveways, parking areas, open
spaces, pedestrian facilities, landscaping, fences, lights, signs, and other structures
should achieve a functional, safe, and harmonious site relationship. At the same
time, the site organization should be compatible with existing positive characteristics
of the site.
4. Location of buildings. The setback of buildings from streets, the spacing between
buildings, and arrangement of buildings shall be considered in relation to the prevailing
development in the area.
5. Drives, parking, and circulation. Special attention shall be given to limiting the number of
vehicular access points and their location, general onsite vehicular circulation, separation of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic flows, and the arrangement of parking areas that are safe
and convenient. The screening and landscaping of parking lots shall be addressed to
minimize the visual impacts. Provisions for adequately addressing pedestrian access,
handicapped accessibility, bicycles, and transit shall be considered as appropriate.
6. Grading and drainage. The existing and proposed grades and drainage patterns are to be
reviewed to ensure that proper storm water drainage can occur.
7. Utility service. The installation of underground electric, telephone, and other utilities is
encouraged wherever feasible. Remaining above ground utilities should be designed to
have a harmonious relationship to neighboring properties and the site.
8. Views. Important views within the site and the immediate area as well as more distant
scenic vistas shall be protected and enhanced with the new development.
9. Environmental issues. Issues pertaining to floodplains, wetlands, mature vegetation, and
other sensitive environmental issues shall be thoroughly investigated as part of the site
design.
10. Landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in a natural state insofar as practicable be
minimizing tree and soil removal. Grade changes shall be in keeping with the general
appearance of the neighborhood area. Plant species and composition should be consistent
with the City’s goals of urban forest management including preferred and prohibited
species, and be compatible to the buildings on the site.
11. Signs. The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting, and materials of all signage shall
be complimentary to the buildings on the site.
12. Lighting. All lighting shall be designed to avoid excessive illumination onto adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way.
13. Building design. All buildings shall be designed to be compatible with existing adjacent
structures. Factors to be reviewed include, but shall not be limited to, building heights,
exterior materials, and building forms including roof shapes and pitches. Refer to Section
6.2: General Building and Site Design Guidelines.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-51
14. Principles of sustainability. The building and site are generally consistent with the
principles of sustainability specified in Section 1.4: Integration of Principles of
Sustainability, when considered as a whole.
15. Failure to perform. No applicant or applicant related to said applicant shall be permitted
to apply for, or be granted a building permit or site plan approval, so long as the applicant
is in non-compliance with a previously issued building permit or previously approved site
plan, whether or not the parcel, which is the subject of the new application, is the same or
different from the site where the violations exist. The City may waive the provisions of this
paragraph upon mutual written agreement between the applicant and the City.
16. Other factors. Other factors pertinent to the proposed use, site conditions, or surrounding
area considerations that the Plan Commission feels are necessary for review in order to
make an informed and just decision.
Section 3.21 (Reserved)
Section 3.22 Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness
A. Applicability
The issuance of a historic preservation certificate of appropriateness is intended to ensure that the
City of Ashland adequately safeguards its historic and cultural heritage as embodied and reflected
in its designated historic structures, sites, and districts.
City of Ashland Ordinance 826 identified the process for the issuance of a historic preservation
certificate of appropriateness.
Section 3.23 Preliminary Plat
A. Applicability
Preliminary plat approval shall be required for any division of land or platting activity as
described in Section 9.1: General Provisions of Land Divisions.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner (or
owner’s agent) of a project requiring the approval of a
preliminary plat is encouraged to request a pre-application
meeting with the Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director,
or Designated Authorized Agent (and the Plan Commission, if
beneficial) pursuant to the procedures described in Section 3.1,
D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting. The pre-application meeting
allows the owner to receive general feedback as to how the
proposed preliminary plat is (or is not) in compliance with this
Ordinance. The meeting also allows the owner to receive
general information about the types and details of
improvements that are required to be installed by and at the
owner’s expense. Refer to Section 9.2, B.: Pre-application
Meeting for Land Divisions, for submittal requirements.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a preliminary plat may be made upon
application of the property owner or their designated agent.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.23: Preliminary Plat
3-52 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline. The application shall
include all the required information specified in Section 9.2, C.: Preliminary Plat.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness;
5. Pursuant to Section 236.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes, submit the application to the required
state agencies and the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent, the Fire Chief, the
Police Chief, the Public Works Director, and the City Engineer for their review and
comment;
6. Notice a public informational meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, G.: General Procedures
Associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices; and
7. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan
Commission with a recommendation for final action.
8. Plan Commission final action. The Plan Commission shall complete the following tasks:
a. Conduct a public informational meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, G.: General
Procedures Associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices; and
9. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Plan
Commission shall take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for
preliminary plat approval unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1,
D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating to Final Action.
10. Approval or approval with conditions of a preliminary plat shall require an affirmative vote
of the majority of the entire Plan Commission.
11. Approval of the preliminary plat is acceptance of the general layout and indicates to the
applicant that he or she may proceed with fulfilling the necessary steps for approval of the
final plat in accordance with the terms of approval. Such approval does not constitute
approval of the final plat.
C. Approval Criteria
A preliminary plat shall be approved if it meets all of the following criteria:
1. The application is complete and the information contained within the application is correct
and sufficient to allow adequate review and final action;
2. The preliminary plat is consistent with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and state
law;
3. The preliminary plat is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and any other
adopted plans and standards as they relate to the following:
a. The City’s current and future streets, sidewalks, bike lanes, alleys, parks, and public
utility facilities; and
4. The extension, improvement, or widening of City roads, taking into account access to and
extension of sewer, water and storm water mains and the instrumentality of public utilities;
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.23. Preliminary Plat
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-53
5. The preliminary plat promotes public health, safety, and general welfare; furthers the
orderly layout and use of land; provides a balanced density of land, provides beneficial
street layout and traffic flows; provides for adequate light and air; facilitates adequate
provisions for water, sewerage, storm water management, and other public requirements;
provides for proper ingress and egress; and promotes proper monumenting of land
subdivided and conveyancing by accurate legal descriptions;
6. The tract of land subject to the application is adequately served by public improvements
and infrastructure (as required by this Ordinance), or will be adequately served upon
completion by the applicant of required improvements; and
7. Where applicable, each preliminary plat shall include a schedule for phasing of
improvements.
Section 3.24 Final Plat
A. Applicability
Final plat approval shall be required within six (6) months of the last required approval of the
preliminary plat. The final plat is essentially a complete version of the previously approved
preliminary plat incorporating all the required changes and the final engineering diagrams and
descriptions.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner or their designated agent may
meet with the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent to review the final
plat requirements prior to submitting an application.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a final plat may be made upon application of the property owner or
their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline.
The application shall include all the required information
specified in Section 9.2, D.: Final Plat.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness;
5. Pursuant to Section 236.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes, submit the
application to the required state agencies and the City Water
and Wastewater Superintendent, the Fire Chief, the Police
Chief, the Public Works Director, and the City Engineer for
their review and comment;
6. Notice a public informational meeting pursuant to Section 3.1,
G.: General Procedures Associated with Public Informational
Meetings and Notices; and
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.24: Final Plat
3-54 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
7. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and prepare a report to the Plan
Commission with a recommendation for final action.
8. Plan Commission recommendation. The Plan Commission shall complete the following
tasks:
a. Conduct a public informational meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, G.: General
Procedures Associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices; and
9. Following the public informational meeting, take action to recommend that the Common
Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for final plat approval based
on the approval criteria specified in this Section.
10. Common Council final action. The Common Council shall complete the following tasks:
a. Within sixty (60) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application (unless the
deadline for action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.: Limit of Time Relating
to Final Action), the Common Council shall review the recommendations of the Plan
Commission and others, and considering the approval criteria, approve or deny the
final plat.
11. Approval of the final plat shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire
Common Council.
C. Approval Criteria
A final plat shall be approved if it meets all of the following criteria:
1. The application is complete and the information contained within the application is correct
and sufficient to allow adequate review and final action; and
2. The final plat must be consistent with the approved preliminary plat and all of the approval
criteria of the preliminary plat.
Section 3.25 Public Art Permit
A. Applicability
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, relocate, or structurally modify
public art or cause the same to be done in the City of Ashland without first obtaining a public art
permit pursuant to this Section and Section 5.6 I.: Public Art.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner,
or their designated agent, requiring a public art permit may
request a pre-application meeting with the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent to review
the proposed work and clarify the requirements for
obtaining a public art permit.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a public art permit may be made
upon application of the property owner or their designated
agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.:
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.25: Public Art Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-55
APPLICATIONS REQUIRING ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL
Sections 3.30. through 3.59. describe applications and review procedures that required administrative approval in lieu of a public
hearing or a public informational meeting. Administrative approval is intended to simplify and expedite the review and approvals
procedures associated with development that is expected to have minimal impact on the site, its surroundings, and within the
community.
Application Forms and Fees. The application shall contain the following information:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the public art owner, the property owner
where the public art is or shall be located, and the artist or contractor of the proposed
public art.
4. Clear and legible scale drawings showing the construction, size, dimensions, materials to be
used, and the location of the proposed public art and any existing public art on the parcel.
5. Calculations or evidence showing that the structure and design comply with the provisions
of Section 5.6 I.: Public Art.
6. Evidence of liability insurance policy or bond as required herein.
7. A Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness and/or approval from the Mural Art
Walk Committee, if required.
8. Such other information as the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may
require showing full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
9. Signature of the applicant.
10. Payment of all required fees.
11. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
12. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval, and submit the application to
other City Staff for their review and comment as necessary or desired.
13. Plan Commission final action. The Plan Commission shall complete the following tasks:
a. Conduct a public informational meeting pursuant to Section 3.1, G.: General
Procedures associated with Public Informational Meetings and Notices.
14. Within ninety (90) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Plan
Commission shall take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for
public art approval unless the deadline for action is extended pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 5.:
Limit of Time Relating to Final Action.
C. Approval Criteria
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall issue a public art permit when
the permit application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, approval has been
granted by the Plan Commission and the public art complies with the applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
Sections 3.26 - 3.29 (Reserved for future applications requiring a public informational meeting.)
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.30: Administrative Site Plan Approval
3-56 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
Section 3.30 Reserved
Section 3.31 Development Permit
A. Applicability
All development activities within the City of Ashland, as defined pursuant to Section 3.1, B., 2.:
Development Defined, shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and
only after a development permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
B. General Provisions
1. Effect of a development permit. The issuance of a development permit authorizes the
applicant to commence development immediately upon the giving of notice by the City, but
subject to any lawful conditions attached by the Common Council, the Plan Commission,
the Zoning Board of Appeals, or Authorized Agents of the City. A development permit
does not authorize occupancy.
2. Expiration of a development permit. If the work described in any development permit
has not begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance, such permit shall expire. If
the work had begun, but the work lied idle for a period of six (6) months or more the permit
shall be void. An extension may be granted in writing by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent, if the work has not been substantially completed, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, within one (1)
year of the date of the permit issuance. A development permit may be extended for an
additional six (6) months by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent due
to weather related factors. No further work shall proceed where a development permit has
expired or is void unless an extension is given or a new development permit has been
issued.
3. Demolition. In the event that the work described in the development permit has begun, but
has not been substantially completed within one (1) year of the date of issuance of a
development permit, or if work has begun without a permit, then the Zoning Administrator
or Designated Authorized Agent may order demolition of partially completed work.
4. Development permits must conform to be valid. All officials and employees of the City
vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance and shall not issue a permit or license for any uses, building,
or purpose in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any permit or license issued
in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and void and of no effect
whatever.
C. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. The property owner or their
designated agent may meet with the Zoning Administrator
or Designated Authorized Agent prior to submitting an
application for a development permit to review the
permitting procedures and the Ordinances.
2. Initiation. An application for a development permit may
be initiated by a property owner or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.31. Development Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-57
Authorized Agent, pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application Forms and Fees.
4. Staff review and final action. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness;
5. Within thirty (30) days of the date that a complete application is filed, considering the
approval criteria, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall issue the
development permit (with or without conditions) or notify the applicant in writing of his or
her refusal to issue the development permit and the reasons thereof.
6. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may attach to the development
permit conditions relating to the following:
(1) Compliance with the plans and specifications submitted by the developer to the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent;
(2) Time within which the development must be commenced or completed; and
(3) Protective measures that a developer must undertake for the benefit of
neighboring property, such as the construction of fencing or the establishment
of buffer areas.
7. One copy of the plans submitted with the application shall be returned to the applicant
when such plans have been approved, together with any conditions of such approval, the
signature of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, and any
development permit as may be granted. One copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be
retained by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent as a permanent
record or until such time as the development no longer occupies the subject parcel.
D. Approval Criteria
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall issue a development permit if he
or she finds that the development for which the development permit is sought constitutes a
general development permitted by this Ordinance and consistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance or a conditional development that was approved by the applicable approval body.
Section 3.32 Building Permit
A. Applicability
1. No building or structure or any part thereof shall hereafter be built, enlarged, altered,
moved, or demolished, or any plumbing or electrical work commenced within the City of
Ashland, except as exempted in Section 3.1, B., 3.: Exempt Activities or as exempted in
this Section unless a building permit is first obtained from the Building Inspector or
Designated Authorized Agent.
2. To the extent feasible, all police officers or other Authorized Agents of the City shall report
at once to the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent any building that they
have been made aware of that is being erected, altered, moved, or wrecked without a
building permit as required by this Ordinance.
3. It shall be unlawful to commence work on any building before a building permit has been
issued as required by this Ordinance.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.32: Building Permit
3-58 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
4. A building permit may not be required for exterior repairs or minor alterations that do not
change the area, structural strength, or level of occupancy, fire protection, light, or
ventilation, or the number of exits, or where the cost of repairs does not exceed the amount
identified in the City of Ashland’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
5. Interior repair projects not exceeding the amount identified in the City of Ashland
Comprehensive Fee Schedule shall not require a building permit. The cost of furniture and
removable equipment/fixture shall not be included in the project cost.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner (or owner’s agent) of a project
requiring a building permit may request a pre-application meeting with the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent to review the proposed work and clarify the
requirements for obtaining a building permit.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a building permit may be made upon
application of the property owner or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized
Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application Forms and
Fees.
4. Staff review. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized
Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval,
and submit the application to other City Staff and government
agencies for their review and comment as necessary or desired.
6. Staff final action. Within thirty (30) days of the City’s receipt
of a complete application and upon satisfactory review of the application, the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the request for issuance of a building permit.
C. Approval Criteria
If the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent finds that the proposed development
complies with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and all applicable laws and lawful
orders of the State of Wisconsin, he or she shall approve and shall issue a building permit, which
shall be posted at the building site in a manner visible from the street.
D. Applicant’s Responsibilities
1. No work for which a building permit is required shall be commenced until the building
permit and all other applicable permits are issued.
2. Permit fees shall be doubled for all work commenced prior to the issuance of a permit.
3. New commercial projects may require periodic inspections by a State certified commercial
building inspector.
4. The applicant shall request the required inspections associated with the building permit at
the appropriate times. Failure to call for the inspections at the appropriate times may
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.32: Building Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-59
require full or partial disassembly of the work to reveal covered work. Construction shall
not proceed beyond the point of inspection until the inspection has been completed.
5. Before the building can be occupied, the applicant shall request the final inspection and the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy as required.
Section 3.33 Demolition Permit
A. Applicability
No building, structure, or part thereof (as determined by the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent), shall be removed, razed or demolished without prior approval and/or a
demolition permit. Any building or structure, or part thereof, to be moved to a new location shall
require a permit pursuant to Section 3.34: Permit to Move a Building or Structure.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner (or owner’s agent) of a project
requiring a demolition permit may request a pre-application meeting with the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent to review the proposed work and clarify the
requirements for obtaining a demolition permit.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a demolition permit may be made upon application by the property
owner or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized
Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application Forms and
Fees.
4. Review. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized
Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to
Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval,
and submit the application to the Zoning Administrator, Public
Works Director, Fire Chief, Police Chief and other Designated
Authorized Agents, and other government agencies for their
review and comment as necessary or desired.
6. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent may
require an application for demolition be reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission, if
the proposed demolition will impact or has the potential to impact neighboring properties or
City infrastructure.
7. Staff final action. Within thirty (30) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application
and upon satisfactory review of the application, the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for issuance
of a demolition permit.
C. Approval Criteria
If the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent finds that the proposed demolition
complies with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, including all applicable standards in
Section 6.1, J.: Demolition and Moving of a Structure, and all applicable laws and lawful orders
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.35: Certificate of Occupancy
3-60 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
of the State of Wisconsin, he or she shall approve and issue a demolition permit, which shall be
posted at the building site in a manner visible from the street. A copy of the approved demolition
permit shall be provided to the Police, Fire, Public Works and Planning & Development
Departments. A copy of the permit may be provided to other governmental agencies or
departments if applicable.
D. Applicants Responsibilities
1. No work for which a demolition permit is required shall be commenced until the
demolition permit and all other applicable permits are issued. If approvals or permits are
required by other governmental agencies or departments, a letter of approval or a copy of
the permits shall be provided to the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent
prior to issuance of a demolition permit.
2. Permit fees shall be doubled for any work commenced prior to the issuance of a permit.
3. The applicant shall request the required inspections associated with the demolition permit
at the appropriate times, including inspections for properly abandoning utilities. Failure to
call for the inspections at the appropriate times may require full or partial disassembly of
the work to reveal covered work. Demolition shall not proceed beyond the point of
inspection until the inspection has been completed.
Section 3.34 Permit to Move a Building or Structure
A. Applicability
No building, structure, or part thereof (as determined by the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent), shall be moved without prior approval and/or a permit to move a building or
structure. Any building or structure, or part thereof, to be removed, razed or demolished shall
require a demolition permit pursuant to Section 3.33: Demolition Permit.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner (or
owner’s agent) of a project requiring a permit to move a building
or structure may request a pre-application meeting with the
Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent to review the
proposed work and clarify the requirements for obtaining the
permit.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a permit to move a building or structure
may be made upon application by the property owner or their
designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted
to the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant
to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application Forms and Fees.
4. Review. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent
shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section
3.1, D., 4.: Application Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval, and submit the application to
the Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director, Fire Chief, Police Chief or Designated
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.35: Certificate of Occupancy
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-61
Authorized Agents, and other government agencies for their review and comment as
necessary or desired.
6. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent may require the application to
move a building or structure be reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission, if the
proposed relocation will impact or has the potential to impact neighboring properties or
City infrastructure at the existing site or the proposed new location.
7. Staff final action. Within thirty (30) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application
and upon satisfactory review of the application, the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for issuance
of a permit to move a building or structure.
C. Approval Criteria
1. If the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent finds that the proposed
development complies with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, including all
applicable standards in Section 6.1, J.: Demolition and Moving of a Structure, and all
applicable laws and lawful orders of the State of Wisconsin, he or she shall approve and
shall issue a permit to move a building or structure, which shall be posted in a manner
visible from the street in the following locations:
a. At the existing site of the building or structure to be moved;
2. On the building or structure, or in a location accessible for viewing by local or state
officials while in transit; and
3. At the proposed final location, if the building or structure is to be located within the City of
Ashland.
A copy of the approved permit to move a building or structure shall be provided to the
Police, Fire, Public Works and Planning & Development Departments. A copy of the
permit may be provided to other governmental agencies or departments if applicable.
D. Applicants Responsibilities
1. No work for which a permit is required shall be commenced until the permit to move a
building or structure and all other applicable permits are issued. If approvals or permits are
required by other governmental agencies or departments, a letter of approval or a copy of
the permits shall be provided to the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent.
2. Permit fees shall be double for any work commenced prior to the issuance of a permit.
3. The applicant shall request the required inspections associated with the permit at the
appropriate times, including inspection for properly abandoning utilities. Failure to call for
the inspections at the appropriate times may require full or partial disassembly of the work
to reveal covered work. Construction shall not proceed beyond the point of inspection until
the inspection has been completed.
4. Before any building or structure to be located in the City of Ashland can be occupied, the
applicant shall request the final inspection and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as
required.
Section 3.35 Certificate of Occupancy
A. Intent
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.35: Certificate of Occupancy
3-62 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
The issuance of a certificate of occupancy is intended to ensure that new or expanded uses of a
structure or site, as well as alterations of an existing structure or site, comply with all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations of the City. A certificate of
occupancy is also intended to provide the City with a record of each new or expanded use of a
structure or site in Ashland.
B. Applicability
It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the occupancy of any new or expanded uses of a
structure and/or site, as well as alterations of an existing structure or site, until the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent of the City issues a certificate of occupancy for the
use. Permanent connection of any building to any City of Ashland utility shall be prohibited
without the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. Review Process
1. Application. Every application for a building permit shall be deemed an application for a
certificate of occupancy. Every application for a certificate of occupancy for a new use or
change in use of land or building shall be made directly to Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent. When a certificate of occupancy is required pursuant to this Ordinance,
the property owner or their designated agent shall request issuance of a certificate of
occupancy from the Building Inspector, or Designated Authorized Agent when the subject
work is complete (or substantially complete) and ready for occupancy or use.
2. Approval criteria. The Building Inspector, or Designated Authorized Agent shall review
the work and issue a certificate of occupancy if the work complies with the applicable
provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable City ordinances, all City building,
housing, and health laws, and any applicable conditions of approval that may have been
required pursuant to the development and approval process. Any lawful conditions of
occupancy shall be attached to or referred to on the certificate of occupancy.
3. Record keeping. The Building Inspector, or Designated Authorized Agent shall maintain
records of all certificates of occupancy and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any
person upon payment of a reasonable fee to cover the City’s cost related to the request.
D. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy
1. Approval criteria. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent may issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy for a period not to exceed six (6) months during
alteration or partial occupancy of a building, or pending its completion. Such temporary
certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights,
duties, or obligations of the property owner or the City, and shall not be issued except
under such restrictions as needed to adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. The
temporary certificate of occupancy shall only be issued for weather delays or other
circumstances beyond the control of the property owner as determined by the Building
Inspector, or Designated Authorized Agent.
2. Acceptance. Acceptance of a temporary certificate of occupancy implies consent to
application of the financial guarantee to make completion of any required improvements
not completed prior to the expiration date of the temporary certificate of occupancy and
forfeiture of any portion thereof not so applied, but no action or inaction by the City in
respect to any required improvement shall serve to extend the time of validity of any
temporary certificate of occupancy, or excuse any violation of this Ordinance. Any utility
connection existing during the time of the temporary certificate of compliance shall
terminate with the temporary certificate of occupancy.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.35: Certificate of Occupancy
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-63
3. Extension. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent may extend the time
of a temporary certificate of occupancy for good cause. Such extension shall extend for the
same period, the time for completion under the terms of any required bond.
E. Applicant’s Responsibilities
It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to request a final inspection and issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
Section 3.36 Sign Permit
A. Applicability
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, relocate, or structurally modify a
sign or cause the same to be done in the City of Ashland without first obtaining a sign permit for
each such sign pursuant to this Section and Section 6.6: Signs.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner, or their designated agent,
requiring a sign permit may request a pre-application meeting with the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent to review the proposed work and clarify the
requirements for obtaining a sign permit.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a sign permit may be made upon application of the property owner
or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees. The application shall contain the following information:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the sign
owner, the property owner where the sign is or shall be
located, and the sign contractor of the proposed sign.
4. Clear and legible scale drawings showing the construction,
size, dimensions, materials to be used, and the location of the
proposed sign and any existing signs on the parcel.
5. Calculations or evidence showing that the structure and
design comply with the provisions of Section 6.6: Signs.
6. Evidence of liability insurance policy or bond as required
herein.
7. Such other information as the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent may require to show full
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
8. Signature of the applicant.
9. Payment of all required fees.
10. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.36: Sign Permit
3-64 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
11. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval, and submit the application to
other City Staff for their review and comment as necessary or desired.
12. Staff final action. Within fifteen (15) working days of the City’s receipt of a complete
application and upon satisfactory review of the application, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request
for issuance of a sign permit. If a sign permit is denied, within fifteen (15) working days of
the denial, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall set forth in
writing the reasons for the denial.
C. Approval Criteria
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall issue a sign permit when the
permit application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, and the sign complies
with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 3.37 Bed and Breakfast Establishment Permit
A. Applicability
The development, operation, or management of a bed and breakfast establishment requires the
issuance of a bed and breakfast establishment permit pursuant to this Section and may require a
conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner, or
their designated agent, considering developing a bed and
breakfast establishment is encouraged to request a preapplication
meeting with the Zoning Administrator and other
applicable City Staff and government agencies, pursuant to
the procedures described in Section 3.1, D., 1.: Preapplication
Meeting.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a request for a bed and breakfast
establishment permit may be made upon application of the
property owner or their designated agent and may be made
simultaneously with the required application for a
conditional use permit.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.:
Application Forms and Fees and Section 3.1, D., 3.: Application Deadline.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval, and submit the application to
other City Staff and government agencies for their review and comment as necessary or
desired.
6. Staff final action. Upon satisfactory review of the application and, if required, upon
approval of a conditional use permit for the bed and breakfast establishment, the Zoning
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.37: Bed and Breakfast Establishment Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-65
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the request for approval of bed and breakfast establishment permit.
C. Approval Criteria
A bed and breakfast establishment permit shall be approved if it meets all of the following
criteria:
1. A conditional use permit, if required, has been approved;
2. The bed and breakfast establishment is consistent with all conditions of the approved
conditional use permit, if required; and
3. The bed and breakfast establishment meets all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and
applicable provisions set forth in Chapter DHS 195 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
or Chapter DHS 197 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
D. Termination of Permit
A bed and breakfast establishment permit shall be void upon the sale or transfer of the property
ownership. A permit issued in accordance with this Section shall be valid until terminated by
action of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent for violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance or violations of the provisions set forth in Chapter DHS 195 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code or Chapter DHS 197 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Section 3.38 Floodplain Certificate of Compliance
A. Applicability
No land in the Floodplain Overlay District as specified in Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay
District, shall be occupied or used, and no building that is hereafter
constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt, or replaced
shall be occupied until a Floodplain Certificate of Compliance is
issued by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent,
except where no development permit or building permit is required by
this Ordinance.
B. Review Process
1. Initiation. An application for a Floodplain Certificate of
Compliance may be initiated by a property owner or their
designated agent, concurrently with an application of a
development permit.
2. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent, pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees.
3. Staff review and final action. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
4. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and if all of the provisions of the
Floodplain Overlay District are met, the Floodplain Certificate of Compliance shall be
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.38: Floodplain Certificate of Compliance
3-66 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
issued within thirty (30) days after written notification from the applicant that the permitted
work is completed.
C. Approval Criteria
Approval of a Floodplain Certificate of Compliance shall be in accordance with the provisions
specified in Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District.
D. Additional Approvals
Approval of a Floodplain Certificate of Compliance signifies the application’s compliance with
the provisions of the Floodplain Overlay District. Such approval shall not relieve the applicant
from obtaining any other approvals that may be necessary for the proposed development
including, but not limited to, those required by the United States Army Corp of Engineers under
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act).
Section 3.39 Certified Survey Map without Public Dedication
A. Applicability
Whenever a division of land is proposed, but an insufficient number of parcels or parcels of size
such that a platted subdivision is not required by Section 9.1, C.: Types of Land Division, in lieu
of a platted subdivision, such division of land shall be accomplished by a certified survey map in
compliance with the provisions of Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes and this Ordinance.
If the proposed certified survey map does not involve dedications to the public, the certified
survey map may, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent,
be reviewed and approved administratively pursuant to this Section. If the proposed certified
survey map involves dedication to the public, it shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Common Council following the general procedures relating to plat review and
approval.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner, or
their designated agent, of a proposed division of land that is
intended to be accomplished by a certified survey map may
request a pre-application meeting with the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent and other
applicable City Staff, to review the proposed division of land
and clarify the requirements for obtaining approval of a
certified survey map.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a certified survey map may be made
upon application of the property owner or their designated
agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees and the required information specified in Section 9.2, E.: Certified Survey
Map.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.39. Certified Survey Map without Public Dedication
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-67
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval, and submit the application to
other City Staff and government agencies for their review and comment as necessary or
desired.
6. Staff final action. Within thirty (30) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application
and upon satisfactory review of the application, the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for approval
of a certified survey map.
C. Approval Criteria
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve a certified survey map
when the application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, and the certified
survey map complies with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance and state law.
Section 3.40 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
A. Applicability
No land disturbing construction activity as specified in Section 8.2, A., 4: Applicability shall
commence without receiving prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for the site
and all other applicable approvals and permits.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner, or
their designated agent, on any site on which land disturbing
construction activity is proposed to occur is encouraged to
request a pre-application meeting with the Public Works
Director or Designated Authorized Agent to review the
proposed land disturbing construction activity and clarify the
requirements for receiving the necessary approvals.
2. Initiation. Initiation of an erosion and sediment control plan
may be made upon application by the property owner or their
designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application
Forms and Fees. The application shall include all the required
information specified in Section 8.2, D.: Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan and Permitting Requirements.
4. Staff review. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and submit the application to
other City Staff and government agencies as may be necessary for their review.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.40: Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
3-68 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
6. Staff final action. Within thirty (30) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application,
the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the request for approval of the erosion and sediment control plan.
C. Approval Criteria
The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve an erosion and
sediment control plan when the application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid,
and the erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable provisions as specified in
Section 8.2: Construction Site Erosion Control (and elsewhere in this Ordinance) and state law.
Section 3.41 Storm Water Management Plan
A. Applicability
No land disturbing construction activity as specified in Section 8.3, A., 4: Applicability shall
commence without receiving prior approval of a storm water management plan for the site and all
other applicable approvals and permits.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner, or
their designated agent, on any site on which land disturbing
construction activity is proposed to occur is encouraged to
request a pre-application meeting with the Public Works
Director or Designated Authorized Agent to review the
proposed land disturbing construction activity and clarify the
requirements for receiving the necessary approvals.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a storm water management plan may
be made upon application by the property owner or their
designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.:
Application Forms and Fees. The application shall include
all the required information specified in Section 8.3, D.:
Storm Water Management Plan and Permitting Requirements.
4. Staff review. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and submit the application to
other City Staff and government agencies as may be necessary for their review.
6. Staff final action. Within thirty (30) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application,
the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the request for approval of the storm water management plan.
C. Approval Criteria
The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve a storm water
management plan when the application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, and
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.41: Storm Water Management Plan
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-69
the storm water management plan complies with the applicable provisions as specified in Section
8.3: Post Construction Storm Water Management (and elsewhere in this Ordinance) and state
law.
Section 3.42 Right-of-Way Permit
A. Applicability
All private utilities, private contractors and property owners shall obtain a right-of-way permit
from the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent prior to digging, excavating,
trenching, augering, jacking, or other work requiring a right-of-way permit, within any street or
alley right-of-way. Refer to City of Ashland Ordinance 501 for more information.
Section 3.43 Fence Permit
A. Applicability
No fence, gate, or wall (except those specifically exempted by Section 6.5: Fences) shall be
constructed without first having obtained an approved fence permit from the Building Inspector
or Designated Authorized Agent.
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. Any person or entity wishing to construct a fence, gate, or wall
may request a pre-application meeting with the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent to review the proposed work and discuss the requirements for receiving
the necessary approvals.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a fence permit may be made upon application by the property
owner or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized
Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.: Application Forms and
Fees. The application shall include the following supporting
information:
a. A plan at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1” =
20’) or greater, showing the location of any fences and
landscaped areas in relation to structures and parcel
lines;
b. A description of the types of fencing materials to be
used; and
c. A drawing showing the height, footings, and design of
the fences.
4. Staff review. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete the
following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
5. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and submit the application to
other City Staff and government agencies as may be necessary for their review.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.43: Fence Permit
3-70 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
6. Staff final action. Within fifteen (15) days of the City’s receipt of a complete application,
the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the request for a fence permit.
C. Approval Criteria
The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve a fence permit when the
application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, and the proposed work
complies with the applicable provisions as specified in Section 6.5: Fences.
D. Fence Permit Appealed
In the event that the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent denies a fence permit
application, the applicant may choose to appeal the denial decision to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Such appeal must be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent within ten (10) working days of the denial.
Section 3.44 Approval to Temporarily Place Items on Sidewalks
A. Applicability
No sales racks, tables, chairs, or other items shall be placed on City sidewalks without the
permission of the City. Items that are intended to be placed on a sidewalk shall require approval
from the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent. Refer to City of Ashland
Ordinance 501 for more information. This Section does not apply to newspaper racks, which are
governed by City of Ashland Ordinance 934, or sidewalk signs, which are governed by Section
6.6. F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
Section 3.45 Sign Permit for a Sidewalk Sign
A. Applicability
Pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Sign, no sidewalk sign shall
be allowed without the issuance of a sign permit pursuant to this
Section.
B. Review Process
1. Optional pre-application meeting. The property owner, or
their designated agent, requiring a sign permit for a sidewalk
sign adjacent to their property may request a pre-application
meeting with the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent to review the proposed sign and clarify the
requirements for obtaining a sign permit.
2. Initiation. Initiation of a sign permit may be made upon
application of the property owner or their designated agent.
3. Application submittal. A complete application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section
3.1, D., 2.: Application Forms and Fees. The application shall contain the following
information:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the sign owner, the property owner, and
the sign contractor of the proposed sign.
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.45: Sidewalk Sign Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-71
7. Clear and legible scale drawings showing the construction, size, dimensions, materials to be
used, colors, and the location of the proposed sign and any existing signs on the parcel.
8. Site sketch showing the location of the proposed sidewalk sign in relation to parcel lines,
buildings, and the sidewalk and street.
9. Such other information as the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may
require showing full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
10. Signature of the applicant on the sign permit.
11. Signature of the applicant on a hold harmless agreement.
12. Payment of all required fees.
4. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall complete
the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
13. Review the application, considering the criteria for approval, and submit the application to
the Public Works Director and Police Chief or Designated Authorized Agent for their
review and approval as necessary or desired.
5. Staff final action. Within fifteen (15) working days of the City’s receipt of a complete
application and upon satisfactory review of the application, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent (and where applicable, the Public Works Director and Police
Chief or Designated Authorized Agent) shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
request for issuance of a sign permit for a sidewalk sign. If a sign permit for a sidewalk
sign is denied, within fifteen (15) working days of the denial, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall set forth in writing the reasons for the denial.
C. Approval Criteria
1. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall issue a sign permit for a
sidewalk sign when the permit application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been
paid, and the sign complies the provisions of Section 6.6, F., 8., Sidewalk Sign.
2. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall deny an application for a
sign permit for a sidewalk sign if it is inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Reasons for denial may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. The sign material does not comply with the allowable material types;
14. The sign design or construction is not compatible with its surroundings;
15. The sign does not encourage a positive business atmosphere; and/or
16. The sign exceeds the allowable size.
D. Revocation of Sidewalk Sign Permit
1. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may elect to revoke a permit
for a sidewalk sign that is in violation of this Ordinance. Reasons for a revocation may
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. The location, installation, or construction of the sign presents a safety hazard or is
different than what was indicated on the application;
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.46: Annual Keeping of Animals Permit
3-72 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
b. The sign is being displayed outside the allowable hours for display; and/or
c. The sign is not appropriately stabilized or weighted to prevent unintentional
movement.
2. Process for revocation of a sign permit. The process for the revocation of a sign permit
associated with a sidewalk sign shall be as follows:
a. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall issue a written
warning specifying the violation and the allowable time to bring the violation into
compliance.
b. If the violation is not brought into compliance by the time allowed by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, the permit shall be revoked and may
not be renewed until the next calendar year.
c. Under circumstances in which, a sidewalk sign presents an immediate public safety
hazard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent,
the immediate removal of the sign may be ordered. If the owner fails to remove the
sign, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may physically
remove the sign. Upon removal of the illegal sign, the owner of the sign shall be
given thirty (30) days in which to salvage the sign upon payment of a ten dollar
($10.00) removal fee and a five dollar ($5.00) fee per day for storage. If not salvaged,
the sign may be disposed of as deemed appropriate.
Section 3.46 Keeping of Animals Permit
A. Applicability
It shall be unlawful to keep, on any property located in the City of Ashland, family farm animals
identified in Section 5.6, C.: Keeping of Animals (excluding those specifically exempted) without
first having obtained an approved Keeping of Animals permit from the Zoning Administrator and
Animal Control Officer or Designated Authorized Agent.
B. Review Process
1. Pre-application meeting. Any person or entity wishing to request the keeping of family
farm animals may request a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent to review the proposed request and discuss the requirements
for receiving the necessary approvals.
d. Initiation. Initiation of a keeping of animals permit may be made upon application by
the property owner or their designated agent.
e. Application submittal. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 2.:
Application Forms and Fees. The application shall include the following supporting
information:
a. A site sketch showing:
(1) Parcel lines and dimensions;
(2) Location of all existing buildings, structures and setbacks from parcel lines;
(3) Location of all occupied principal buildings on neighboring parcels within one
hundred (100) feet;
Part 3: Applications, Review, and Approval Procedures
Section 3.46: Annual Keeping of Animals Permit
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 3-73
(4) All streets avenues, alleys and other rights-of-way;
(5) Location of proposed shelters, coops, hives, fencing or other structures
proposed to be used; and
(6) Location of flyway barriers (for beekeeping).
b. A description, drawing and/or photos of the building and/or fencing materials to be
used;
c. Staff review. The Zoning Administrator and Animal Control Officer or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Determine if the application is complete pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 4.: Application
Completeness; and
b. Review the application, considering the approval criteria, and submit the application
to other City Staff and government agencies as may be necessary for their review.
c. Staff final action. Within thirty (30) days of the City’s receipt of a complete
application, the Zoning Administrator and Animal Control Officer or Designated
Authorized Agent shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for a
keeping of animals permit.
C. Approval Criteria
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall approve a keeping of animals
permit when the application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, and the
proposed work complies with the applicable provisions as specified in Section 5.6, C.: Keeping of
Animals.
D. Permit Expiration and Fees
A keeping of animals permit shall be valid from the date of issuance to December 31 of the 3rd
calendar year in which the permit was issued. A keeping of animals permit must be renewed each
3rd calendar year, prior to December 31 regardless of the date of issuance. Permit fees shall be
identified in the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule and shall be doubled for failure to
obtain a permit. Permits for the keeping of animals shall be subject to review and renewal upon
transfer of ownership of parcel or animals.
E. Revocation of a Keeping of Animals Permit
1. Reasons for revocation. The Zoning Administrator and/or Animal Control Officer or
Designated Authorized Agent may elect to revoke a permit for the keeping of animals that
is in violation of this Ordinance. Reasons for a revocation may include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
a. The location or installation of the animals and associated structures presents a safety
hazard or is different than what was indicated on the application;
b. The keeping of animals is creating a nuisance to occupants of nearby properties;
c. The animals are not provided with adequate shelter, a secure enclosure, food or water;
d. The shelter and/or enclosures are unsanitary or unsafe; and
e. Other reasons not specifically stated that endanger the safety, health and welfare of the
animals and/or citizens of the City.
Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approvals
Section 3.46: Annual Keeping of Animals Permit
3-74 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 1st, 2012
f. Process for revocation of a keeping of animals permit. The process for the
revocation of a keeping of animals permit shall be as follows:
a. The Zoning Administrator, Animal Control Office or Designated Authorized Agent
shall issue a written warning specifying the violation and the allowable time to bring
the violation into compliance;
b. If the violation is not brought into compliance by the time allowed, the permit shall be
revoked and may not be renewed until the next calendar year or for three (3) months,
whichever is later; and
c. Under circumstances in which, the keeping of animals presents an immediate public
safety hazard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, Animal Control Officer or
Designated Authorized Agent, the immediate removal of the animals may be ordered.
If the owner fails to remove the animals, the Animal Control Officer or Designated
Authorized Agent may physically remove the animals.
Section 3.46–3.54 (Reserved for future applications requiring administrative approval.)
Section 3.55 Other Required Permits and Approvals
In the event that this Ordinance references permits or approvals that are not specified in Part 3: Applications,
Reviews, and Approvals, the applicant shall submit an application on a form as directed by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-1
Part 4
ZONING DISTRICTS
Part 4: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 4.1 Zoning District Regulations .................................................................................................... 6
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 6
B. Relationship of Zoning Districts to the Comprehensive Plan .................................................... 6
C. Establishment of Zoning Districts ............................................................................................. 6
D. Zoning Map................................................................................................................................ 7
E. Zoning for Newly Annexed Land .............................................................................................. 9
F. Land Use Table & Dimensional Requirements Table ............................................................... 9
Section 4.2 R-E Residential Estate District ............................................................................................... 9
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 9
B. Uses ............................................................................................................................................ 9
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 12
Section 4.3 R-1 Single-Family Residential District ................................................................................. 13
Part 4: Zoning Districts describe requirements for each zoning district in the city. Zoning districts are organized by the primary use
in each district, including residential, commercial, industrial, waterfront, and other major uses. The requirements for each zoning
district include the types of land uses that are permitted and those uses that require a conditional use permit. Dimensional
standards are also included for each zoning district such as minimum parcel sizes and setback, height, and parcel coverage
requirements. In some cases, the district also specifies design standards or other special requirements that relate to the district.
Refer to the Zoning Map for the locations of the zoning districts. Some overlay zoning district locations may be illustrated within
this Part of the Unified Development Ordinance, rather than on the Zoning Map. Refer to the official Unified Development
Ordinance and the official Zoning Map on file with the Zoning Administrator for current information.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
4-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 13
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 13
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 16
Section 4.4 R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District ................................................................. 18
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 18
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 18
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 21
Section 4.5 R-3 Medium Density Residential District ............................................................................ 22
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 22
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 22
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 25
Section 4.6 R-4 High Density Residential District .................................................................................. 27
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 27
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 27
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 30
Section 4.7 MHC Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District ........................... 31
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 31
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 31
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 34
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 35
Section 4.8 MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District .................................................................... 35
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 35
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 36
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 41
D. Special Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Uses .................................................... 41
Section 4.9 PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District.................................................................... 43
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 43
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 44
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 44
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 45
Section 4.10 – 4.14 (Reserved for potential additional residential districts.) ........................................... 45
Section 4.15 NC Neighborhood Convenience District .............................................................................. 45
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 45
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 45
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 49
Section 4.16 RC Regional Commercial District ........................................................................................ 50
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 50
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 50
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 55
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 56
Section 4.17 CC City Center District ......................................................................................................... 56
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 56
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 56
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 61
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 61
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-3
Sections 4.18 – 4.19 (Reserved for potential additional commercial districts.) .......................................... 62
Section 4.20 MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District ....................................................................... 62
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 62
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 62
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 65
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 66
Section 4.21 LI Light Industrial District ................................................................................................... 66
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 66
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 66
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 70
Section 4.22 HI Heavy Industrial District ................................................................................................. 71
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 71
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 71
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 75
D. Special Requirements for Parcels in the Ashland Industrial Park............................................ 76
Sections 4.23 – 4.24 (Reserved for potential additional industrial districts.) ............................................ 76
Section 4.25 W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District ..................................................... 76
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 76
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 76
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 79
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 80
Section 4.26 W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District .......................................... 80
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 80
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 81
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 85
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 86
Section 4.27 W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District ................................................ 86
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 86
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 86
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 90
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 90
Section 4.28 W-C Waterfront Commercial District ................................................................................. 91
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 91
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 91
C. Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................................................... 95
D. Special Requirements .............................................................................................................. 96
Section 4.29 W-CC Waterfront City Center District ............................................................................... 96
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 96
B. Uses .......................................................................................................................................... 96
C. Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................................... 100
D. Special Requirements ............................................................................................................ 101
Section 4.30 W–I Waterfront Industrial District ................................................................................... 101
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 101
B. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 101
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
4-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
C. Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................................... 104
D. Special Requirements ............................................................................................................ 104
Section 4.31 W–PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District ................................................................. 105
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 105
B. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 105
C. Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................................... 107
D. Special Requirements ............................................................................................................ 108
Sections 4.32 – 4.34 (Reserved for potential additional waterfront districts.) ......................................... 108
Section 4.35 PI Public/Institutional District............................................................................................ 108
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 108
B. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 108
C. Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................................... 111
Section 4.36 PP Public Parks District ...................................................................................................... 112
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 112
B. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 112
C. Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................................... 114
Section 4.37 FD Future Development District ........................................................................................ 115
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 115
B. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 115
C. Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................................... 118
D. Design Standards for Agricultural Buildings and Other Accessory Buildings ...................... 119
Section 4.38 AIR Airport District ............................................................................................................ 120
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 120
B. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 120
C. Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................................... 122
Sections 4.39 – 4.44 (Reserved for potential additional other zoning districts.) ....................................... 122
Section 4.45 AIR-O Airport Overlay District ......................................................................................... 122
Section 4.46 W-O Waterfront Overlay District ...................................................................................... 122
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 122
B. District Boundaries ................................................................................................................ 123
C. Administration ....................................................................................................................... 123
D. Design Standards and Guidelines .......................................................................................... 123
Section 4.47 GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District .................................................................................. 126
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 126
B. District Boundaries ................................................................................................................ 126
C. Administration ....................................................................................................................... 126
D. Design Standards and Guidelines .......................................................................................... 127
Section 4.48 Reserved ................................................................................................................................ 128
Section 4.49 BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay District ........................................................................... 128
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 128
B. District Boundaries ................................................................................................................ 129
C. Administration ....................................................................................................................... 129
D. Design Standards ................................................................................................................... 129
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-5
Section 4.50 F-O Floodplain Overlay ...................................................................................................... 130
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 130
B. General Provisions ................................................................................................................. 130
C. Development Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts ............................................ 132
D. Development Standards Applicable to the FW Floodway District ........................................ 134
E. Development Standards Applicable to the FF Flood fringe District...................................... 136
F. Development Standards Applicable to the GFP General Floodplain District ........................ 139
Section 4.51 WET-O Wetland Overlay District ..................................................................................... 140
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 140
B. General Provisions ................................................................................................................. 140
C. District Boundaries ................................................................................................................ 141
D. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 142
Section 4.52 - 4.54 (Reserved for potential additional overlay districts other than PUDs.) ................... 144
Section 4.55 PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District ............................................................ 144
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 145
B. Applicability .......................................................................................................................... 145
C. Administration ....................................................................................................................... 145
Section 4.56 Conservation Subdivision Overlay District ....................................................................... 145
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 145
B. Applicability .......................................................................................................................... 146
C. Permitted Uses and Density ................................................................................................... 146
D. Design Standards ................................................................................................................... 147
Section 4.57 Traditional Neighborhood Design Overlay District ......................................................... 150
A. Intent ...................................................................................................................................... 150
B. Applicability .......................................................................................................................... 150
C. Uses ........................................................................................................................................ 151
D. Design Standards and Guidelines .......................................................................................... 152
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
4-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Section 4.1 Zoning District Regulations
A. Intent
The intent of Part 4: Zoning Districts is to establish zoning districts within the City of Ashland
that correspond with the Land Use Plan and the City’s vision, goals, objectives, and policies for
sustainable growth and development as described in the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
B. Relationship of Zoning Districts to the Comprehensive Plan
The zoning district requirements and the delineation of zoning district
boundaries on the Zoning Map shall be consistent with the goals,
objectives, and policies of the City of Ashland Comprehensive Plan.
The zoning district boundaries and rezoning requests shall also relate to
the Land Use Plan Map and the Staged Growth plans of the
Comprehensive Plan. The official Comprehensive Plan is on file in the
office of the Zoning Administrator.
C. Establishment of Zoning Districts
The City of Ashland is divided into the following base (underlying)
zoning districts as regulated in this Ordinance and as shown on the
Zoning Map.
1. R-E Residential Estate District
2. R-1 Single-Family Residential District
3. R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District
4. R-3 Medium Density Residential District
5. R-4 High Density Residential District
6. MHC Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park)
District
7. MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
8. PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District
9. NC Neighborhood Convenience District
10. RC Regional Commercial District
11. CC City Center District
12. MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District
13. LI Light Industrial District
14. HI Heavy Industrial District
15. W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District
16. W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
17. W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District
18. W-C Waterfront Commercial District
19. W-CC Waterfront City Center District
Helpful Note.
Any rezoning request that is
not consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan shall
also include a request for a
Comprehensive Plan
amendment pursuant to the
procedures specified in Part
3: Review, Application, and
Approval Procedures.
Helpful Note.
A copy of the Comprehensive
Plan may be downloaded from
the City’s website:
http://www.ci.ashland.wi.us/
Contact the Office of the
Zoning Administrator to verify
if amendments have been
made to the Plan.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-7
20. W-I Waterfront Industrial District
21. W-PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District
22. PI Public/Institutional District
23. PP Public Parks District
24. FD Future Development District
25. AIR Airport District
The City of Ashland is divided into the following overlay zoning districts as regulated by this
Ordinance and as may be shown on the Zoning Map or illustrated or described within this
Ordinance.
26. W-O Waterfront Overlay District
27. GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District
28. BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay District
29. F-O Floodplain Overlay
30. WET-O Wetland Overlay
31. PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
32. Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
33. Traditional Neighborhood Design Overlay District
D. Zoning Map
1. Location and boundaries of zoning districts. The location and
boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Ordinance
are set forth on the Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated as
part of this Ordinance, or are set forth in the pertinent sections of
this Ordinance.
2. Official Zoning Map and copies. An official Zoning Map shall
be created and kept on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator. Paper or electronic copies of the official Zoning
Map may be created for ease of access. Copies shall not be
considered the official Zoning Map and shall contain a
disclaimer stating that the information may not be current and
directing the user to the office of the Zoning Administrator for
the official Zoning Map.
3. Map format. The Zoning Map may be in hard copy or
electronic format or both.
4. Changes to district boundaries. Changes to zoning district boundaries must be approved
by the Common Council pursuant to Section 3.3: Zoning Map Amendments (Rezoning).
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall record any approved
change on the official Zoning Map after approval by the Common Council.
Helpful Note.
Copies of the Zoning Map are
included in Appendix B:
Zoning Maps. Copies are
also available at the Office of
the Zoning Administrator.
These copies are for general
reference only. Contact the
Office of the Zoning
Administrator to verify zoning
based on the Official Zoning
Map.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
4-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
5. Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
a. Parcel lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following parcel lines shall be
construed as following such parcel lines.
b. Street centerlines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following centerlines of
streets or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed as
following such lines.
c. Centerlines extended. Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to or
extensions of the centerlines or right-of-way lines of streets, or the centerlines or
right-of-way lines of highways, shall be construed as being parallel to or extensions
of and at such distance there from as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is
given, the distance shall be determined using the Zoning Map scale.
d. Water bodies. Boundaries shown following a water body shall be deemed to be
located along the shores of the water body unless designated otherwise in this
Ordinance.
e. Railroad right-of-way. Boundaries shown following a railroad line shall be deemed
to be located midway between the main tracks of the railroad line.
f. Parcel divisions. Where a district boundary divides a single parcel:
(1) Except where required under 4.1, D., 5., f., (2), the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall extend to the entire lot all provisions of the
one (1) district on said parcel which is:
? Most similar to and compatible with the prevailing uses established on all
lands within three-hundred (300) feet of said parcel, and
? Consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Where the Zoning Administrator or Designated Agent finds the above criteria
not conducive to a determination of the prevailing zoning district, the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall refer the matter to the
Plan Commission for consultation.
(3) In no case shall a parcel split by zoning boundaries have more than one
principal structure on the parcel.
(4) A principal use may not be established on any portion of a parcel if the
minimum parcel size requirements of the applicable district cannot be met by
the available area of the entire parcel.
g. Vacations or discontinuances. If a street, alley, or other public way is vacated or
discontinued by official action, then the zoning district adjoining such public way
shall be extended automatically to include all land attached by reversion to the
centerline of such public way. Such vacated or discontinued land shall be subject to
all regulations of the extended district.
h. Administrative interpretations. Where physical or cultural features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown on the Zoning Map, or where due to scale,
lack of detail, or illegibility there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to
the intended location of any district boundaries, or in other circumstances not covered
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.1: Zoning District Regulations
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-9
above, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall interpret the
district boundaries.
E. Zoning for Newly Annexed Land
All land annexed to the City shall automatically be designated FD Future Development District
unless otherwise directed by the Common Council as part of the annexation process. Such
designation shall remain until definite boundaries and regulations for such land are adopted by the
Common Council.
F. Land Use Table & Dimensional Requirements Table
Appendix C-1: Land Use Table presents a land use table that is intended to help aid the reader in
comparing allowable land uses across the various base or (underlying) districts. This table is
intended for general reference only. Appendix C-2: Dimensional Requirements Table presents a
table that is intended to help aid in understanding dimensional requirements in each district. If a
conflict exists between the information presented in the land use table and the information
specified in the text of the districts described in this Part of this Ordinance, the text of the districts
shall take precedence.
Section 4.2 R-E Residential Estate District
A. Intent
The intent of the R-E Residential Estate District is to provide areas, as guided by the
Comprehensive Plan, for single-family detached dwellings (and other compatible uses) on
relatively large parcels. Uses in the R-E Residential Estate District may or may not be served by
municipal water and/or sanitary sewer service.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-E Residential Estate District,
pursuant to all applicable specific uses standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: single-family detached
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
Predominantly Residential Districts
Sections 4.2 – 4.14 describe the zoning districts in the City of Ashland that are predominantly residential. However, these districts
may also allow for a mixture of other uses including commercial, industrial, and public institutional uses. Likewise residential uses
may also be allowed in other zoning districts that are predominantly commercial or industrial.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.2: R-E Residential Estate District
4-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
d. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less of land
disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling, and/or
excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the R-E Residential Estate District
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional
Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(6) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(7) Emergency residential facility, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(8) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(10) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a religious
institution or primary or secondary school and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day
Care Center: Commercial
(2) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Cemetery
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.2: R-E Residential Estate District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-11
(2) Government or community service use
(3) Religious institution
(4) School: primary or secondary
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, or institutional use, and pursuant to
Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Agriculture, forestry, and open space uses.
(1) Agriculture, provided that the subject parcel has a gross developable area of
five (5) acres or more
(2) Forestry, provided that the subject parcel has a gross developable area of five
(5) acres or more
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated with a
building permit or other development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
g. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the building exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are allowed as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the R-E Residential Estate District, pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Animals: keeping horses, mules, or donkeys, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.:
Animals: Keeping of
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.2: R-E Residential Estate District
4-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(4) Animals: raising family farm animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(5) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(6) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(7) Day care: family home, licensed or unlicensed, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.:
Day Care: Family Home
(8) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(9) Foster care: family home
(10) Greenhouse: local
(11) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(12) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(13) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(14) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(15) Outdoor wood-fired furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750,
Section 750.B.17.
(16) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(17) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(18) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(19) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(20) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(21) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(22) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R-E Residential Estate
District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3:
Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. One half (1/2) acre.
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.2: R-E Residential Estate District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-13
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility,
communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements
of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty (20) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. The maximum allowable height of principal
buildings, as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, shall be as follows.
a. All uses. Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Exception for public, civic, and institutional uses. The maximum allowable height of
a principal building for public, civic, or institutional use shall not exceed forty-five
(45) feet, provided that the minimum principal building setback from the interior side
parcel line as specified in this section shall be increased one (1) foot for every
additional foot that the building is over thirty-five (35) feet in height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. The maximum building coverage shall be as
follows:
a. All residential uses. Twenty-five (25) percent.
b. Other uses. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage of a parcel shall be
as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
a. All residential uses. Thirty (30) percent impervious coverage.
b. Other uses. Seventy (70) percent impervious coverage.
Section 4.3 R-1 Single-Family Residential District
A. Intent
The intent of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District is to provide areas, as guided by the
Comprehensive Plan, for low-density single-family residential uses and other uses compatible
with single-family residential uses.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District, pursuant to all applicable specific uses standards.
a. Residential uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.3: R-1 Single-Family Residential District
4-14 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: single-family detached
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
d. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(6) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(7) Emergency residential facility, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(8) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.3: R-1 Single-Family Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-15
(10) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a religious
institution or primary or secondary school and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day
Care Center: Commercial
(2) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Cemetery
(2) Government or community services
(3) Religious institution
(4) School: primary or secondary
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, or institutional use, and pursuant to
Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Outdoor wood-fired furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750,
Section 750.B.17.
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the building exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as the principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.3: R-1 Single-Family Residential District
4-16 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, licensed or unlicensed, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.:
Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R-1 District shall be as
follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area.
(1) Dwelling: single-family detached. Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
(2) Other residential use. Ten thousand five hundred (10, 500) square feet.
(3) Other principal use. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width.
(1) Dwelling: single-family detached. Fifty (50) feet.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.3: R-1 Single-Family Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-17
(2) Other residential use. Seventy-five (75) feet.
(3) Other principal use. One hundred (100) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility,
communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements
of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line.
(1) All residential use. Twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Twenty (20) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty (30) feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Eight (8) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Fifteen (15) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. The maximum allowable height of principal
buildings, as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, shall be as follows:
a. All uses. Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Exception for public, civic, and institutional uses. The maximum allowable height of
a principal building for public, civic, or institutional use shall not exceed forty-five
(45) feet, provided that the setback requirement from the interior side parcel lines are
increased one (1) foot for every additional foot that the building is over thirty-five
(35) feet in height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel.
a. All residential uses. Thirty (30) percent.
b. Other use. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum allowable impervious coverage of a
parcel shall be as follows except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, D.:
Impervious Coverage.
a. All residential uses. Forty (40) percent.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.3: R-1 Single-Family Residential District
4-18 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
b. Other use. Seventy (70) percent.
Section 4.4 R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District
A. Intent
The intent of the R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District is to provide areas, as guided by
the Comprehensive Plan, for low-density residential uses allowing both single-family and twofamily
dwellings and to allow for other uses compatible with single and two-family residences.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-2 Single and Two-Family
Residential District, pursuant to all applicable specific uses standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: single-family attached, not to exceed two (2) dwelling units per
building
(3) Dwelling: single-family detached
(4) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
d. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the R-2 Single and Two-Family
Residential District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.4: R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-19
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(6) Emergency residential facility, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(7) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(8) Long term housing, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.:, Social Services
(9) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(10) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
(11) Community-based Residential Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a religious
institution or primary or secondary school and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day
Care Center: Commercial
(2) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(3) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Cemetery
(2) Clinic and Medical Office
(3) Government or community services
(4) Religious institution
(5) School: primary or secondary
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is public, civic, or institutional use, and pursuant to
Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Outdoor wood-fired furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750,
Section 750.B.17.
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.4: R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District
4-20 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as the principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District, pursuant to all
applicable specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, licensed or unlicensed, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.:
Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.4: R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-21
(15) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5 B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R-2 District shall be as
follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area.
(1) Dwelling: single-family attached. Seven thousand (7,000) square feet per
dwelling unit.
(2) Dwelling: single-family detached. Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
(3) Dwelling: two-family or duplex. Ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square
feet.
(4) Other residential use. Ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet.
(5) Other principal use. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width.
(1) Dwelling: single-family attached. Fifty (50) feet per unit.
(2) Dwelling: single-family detached: Fifty (50) feet.
(3) Dwelling: two-family or duplex. Seventy-five (75) feet.
(4) Other residential use. Seventy-five (75) feet.
(5) Other principal use. One hundred (100) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this Section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Twenty (20) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty (30) feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.4: R-2 Single and Two-Family Residential District
4-22 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) All residential uses. Eight (8) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Fifteen (15) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. The maximum allowable height of principal
buildings, as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, shall be as follows:
a. All uses. Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Exception for public, civic, and institutional uses. The maximum allowable height of
a principal building for public, civic, or institutional use shall not exceed forty-five
(45) feet, provided that the setback requirement from the interior side parcel lines are
increased one (1) foot for every additional foot that the building is over thirty-five
(35) feet in height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel.
a. All residential uses. Thirty-five (35) percent.
b. Other use. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be as follows
except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
a. All residential uses. Forty (40) percent.
b. Other use. Seventy (70) percent.
Section 4.5 R-3 Medium Density Residential District
A. Intent
The intent of the R-3 Medium Density Residential District is to provide areas for medium density
residential uses in Ashland. The R-3 District is also intended to allow for other uses compatible
with medium density residential uses. Areas of medium density residential development may
also occur within other districts, including, but not limited to, the MRC Mixed
Residential/Commercial, W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial, PRI Planned
Residential/Institutional, CC City Center, and W-CC Waterfront City Center Districts.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Medium Density Residential
District.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) or four (4) dwelling units per building
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.5: R-3 Medium Density Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-23
(3) Dwelling: single-family attached not to exceed six (6) dwelling units per
building
(4) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
d. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary or seasonal use.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the R-3 Medium Density
Residential District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dwelling: single-family detached
(6) Emergency residential facility, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(7) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(8) Long term housing, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.:, Social Services
(9) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(10) Short term housing, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.,: Social Services
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.5: R-3 Medium Density Residential District
4-24 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(11) Community-based Residential Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a religious
institution or primary or secondary school and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day
Care Center: Commercial
(2) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(3) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Government or community services
(3) Nursing home
(4) Religious institution
(5) School: primary or secondary
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, or institutional use, and pursuant to
Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as the principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to a permitted or
conditional use in the R-3 Medium Density Residential District, pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.5: R-3 Medium Density Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-25
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, licensed or unlicensed, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.:
Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R3 District shall be as
follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area.
(1) Dwelling: multi-family. Five thousand (5,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) Dwelling: single-family attached. Five thousand (5,000) square feet per
dwelling unit.
(3) Dwelling: two-family or duplex. Ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square
feet.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.5: R-3 Medium Density Residential District
4-26 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(4) Other residential use. Ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet.
(5) Other principal use. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width.
(1) Dwelling: multi-family. One hundred (100) feet.
(2) Dwelling: single-family attached. Thirty-five (35) feet per dwelling unit.
(3) Dwelling: two-family or duplex. Seventy-five (75) feet.
(4) Other residential use. Seventy-five (75) feet.
(5) Other principal use. One (100) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Twenty (20) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty (30) feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Eight (8) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Fifteen (15) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line.
(1) All residential uses. Thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) Other principal use. Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. The maximum allowable height of principal
buildings, as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, shall be as follows:
a. All uses. Thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Exception for public, civic, and institutional uses. The maximum allowable height of
a principal building for public, civic, or institutional use shall not exceed forty-five
(45) feet, provided that the setback requirement from the interior side parcel lines are
increased one (1) foot for every additional foot that the building is over thirty-five
(35) feet in height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.5: R-3 Medium Density Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-27
a. All residential uses. Forty (40) percent.
b. Other use. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage of a parcel shall be
as follows except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
a. All residential uses. Forty-five (45) percent.
b. Other use. Seventy (70) percent.
Section 4.6 R-4 High Density Residential District
A. Intent
The intent of the R-4 High Density Residential District is to provide areas for high-density
residential uses in Ashland. The R-4 District is also intended to allow for other uses compatible
with high-density residential uses. Other areas of high density residential development may occur
within other districts, including, but not limited to, the MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial, WMRC
Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial, PRI Planned Residential/Institutional, CC City
Center, W-CC Waterfront City Center, and PI Public/Institutional Districts.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-4 High Density Residential
District, pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) to eight (8) dwelling units per building
(3) Dwelling: single-family attached three (3) to six (6) dwelling units per
building
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
d. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary or seasonal use.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.6: R-4 High Density Residential District
4-28 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the R-4 High Density
Residential District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dormitory
(6) Dwelling: multi-family, if more than eight (8) dwelling units per building
(7) Emergency residential facility
(8) Fraternity or sorority house
(9) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(10) Long term housing pursuant to Section 5.2, F.: Social Services
(11) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(12) Short term housing pursuant to Section 5.2, F.: Social Services
(13) Community-based Residential Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a religious
institution, a primary or secondary school, or the common facilities of a multifamily
dwelling complex and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care Center:
Commercial
(2) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(3) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Government or community service
(3) Nursing home
(4) Religious institution
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.6: R-4 High Density Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-29
(5) School: primary or secondary
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, or institutional use, and pursuant to
Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as the principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to a permitted or
conditional use in the R-4 High Density Residential District, pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, licensed or unlicensed, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.:
Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.6: R-4 High Density Residential District
4-30 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the R-4 District shall be as
follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area.
(1) Dwelling: multi-family. Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per
dwelling unit.
(2) Dwelling: single-family attached. Four thousand (4,000) square feet per
dwelling unit.
(3) Other residential use. Ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet.
(4) Other principal use. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width.
(1) Dwelling: multi-family. One hundred (100) feet.
(2) Dwelling: single-family attached. Thirty-five (35) feet per dwelling unit.
(3) Other residential use. Seventy-five (75) feet.
(4) Other principal use. One (100) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty-five (35) feet.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.6: R-4 High Density Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-31
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifteen (15) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. Forty-five (45) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel.
a. All residential uses. Forty (40) percent.
b. Other use. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage of a parcel shall be
as follows except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
a. All residential uses. Sixty (60) percent.
b. Other use. Seventy (70) percent.
7. Minimum floor area per unit in multi-family uses.
a. Efficiency unit. Five hundred (500) square feet.
b. One bedroom unit. Six hundred (600) square feet.
c. Two bedroom unit. Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
d. Three or more bedroom units. Seven hundred fifty (750) plus one hundred fifty (150)
square feet for each additional bedroom beyond two (2).
8. Minimum floor area per unit for multi-unit senior housing.
a. Efficiency unit. Four hundred fifty (450) square feet.
b. One bedroom unit. Five hundred fifty (550) square feet.
c. Two bedroom unit. Seven hundred (700) square feet.
d. Three or more bedroom units. Seven hundred (700) plus one
hundred (100) square feet for each additional bedroom
beyond two (2).
Section 4.7 MHC Manufactured Home Community
(Mobile Home Park) District
A. Intent
The intent of the MHC Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home
Park) District is to preserve and provide safe and attractive areas in
Ashland for manufactured homes (mobile homes) in a manufactured
home community (mobile home park) setting.
B. Uses
Sustainability Tip.
A sustainable community
provides housing that
meets the needs of all
residents. Manufactured
home communities
provide an affordable
housing option for many
of Ashland’s residents.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.7: MHC Manufactured Home Community District
4-32 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the MHC Manufactured Home
Community (Mobile Home Park) District, pursuant to all applicable specific use standards:
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: single-family detached for use by the owner or caretaker of the
associated manufactured home community
(3) Manufactured home, mobile home, and manufactured home community,
pursuant to Section 5.1, G.: Mobile Homes and Mobile/Manufactured Home
Communities
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
d. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Common facilities for use by residents and guests of a manufactured home
community such as a laundromat, indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, and
a storm shelter.
(2) Parking lot as a principal use, provided that it provides parking for the
exclusive use of the residents of the mobile home community and their guests.
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the MHC Manufactured
Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.7: MHC Manufactured Home Community District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-33
(3) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(4) Emergency residential, facility provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(5) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(6) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Day care center: commercial provided that is an accessory use to a religious
institution, primary or secondary school, or the common facilities of the
manufactured home community and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care
Center: Commercial
(2) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Government or community service use
(2) Religious institution
(3) School: primary or secondary
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, or institutional use, and pursuant to
Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, provided that it is located on a parcel for which the
principal use is a government or community service use, a religious institution,
a primary or secondary school, or the common facilities of a manufactured
home community, and pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as the principal use
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.7: MHC Manufactured Home Community District
4-34 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are allowed as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the MHC Manufactured Home Community District, pursuant to all
applicable specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, licensed or unlicensed, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.:
Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Required area for a manufactured home community. A manufactured home
community shall have a minimum area of ten (10) acres.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.7: MHC Manufactured Home Community District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-35
2. Lot requirements for manufactured homes.
a. Minimum lot width. Thirty-two (32) feet.
b. Minimum lot length. Seventy-five (75) feet.
3. Required setbacks at the periphery of a manufactured home community. All principal
and accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from parcel or
lot lines at the periphery of a manufactured home community.
4. Required setbacks internal to the manufactured home community.
a. Minimum principal and accessory building setback from all internal street right-ofways.
Ten (10) feet.
b. Minimum distance between all principal buildings. Twenty (20) feet.
c. Minimum distance between an accessory building and a principal building. Six (6)
feet.
d. Minimum accessory building setback from an interior parcel line. Three (3) feet.
5. Maximum allowable principal building height. No principal building shall exceed one
(1) story, nor twenty-five (25) feet in height, as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.:
Building Height.
6. Height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height requirements for
accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
7. Maximum building coverage of a manufactured home lot.
a. Manufactured home. Thirty-five (35) percent.
b. Manufactured home and accessory buildings combined. Fifty
(50) percent.
D. Special Requirements
1. Manufactured home community created after January 1, 1996.
A manufactured home community created after January 1, 1996 (or
the addition of new lots to an existing manufactured home
community) shall be approved through the planned unit
development (PUD) process, pursuant to Section 4.55: PUD
Planned Unit Development Overlay District.
2. Licensing, inspection, enforcement, and special design standards. Licensing,
inspection, enforcement, and special design standards of a manufactured home community
shall be pursuant to Section 5.1, G.: Mobile Homes and Mobile/Manufactured Home
Communities.
Section 4.8 MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
A. Intent
The MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District encompasses areas that have predominantly
existing residential uses, but that may also have existing commercial and/or industrial uses, some
of which may be incompatible with residential uses and/or the vision for the area as expressed in
the City’s Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the district is as follows:
1. Encourage the preservation and enhancement of existing residential uses in the district;
Sustainability Tip.
Mixed use districts allow
residents the opportunity
to live, work, shop, and
recreate within walking
distance of each other.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
4-36 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Encourage a sensitive mixture and integration of new residential uses in the district,
including single and two-family dwellings, single-family attached dwellings, and multifamily
dwellings;
3. Allow the preservation and enhancement of existing commercial uses that are compatible
with the predominantly residential character of the area and the vision for the area as
expressed in the City’s Comprehensive Plan;
4. Encourage existing commercial and industrial uses that are incompatible with residential
uses and/or the vision of the area, as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan, to relocate to
other appropriate districts in the city;
5. Encourage redevelopment of sites that have existing incompatible uses by providing
flexibility to redevelop those sites with mixed residential uses, compatible commercial
uses, and potentially compatible light industrial uses;
6. Encourage redevelopment in the district to occur through the planned unit development
(PUD) process at a neighborhood or block scale. If the City of Ashland has adopted a plan
for an area in the MRC District, the application of this Ordinance is intended to be
consistent with the vision, goals, objectives, and policies of that plan.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the MRC Mixed
Residential/Commercial District.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment, and provided that is associated with a permitted
residential use or a residential use in existence prior to the adoption of this
ordinance
(2) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(3) Dwelling: single-family attached, not to exceed two (2) dwelling units per
building
(4) Dwelling: single-family detached
(5) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(6) Any residential use in the district that was in existence prior to the adoption of
this ordinance (and was a conforming use at that time) shall be a permitted use
on the subject parcel.
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Any commercial use in the district that was in existence prior to the adoption of
this ordinance (and was a conforming use at that time) shall be a permitted use
on the subject parcel.
c. Public, institutional, and civic uses.
(1) Public park
d. Utility and communication uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-37
(1) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: public or private
f. Temporary and seasonal uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Seasonal market, pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
g. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of the permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the MRC Mixed
Residential/Commercial District subject to the special requirements of this section and to
the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Boarding or rooming home
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dwelling: accessory, provided that it is associated with a single-family
detached dwelling, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(6) Dwelling combined with a conditional use
(7) Dwelling: single-family attached, three to six units per building
(8) Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) or more dwelling units
(9) Emergency residential facility, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(10) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(11) Rehabilitation center/transitional facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility and provided that the facility
does not serve more than fifteen (15) persons at one time
(12) Tourist home, provided that it is associated with a single-family detached
dwelling, and pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
4-38 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(13) Community-based Residential Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Animal boarding, animal training, or animal grooming, except that no outdoor
kennels nor outdoor runs shall be allowed
(2) Artist studio
(3) Assembly hall
(4) Bank or financial institution
(5) Business service
(6) Car wash
(7) Day care center: commercial, pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care Center:
Commercial
(8) Dry cleaning and laundry drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
(9) Filling station with or without a convenience store
(10) Funeral home
(11) Garden supply or landscaping center
(12) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(13) Laundromat
(14) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(15) Lodging establishment, short stay or extended stay
(16) Office
(17) Personal service
(18) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(19) Restaurant: carry-out, fast food, drive-in, or sit-down
(20) Retail establishment: convenience
(21) Retail establishment: general
(22) Social services
(23) Tavern
(24) Theater
(25) Tool and equipment rental facility
(26) Vehicle repair and service
(27) Veterinary clinic: small animal
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Contractor’s yard, provided that the use was a conforming use in existence on
the subject parcel prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and that the use has
not lapsed for more than twelve (12) consecutive months) and pursuant to the
special requirements of this section
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-39
(2) Freight terminal, provided that the use was a conforming use in existence on
the subject parcel prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and that the use has
not lapsed for more than twelve (12) consecutive months) and pursuant to the
special requirements of this section
(3) Manufacturing: heavy, provided the use was a conforming use in existence on
the subject parcel prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and that the use has
not lapsed for more than twelve (12) consecutive months) and pursuant to the
special requirements of this section
(4) Manufacturing: light, provided that the use was a conforming use in existence
on the subject parcel prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and that the use
has not lapsed for more than twelve (12) consecutive months) or provided that
the use is replacing a more intense existing use, and pursuant to the special
requirements of this section
(5) Public works yard, provided the use was a conforming use in existence on the
subject parcel prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and that the use has not
lapsed for more than twelve (12) consecutive months) and pursuant to the
special requirements of this section
(6) Research and development use, provided that the use was a conforming use in
existence on the subject parcel prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and that
the use has not lapsed for more than twelve (12) consecutive months) or
provided that the use is replacing a more intense existing use, and pursuant to
the special requirements of this section.
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Club or association
(3) Government or community service use
(4) Nursing home
(5) Religious institution
(6) School: primary or secondary, or specialty or personal instruction
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, institutional, or communication
service use, and pursuant to Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment:
Major
(2) Communication service
(3) Outdoor wood-fired furnace associated with a single-family detached dwelling,
pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.17.
(4) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(5) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
4-40 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate sales office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary
Real Estate Office
g. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District, pursuant to all
applicable specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, licensed or unlicensed, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.:
Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-41
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent. Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.:
Outdoor Merchandise Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Basic dimensional requirements. Basic dimensional requirements including parcel area
and width requirements, principal building setback requirements, allowable height
requirements, maximum building coverage requirements, maximum impervious coverage,
and other pertinent dimensional requirements shall be identical to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in this Ordinance that best resembles the use of the said
parcel, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent of the
City. For example, the dimensional requirements for a single-family detached dwelling
shall meet the dimensional requirements for a single-family detached dwelling in the R-1
Single Family Residential District; the dimensional requirements for a high density
residential use shall meet the dimensional requirements for a high density residential use in
the R-4 High Density Residential District; and the dimensional requirements for a
commercial uses shall meet the dimensional requirements for a commercial use in the NC
Neighborhood Convenience District.
2. Buffer requirements between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial
District abuts a less intense existing use (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent of the City), the more intense use shall provide a landscaped
buffer pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening.
D. Special Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Uses
1. Standards for commercial and industrial uses.
a. Standards for commercial uses in the district. The
Common Council of the City of Ashland recognizes that a
variety of commercial uses exist in the MRC District.
Standards for continuation and/or expansion of
commercial uses in the district are as follows:
(1) Existing commercial uses (listed as conditional uses
in the district) shall be allowed to continue (and
potentially expand) in a manner that is compatible
with adjacent residential uses.
(2) Commercial uses shall not replace existing
residential uses, except in unique situations, the Common Council may find
that it is in the best interest of the overall community to allow this to occur,
Helpful Note.
Applicants considering
development in the MRC
District should contact the
Zoning Administrator early in
the process to learn which
dimensional requirements
apply to the proposed
development.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
4-42 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
especially along arterial roads where the dominant existing land use relates to
commercial uses.
(3) Commercial uses shall serve the local and neighborhood population; however,
commercial uses adjacent to US Highway 2 may also serve the needs of the
traveling public. Commercial uses over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
shall be directed to the RC Regional Commercial District.
(4) To the extent possible, commercial uses shall be integrated with each other to
allow for shared parking and enhanced vehicular and pedestrian access.
(5) Commercial uses shall be limited to arterial and collector streets.
b. Standards for industrial uses in the district. The Common Council of the City of
Ashland recognizes that a variety of industrial uses exist in the MRC District,
especially along arterial and collector streets. Standards for continuation and/or
expansion of industrial uses in the district are as follows:
(1) Existing contractor yards, freight terminals, heavy manufacturing, public work
yards, and similar industrial uses are encouraged to relocate to an appropriate
industrial district in the city. However, these uses shall be allowed to continue
on the parcels on which they exist. Expansion and/or renovation of the uses
may be considered pursuant to the conditional use procedures of this
Ordinance, with special consideration given to the impact of the uses on the
neighborhood and the overarching vision of the City as expressed in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) New industrial uses in the district are not anticipated. However, in unique
situations the Common Council may find that it is in the best interest of the
neighborhood and the overall community to allow the replacement of existing,
more intense industrial uses with appropriate light manufacturing or research
and development uses.
(3) Where feasible, appropriate industrial uses in the district shall be clustered and
have appropriate screening to reduce possible adverse impacts on the
neighborhood and to promote possible synergy between industrial uses.
(4) Industrial uses shall be limited to arterial or collector streets, or to areas where
there is a distinct cluster of appropriate industrial uses.
2. Decision criteria and potential conditions of approval.
a. Decision criteria. Required approvals associated with commercial and industrial uses
in the MRC District shall meet the intent of this district and shall be consistent with
all of the conditional use requirements specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit. Approval or denial of a conditional use permit shall place special emphasis
on how the use addresses neighborhood compatibility and protection issues.
b. Possible conditions of approval. The Common Council may attach appropriate
conditions to any approvals associated with a conditional use in the district.
Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Limited hours of operation;
(2) Limited number, types, and hours of deliveries;
(3) Limited or no outdoor storage;
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.8: MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-43
(4) Limited or no drive through window;
(5) Special building and site design standards that ensure compatibility with the
neighborhood; and/or
(6) Increased screening and/or buffers.
3. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
4. Gateway Overlay District requirements. Parcels that have frontage on a U.S. or State
Highway shall meet the requirements specified in Section 4.47: GTWY-O Gateway
Overlay District.
Section 4.9 PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District
A. Intent
The PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District encompasses areas near major institutions in
Ashland, including Northland College, Wisconsin Indianhead Technical College, and Memorial
Medical Center. Existing uses in the district may include agriculture, open space, and relatively
scattered single-family detached dwellings and commercial uses. The intent of the district is as
follows:
1. Promote development and/or redevelopment of the district based on traditional
neighborhood design principles as described in Section 4.57: Traditional Neighborhood
Design Overlay District. Where applicable, development and/or redevelopment shall be
consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Binsfield Road/Ellis Avenue
Neighborhood Plan described in the City’s Comprehensive Plan and/or other subsequent
and related plans approved by the City;
2. Encourage development and redevelopment in the district to occur through the planned unit
development (PUD) process at a neighborhood or block scale;
3. Promote a mix of residential uses that provide a variety of residential styles, types, and
sizes to accommodate households of various ages, sizes, and incomes;
4. Encourage the development and/or redevelopment of public, civic, and institutional uses
that will have a synergistic relationship with existing nearby institutions. Examples of such
uses may include, but are not limited to, the following: government
offices, research institutions, not-for-profit organizations, schools,
parks, religious institutions, residential care facilities, clinics, and
similar uses;
5. Allow for the development and/or redevelopment of “green” or light
industrial uses that have a synergistic relationship with existing
nearby institutions. These uses shall not create excessive pollution,
congestion, noise, or other adverse conditions that are inconsistent
with the mixed-use character of the district. Examples of acceptable
uses may include, but are not limited to, the following: light
industries that develop and produce sustainable building products,
medical industries, research and development uses, and clean, high-tech industries. Where
feasible, it is the intent of this district to encourage the clustering of light industries in the
district to enhance the environmental, social, and economic performance of individual
industries through collaboration with other industries and institutions in the district;
Sustainability Tip.
The PRI District provides a
unique opportunity to
create a development that
incorporates principles of
sustainability. Refer to the
Comprehensive Plan for
additional information on
this area.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.9: PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District
4-44 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
6. Encourage the limited development of neighborhood convenience uses that provide the
district with convenient, pedestrian access to commercial uses that serve the frequent
commercial needs of the local area. Direct large-scale commercial development to the RC
Regional Commercial District;
7. Incorporate a transportation system that offers public transit opportunities and multiple
routes for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
8. Protect and enhance significant natural features in the district, including, but not limited to,
the Bay City Creek Corridor, wetlands, and woodlands.
B. Uses
1. Uses that are not part of an approved planned unit development (PUD).
a. Uses in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance. Any use in the district that
was in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and was a conforming use at
that time) shall be a permitted use on the subject parcel.
b. New residential development in established residential neighborhoods. A singlefamily
detached dwelling shall be a permitted use in established residential
neighborhoods (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent), provided that the dwelling is served by public sanitary sewer and
water. Single-family dwellings in established residential neighborhoods shall be
consistent with the provisions of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
c. Other uses. All uses that are not part of an approved planned unit development, were
not in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance, and are not a single-family
detached dwelling served by public sanitary sewer and water, shall be consistent with
the FD Future Development District provisions of this Ordinance, except that all
permitted uses in the FD District shall be conditional uses in the PRI District. The
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent of the City shall have the
option of waiving the requirement for conditional use permit approval for minor or
accessory uses that do not have a major impact on the district, including fences,
signs, minor renovations, and similar uses.
2. Uses that are part of an approved planned unit development (PUD). Uses that are part
of a planned unit development (PUD) in the PRI District shall be established in the planned
unit development (PUD) ordinance. The uses shall relate to the intent of this district and
(where applicable) the goals, objectives, and policies, of the Binsfield Road/Ellis Avenue
Neighborhood Plan described in the City’s Comprehensive Plan and/or other subsequent
plans approved by the City.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Basic dimensional requirements for permitted, conditional, and accessory uses that
are not part of an approved planned unit development (PUD). Basic dimensional
requirements including parcel area and width requirements, principal building setback
requirements, allowable height requirements, maximum building coverage requirements,
maximum impervious coverage, and other pertinent dimensional requirements shall be
identical to the dimensional requirements of the FD Future Development District.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.9: PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-45
2. Basic dimensional requirements for permitted, conditional, and accessory uses that
are part of an approved planned unit development (PUD). Basic dimensional
requirements including parcel area and width requirements, principal building setback
requirements, allowable height requirements, maximum building coverage requirements,
maximum impervious coverage, and other pertinent dimensional requirements shall be
established in an approved planned unit development (PUD) ordinance and shall be
consistent with generally accepted traditional neighborhood
design principles.
D. Special Requirements
1. Planned unit development (PUD) area requirement. The
minimum area for a planned unit development in the PRI
District is twenty (20) acres. However, the Common Council
can waive this requirement if it finds that the PUD
encompasses a clearly defined area that will not preclude
logical development of adjacent properties in a manner
consistent with the intent of this section.
2. Planned unit development (PUD) procedures and approval.
A planned unit development (PUD) in the PRI District shall
follow the procedures and approval requirements specified in
Section 4.55: PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay, except as modified in this section.
Approval or denial of a planned unit development (PUD) application shall clearly state how
the planned unit development (PUD) application meets or fails to meet the intent of the PRI
District.
Section 4.10 – 4.14 (Reserved for potential additional residential districts.)
Section 4.15 NC Neighborhood Convenience District
A. Intent
The intent of the NC Neighborhood Convenience District is to provide areas of neighborhood
convenience retail sales and services that serve the local or neighborhood population, rather than
the regional population. Uses in this district are intended to be compatible with the surrounding
residential neighborhood. Neighborhood convenience uses may also occur within other pertinent
districts in Ashland, including, but not limited to, the MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial, the
PRI Planned Residential/Institutional Districts, and the W-MRC Waterfront Mixed
Residential/Commercial District.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the NC Neighborhood Convenience
District pursuant to all specific use standards.
Predominantly Commercial Districts
Sections 4.15. – 4.19. describe the zoning districts in the City of Ashland that are predominantly commercial. However, these
districts may also allow for a mixture of other uses including residential, industrial, and public institutional uses. Likewise
commercial uses may also be allowed in other zoning districts that are predominantly residential or industrial.
Sustainability Tip.
The NC District allows
convenient and pedestrian
oriented access to local
businesses that help meet the
needs of the surrounding
neighborhood. This helps
promote economic
development while reducing
the need for automobile
transportation.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.15: NC Neighborhood Convenience District
4-46 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
a. Residential uses.
Dwelling, provided that the dwelling is combined with a permitted or conditional use
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Animal boarding, animal training, or animal grooming, except that no outdoor
kennels nor outdoor runs shall be allowed
(2) Artist studio
(3) Bank or financial institution
(4) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment, and provided that is associated with a permitted
residential use or a residential use in existence prior to the adoption of this
ordinance
(5) Business service
(6) Day care center: commercial, pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care Center:
Commercial
(7) Dry cleaning and laundry, drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
(8) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(9) Laundromat
(10) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(11) Office
(12) Personal service
(13) Retail: convenience or general, not to exceed two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet
(14) Veterinary clinic: small animal, except that no outdoor kennels nor outdoor
runs shall be allowed
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Club or association
(3) Government or community service use
(4) Public park
(5) Religious institution
(6) School: primary, secondary, specialty, or personal instruction
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
e. Agriculture, forestry, and open space uses.
(1) Open space: public or private
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.15: NC Neighborhood Convenience District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-47
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Seasonal market, pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
g. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in a NC Neighborhood
Convenience District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses
(1) Adult family home pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Boarding or rooming house
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that fifteen (15) or fewer persons are served
by the facility
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Emergency residential shelter, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(6) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(7) Rehabilitation center/transitional facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Assembly hall
(2) Car wash
(3) Currency exchange, payday loan establishment, or title loan agency, pursuant
to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment, Payday Loan
Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own Establishment, or
Similar Use
(4) Filling station with or without a retail convenience use
(5) Funeral home
(6) Garden supply or landscaping center
(7) Lodging establishment: short stay or extended stay
(8) Pawn shop, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment,
Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own
Establishment, or Similar Use
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.15: NC Neighborhood Convenience District
4-48 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(9) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(10) Rent-to-own establishment, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange
Establishment, Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop,
Rent-to-Own Establishment, or Similar Use
(11) Restaurant: carry-out or fast food, drive-in, or sit-down
(12) Retail: convenience or general, exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet
(13) Social Services, pursuant to Section 5.2 F.: Social Services
(14) Theater
(15) Tool and equipment rental facility
(16) Vehicle repair and/or service
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Nursing home
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, or institutional use, and pursuant to
Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Communication service
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use.
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the NC Neighborhood Convenience District, pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.15: NC Neighborhood Convenience District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-49
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(19) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the NC Neighborhood
Convenience District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section
10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) square feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.15: NC Neighborhood Convenience District
4-50 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Ten (10) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Ten (10)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten (10) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Twenty-five (25) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
7. Buffer requirements between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the NC Neighborhood Convenience District
abuts a less intense existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer
pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening.
Section 4.16 RC Regional Commercial District
A. Intent
The intent of the RC Regional Commercial District is to provide areas for commercial uses along
major streets and highways in the city for the convenience of travelers, tourists, and the residents
of Ashland. The district is intended to provide for a full range of commercial uses to be located
on sites with immediate access to arterial or collector streets. It is also the intent of the district to
allow the continuation of existing residential uses in the district, while allowing the sensitive
conversion of residential parcels to appropriate commercial uses that can benefit from the
district’s proximity to arterial or collector streets. Commercial uses in the RC District are not
intended to weaken the commercial vitality of the CC City Center District. It is also the intent of
the RC Regional Commercial District to conditionally allow the continuation of existing
industrial uses in the district, while encouraging the industrial uses to relocate to an appropriate
industrial district in the city.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RC Regional Commercial District
pursuant to all specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Residential uses in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
(2) Dwelling combined with a permitted use
b. Commercial uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.16: RC Regional Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-51
(1) Animal boarding, animal training, or animal grooming, except that no outdoor
kennels nor outdoor runs shall be allowed
(2) Artist studio
(3) Assembly hall
(4) Bank or financial institution
(5) Business service
(6) Car wash
(7) Day care center: commercial, pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care Center:
Commercial
(8) Dry cleaning and laundry, drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
(9) Funeral home
(10) Garden supply or landscaping center
(11) Home improvement center
(12) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(13) Laundromat
(14) Lodging establishment: short stay
(15) Lodging establishment: extended stay
(16) Office
(17) Personal service
(18) Recreation facility: commercial indoor
(19) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
(20) Restaurant: carry-out, fast food, or sit-down.
(21) Retail: convenience
(22) Retail: general
(23) Tavern
(24) Theater
(25) Tool and equipment rental facility
(26) Vehicle repair and/or service
(27) Vehicle sales and/or rental
(28) Veterinary clinic: small animal, except that no outdoor kennels nor outdoor
runs shall be allowed
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Clubs and associations
(3) Government or community service use
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.16: RC Regional Commercial District
4-52 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(4) Museum
(5) Public park
(6) Religious institution
(7) School: primary or secondary, specialty or personal instruction
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication service
(2) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: public or private
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation.
(2) Land filling: temporary
(3) Seasonal market, pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
g. Other uses.
(1) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(2) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in a RC Regional
Commercial District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment, and provided that is associated with a permitted
residential use or a residential use in existence prior to the adoption of this
ordinance
(3) Boarding or rooming house
(4) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that fifteen (15) or fewer persons are served
(5) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(6) Dwelling combined with a conditional use
(7) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory, and
provided that it is associated with a detached single-family residence that was
in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance
(8) Emergency residential facility
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.16: RC Regional Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-53
(9) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(10) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(11) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home, and provided that it
is associated with a detached single-family residence that was in existence prior
to the adoption of this ordinance
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Adult entertainment establishment, pursuant to Section 5.2, A.: Adult
Entertainment Establishment
(2) Adult retail establishment
(3) Agricultural services
(4) Animal boarding, animal training, or animal grooming, with an outdoor kennel
and/or outdoor run
(5) Currency exchange, payday loan establishment, or title loan agency, pursuant
to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment, Payday Loan
Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own Establishment, or
Similar Use
(6) Dry cleaning and/or laundry: onsite processing
(7) Filling station
(8) Freight terminal: local
(9) Manufactured home dealer, sales and display, pursuant to Section 5.2, E.:
Manufactured Home Dealer, Sales and Display
(10) Pawn shop, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment,
Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own
Establishment, or Similar Use
(11) Rent-to-own establishment, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange
Establishment, Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop,
Rent-to-Own Establishment, or Similar Use
(12) Social services, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.: Social Services
(13) Veterinary clinic: large animal
(14) Warehouse: self-storage
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Any industrial use (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent of the City) that was in existence on the subject parcel prior
to the adoption of this ordinance (and was a conforming use at that time) shall
be a conditional use on the subject parcel provided that the use has not lapsed
for more than twelve (12) consecutive months
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Nursing home
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.16: RC Regional Commercial District
4-54 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
e. Agricultural uses.
(1) Agricultural services
f. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, institutional, or communication
service use, and pursuant to Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment:
Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
g. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
h. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the RC Regional Commercial District, pursuant to all applicable specific
use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.16: RC Regional Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-55
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(19) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the RC Regional Commercial
District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3:
Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred fifty (150) square feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifteen (15) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
7. Buffer requirement between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the RC Regional Commercial District abuts a
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.16: RC Regional Commercial District
4-56 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
less intense existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer pursuant to
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening.
D. Special Requirements
1. Gateway Overlay District requirements. Parcels that have frontage on a U.S. or State
Highway shall meet the gateway overlay requirements specified in Section 4.47 GTWY-O
Gateway Overlay District.
2. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
Section 4.17 CC City Center District
A. Intent
The intent of the CC City Center District is to encourage and foster the further development and
enhancement of the downtown (city center) area. The district requirements recognize the unique
characteristics of the city center area as the heart of the city. The city center provides a mix of
traditional downtown uses that are consistent with the vision for the area as expressed in the
Comprehensive Plan, including retail, entertainment, offices, services, government facilities, and
a mixture of residential uses. However, the district also includes a variety of industrial uses,
some of which may not be compatible with the City’s vision for the district. Should an existing
industrial use in this district cease to exist, it is the intent of this district to encourage the parcel to
transition to a use consistent with the vision of the area as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the CC City Center District.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Residential use, provided that the use was in existence prior to the adoption of
this ordinance and provided that the use has not lapsed for more than twelve
(12) consecutive months since the date of adoption of this ordinance.
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Dwelling combined with a permitted use
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Animal boarding, animal training, or animal grooming, except that no outdoor
kennels nor outdoor runs shall be allowed
(2) Artist studio
(3) Assembly hall
(4) Bank or financial institution
(5) Business service
(6) Conference center
(7) Day care center: commercial, pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care Center:
Commercial
(8) Dry cleaning and laundry, drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.17: CC City Center District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-57
(9) Funeral home
(10) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(11) Laundromat
(12) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(13) Office
(14) Personal service
(15) Recreation facility: commercial indoor
(16) Restaurant: carry-out, fast food, or sit-down
(17) Retail: convenience or general
(18) Tavern
(19) Theater
(20) Veterinary clinic: small animal, except that no outdoor kennels nor outdoor
runs shall be allowed
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Club or association
(3) Government or community service use
(4) Museum
(5) Public park
(6) School: primary, secondary, or specialty or personal instruction
(7) Religious institution
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication service
(2) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: public or private
f. Temporary or seasonal use.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Seasonal market pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
g. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of the permitted uses in this district.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.17: CC City Center District
4-58 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the CC City Center District
subject to the special requirements of this section and to the issuance of a conditional use
permit as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Boarding or rooming home
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that a maximum of fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory, and
provided that it is associated with a detached single-family residence that was
in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance
(6) Dwelling combined with conditional use
(7) Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) or more units per building
(8) Dwelling: single-family attached, no more than six (6) units per building
(9) Dwelling: single-family detached
(10) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(11) Emergency residential facility
(12) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(13) Rehabilitation center/transitional facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(14) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home, and provided that it
is associated with a detached single-family residence that was in existence prior
to the adoption of this ordinance
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Adult retail establishment
(2) Car wash
(3) Currency exchange, payday loan establishment, or title loan agency, pursuant
to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment, Payday Loan
Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own Establishment, or
Similar Use
(4) Filling station
(5) Freight terminal: local
(6) Garden supply and landscaping center
(7) Home improvement center
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.17: CC City Center District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-59
(8) Lodging establishment: short stay or extended stay
(9) Pawn shop, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment,
Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own
Establishment, or Similar Use
(10) Rent-to-own establishment, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange
Establishment, Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop,
Rent-to-Own Establishment, or Similar Use
(11) Restaurant: drive-in
(12) Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
(13) Social services, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.: Social Services
(14) Tool and equipment rental facility
(15) Vehicle repair and/or service
(16) Vehicle sales and/or rental
(17) Warehouse: self-storage, provided the use was a conforming use in existence
on the subject parcel prior to the adoption of this ordinance (and that the use
has not lapsed for more than twelve (12) consecutive
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Any industrial use (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent of the City) that was in existence on the subject parcel prior
to the adoption of this ordinance (and was a conforming use at that time) shall
be a conditional use on the subject parcel provided that the use has not lapsed
for more than twelve (12) consecutive months since the date of the adoption of
this ordinance.
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Nursing home
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, institutional, or communication
service use, and pursuant to Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment:
Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Temporary real estate sales office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary
Real Estate Office
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.17: CC City Center District
4-60 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
g. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the CC City Center District, pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.17: CC City Center District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-61
(19) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the CC City Center District
shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming
Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel area for properties located in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay
District. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except that a smaller parcel area may
be allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit.
c. Minimum parcel width. Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Minimum parcel width for properties located in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay
District. One-hundred forty (140) feet, except that a smaller parcel width may be
allowed with approval of a conditional use permit.
2. Setback requirements of a principal building from all parcel lines. None, except that
all parcels in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District shall meet the requirements specified
in Section 4.47: GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District. Setbacks may be reduced with the
approval of a conditional use permit.
3. Maximum parcel coverage. One hundred (100) percent, except that all parcels in the
GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District shall meet the following:
a. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty percent (50%).
b. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy percent (70%), except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
4. Maximum height of principal building. The maximum height of a principal building as
measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height shall be forty-five (45) feet, except
that parcels in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District shall be thirty-five (35) feet. A
principal building may be allowed to exceed the height requirement with the approval of a
conditional use permit.
5. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings in the district shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.:
Accessory Building.
6. Buffer requirements between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the CC City Center District abuts a less intense
existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer pursuant to Section 6.4:
Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening.
D. Special Requirements
1. Standards for industrial uses in the district. The Common Council of the City of
Ashland recognizes that a variety of industrial uses exist in the CC District. Standards for
continuation and/or expansion of industrial uses in the district are as follows:
a. Existing industrial uses shall be allowed to continue on the parcels on which they
exist. Expansion or improvements to existing industrial uses may be considered
pursuant to the conditional use procedures of this Ordinance, with special
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.17: CC City Center District
4-62 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
consideration given to the impact of the uses on the neighborhood and the
overarching vision of the City as expressed in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. New industrial uses in the district are not anticipated. However, in unique situations
the Common Council may find that it is in the best interest of the neighborhood and
the overall community to allow the replacement of existing, more intense industrial
uses, with appropriate light manufacturing, research and development, or similar
industrial uses, that have less of an adverse impact on the surrounding area.
2. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines.
3. Gateway Overlay District requirements. Parcels within the Gateway Overlay District
shall meet the requirements specified in Section 4.47: GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District.
Sections 4.18 – 4.19 (Reserved for potential additional commercial districts.)
Section 4.20 MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District
A. Intent
The MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District encompasses an area that has been historically
industrial, but is currently composed of a mixture of commercial and industrial uses. The intent
of this district is to allow continued use of commercial and industrial uses in the district in a
manner that is compatible with surrounding residential uses.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the MCI Mixed
Commercial/Industrial District pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Commercial uses.
(1) Artist studio
(2) Assembly hall
(3) Bank or financial institution
(4) Business service
(5) Car wash
(6) Dry cleaning and laundry drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
(7) Freight terminal: local
(8) Filling station with or without a convenience store
(9) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(10) Laundromat
Predominantly Industrial Districts
Sections 4.20 – 4.24 describe the zoning districts in the City of Ashland that are predominantly industrial. However, these
districts may also allow for a mixture of other uses including residential, commercial, and public institutional uses. Likewise
industrial uses may also be allowed in other zoning districts that are predominantly commercial.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.20: MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-63
(11) Office
(12) Personal service
(13) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(14) Restaurant: carry-out, fast food, drive-in, or sit down
(15) Retail establishment: convenience or general
(16) Theater
(17) Tool and equipment rental facility
(18) Vehicle repair and service
(19) Veterinary clinic: small animal
b. Industrial uses.
(1) Contractor’s shop
(2) Dry cleaning and/or laundry: onsite commercial processing
(3) Manufacturing: light
(4) Public works yard
(5) Research and development
c. Public, institutional, and civic uses.
(1) Public park
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: public or private
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation.
(2) Land filling: temporary
g. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of the permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the MCI Mixed
Commercial/Industrial District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as
specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
a. Commercial uses.
(1) Animal boarding, animal training, or animal grooming, with an outdoor kennel
and/or outdoor run
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.20: MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District
4-64 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) Social services, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.: Social Services
(3) Vehicle sales and/or rental
b. Industrial uses.
(1) Composting facility: community or indoor pursuant to Section 5.3, C.
Community Composting Facilities
(2) Contractor’s yard
(3) Freight terminal: commercial
(4) Power generation plant
(5) Recycling facility: community, pursuant to Section 5.3, B.: Recycling
Facilities and Indoor and/or Outdoor Salvage Operations
(6) Warehouse: general
(7) Wholesale and distribution center
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Club or association
(3) Government or community service use
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Communication service
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of this District.
3. Accessory uses. The following uses are allowed as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District, pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.20: MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-65
(3) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(4) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(5) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(6) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(7) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(8) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(9) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(10) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(11) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(12) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(13) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. Parcel requirements shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. One-half (1/2) acre.
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public park, public open space, and utility,
communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements
of this Section.
2. Setback requirements for principal buildings. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, B.:
Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel. Thirty (30) feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty (20) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
3. Setback requirements for accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be setback
from parcel lines and principal buildings pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
4. Maximum building height.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.20: MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial District
4-66 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
a. Principal building. No principal building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height,
as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height except that buildings over
thirty-five (35) feet may be allowed pursuant to the approval of a conditional use
permit.
b. Accessory building. The height of an accessory building shall be as specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
7. Buffer requirement between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
an expansion of a more intense existing use) in the MCI Mixed Commercial/Industrial
District abuts a less intense existing use (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent), the more intense use shall provide a buffer pursuant to
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening.
D. Special Requirements
1. Gateway overlay district requirements. Parcels that have frontage on a U.S. or State
Highway shall meet the requirements specified in Section 4.47: GTWY-O Gateway
Overlay District.
Section 4.21 LI Light Industrial District
A. Intent
The intent of the LI Light Industrial District is to provide an area for storage, warehousing,
wholesaling, light manufacturing, and similar uses that do not create excessive pollution,
congestion, noise, or other adverse conditions that are inconsistent with the surrounding area.
Properties in the LI Light Industrial District can serve as a transitional land use between the more
intensive heavy industrial sites and other residential and business uses. It is also the intent of this
district to allow existing uses, including residential and agricultural uses, to continue in the
district until they can logically and sensitively transition to an industrial use.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the LI Light Industrial District
pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Dwelling: single-family detached, provided that the dwelling was in existence
prior to the adoption of this ordinance and provided that the use has not lapsed
for more than twelve (12) consecutive months since the date of the adoption of
this ordinance
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Freight terminal: local
(2) Tool and equipment rental facility
(3) Vehicle repair and/or service
(4) Warehouse: self-storage
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.21: LI Light Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-67
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Contractor’s shop
(2) Dry cleaning and/or laundry: onsite commercial processing
(3) Manufacturing: light
(4) Public works yard
(5) Research and development
(6) Warehouse: general
(7) Wholesale and distribution center
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Government or community service use
(2) Public park
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication service
(2) Essential services
f. Agriculture, forestry, and open space uses.
(1) Agriculture, provided that the subject parcel has a gross area of five (5) acres or
more
(2) Agricultural research facility
(3) Agricultural services
(4) Forestry, provided that the subject parcel has a gross area of five (5) acres or
more
(5) Open space: private or public
g. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation.
(2) Land filling: temporary
h. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the LI Light Industrial
District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Bed and breakfast establishment associated with a permitted dwelling, pursuant
to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.21: LI Light Industrial District
4-68 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) Dwelling that serves as a caretaker’s residence for a permitted or conditional
use
(3) Home occupation associated with a permitted dwelling, if the use exceeds the
pertinent standards specified in Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Adult entertainment establishment, pursuant to Section 5.2, A.: Adult
Entertainment Establishment
(2) Animal boarding, animal grooming, or animal training, with or without outdoor
kennels and/or outdoor runs
(3) Artist studio
(4) Business service
(5) Car or truck wash
(6) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a
permitted or conditional use and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care Center:
Commercial
(7) Garden supply or landscaping center
(8) Home improvement center
(9) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(10) Manufactured home dealer, sales and display, pursuant to Section 5.2, E.:
Manufactured Home Dealer, Sales and Display
(11) Office as a principal use
(12) Pawn shop, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment,
Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own
Establishment, or Similar Use
(13) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(14) Rent-to-own establishment, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange
Establishment, Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop,
Rent-to-Own Establishment, or Similar Use
(15) Retail: convenience or general as a principal use
(16) Social services, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.: Social Services
(17) Vehicle sales and/or rental
(18) Veterinary clinic: large or small animal, with or without outdoor kennels or
runs
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Composting facility: community or indoor, pursuant to Section 5.3, C.
Community Composting Facilities
(2) Contractor’s yard
(3) Freight terminal: commercial
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.21: LI Light Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-69
(4) Power generation plant
(5) Recycling facility pursuant to Section 5.3, B.: Recycling Facilities and Indoor
and/or Outdoor Salvage Operations
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) School, specialty or special instruction
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
g. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to a permitted or
conditional use in the LI Light Industrial District.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, provided that the animals are accessory to
a permitted residential use and pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals: Keeping
of
(3) Animals: keeping horses, mules, and donkeys, provided that the animals are
accessory to a permitted residential use and pursuant to Section 5.6, C.:
Animals: Keeping of
(4) Animals: raising family farm animals, provided that the animals are accessory
to a permitted residential use and pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(5) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(6) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(7) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(8) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(9) Foster care: family home
(10) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.21: LI Light Industrial District
4-70 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(11) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(12) Office, provided that it is accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
(13) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(14) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(15) Outdoor wood-fired furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750,
Section 750.B.17.
(16) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(17) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(18) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(19) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(20) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(21) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(22) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent
(23) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. Parcel requirements shall be as follows except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. One (1) acre
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility,
communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements
of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, B.:
Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty (20) feet.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.21: LI Light Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-71
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
3. Setback requirements for accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be setback
from parcel lines and principal buildings pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
4. Maximum building height.
a. Principal building. No principal building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height,
as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height except that buildings over
thirty-five (35) feet may be allowed pursuant to the approval of a conditional use
permit.
b. Accessory building. The height of accessory buildings shall be as specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. The combined footprint of all principal and
accessory buildings on a parcel shall not exceed forty (40) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage..
Section 4.22 HI Heavy Industrial District
A. Intent
The intent of the HI Heavy Industrial District is to provide areas in the City for intense industrial
uses. The HI District is intended to be separated from residential development and it is intended
to be limited to areas where adequate transportation and pertinent utilities and services exist. It is
also the intent of this district to allow existing uses, including residential and agricultural uses, to
continue in the district until they can logically and sensitively transition to an industrial use.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the HI Heavy Industrial District
pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Dwelling: single-family detached, provided that the dwelling was in existence
prior to the adoption of this ordinance and provided that the use has not lapsed
for more than twelve (12) consecutive months since the date of the adoption of
this ordinance
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Freight terminal: local
(2) Tool and equipment rental facility
(3) Vehicle repair and/or service
(4) Warehouse: self-storage
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Contractor’s shop
(2) Contractor’s yard
(3) Dry cleaning and/or laundry: onsite commercial processing
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.22: HI Heavy Industrial District
4-72 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(4) Freight terminal: commercial
(5) Manufacturing: light
(6) Manufacturing: heavy
(7) Public works yard
(8) Research and development
(9) Warehouse: general
(10) Warehouse: self-storage
(11) Wholesale and distribution center
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Government or community service use
(2) Public park
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication service
(2) Essential services
f. Agriculture, forestry, and open space uses.
(1) Agriculture, provided that the subject parcel has a gross area of five (5) acres or
more
(2) Agricultural research facility
(3) Forestry, provided that the subject parcel has a gross area of five (5) acres or
more
(4) Agricultural services
(5) Open space: private or public
g. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation.
(2) Land filling: temporary
h. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the HI Heavy Industrial
District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Bed and breakfast associated with a permitted dwelling, pursuant to Section
5.1, B.: Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.22: HI Heavy Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-73
(2) Dwelling that serves as a caretaker’s residence for a permitted or conditional
use
(3) Home occupation permitted with a permitted dwelling, if the use exceeds the
pertinent standards specified in Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Adult entertainment establishment, pursuant to Section 5.2, A.: Adult
Entertainment Establishment
(2) Animal boarding, animal grooming, or animal training, with or without outdoor
kennels and/or outdoor runs
(3) Artist studio
(4) Business service
(5) Car or truck wash
(6) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a
permitted or conditional use and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care Center:
Commercial
(7) Garden supply or landscaping center
(8) Home improvement center
(9) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(10) Manufactured home dealer, sales and display, pursuant to Section 5.2, E.:
Manufactured Home Dealer, Sales and Display
(11) Office as a principal use
(12) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(13) Vehicle sales and/or rental
(14) Veterinary clinic: large or small animal, with or without outdoor kennels or
runs
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Batch plant: concrete or asphalt
(2) Composting facility: community or indoor, pursuant to Section 5.3, C.
Community Composting Facilities
(3) Grain elevator
(4) Landfill: construction debris
(5) Mined materials: processing and/or recycling
(6) Power generation plant
(7) Recycling facility, pursuant to Section 5.3, B.: Recycling Facilities and Indoor
and/or Outdoor Salvage Operations
(8) Salvage operation: indoor and/or outdoor
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.22: HI Heavy Industrial District
4-74 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) School, specialty or special instruction
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Mining, consistent with Chapter NR 135 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
and all other applicable regulations
g. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to a permitted or
conditional use in the HI Heavy Industrial District.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, provided that the animals are accessory to
a permitted residential use, and pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals: Keeping
of
(3) Animals: keeping horses, mules, and donkeys provided that the animals are
accessory to a permitted residential use, and pursuant to Section 5.6, C.:
Animals: Keeping of
(4) Animals: raising family farm animals, provided that the animals are accessory
to a permitted residential use and pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(5) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(6) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(7) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(8) Fences, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(9) Foster care: family home
(10) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(11) Landscaping and/or gardening
(12) Office, accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.22: HI Heavy Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-75
(13) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(14) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(15) Outdoor wood-fired furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750,
Section 750.B.17.
(16) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(17) Solar equipment
(18) Swimming pool for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.:
Swimming Pool
(19) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(20) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(21) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(22) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. Parcel requirements shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. Two (2) acres
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility,
communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements
of this section.
2. Setback Requirements. Setback requirements shall be as follows, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Fifty (50) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty (20) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
3. Setback requirements for accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be setback
from parcel lines and principal buildings pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
4. Maximum building height.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.22: HI Heavy Industrial District
4-76 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
a. Principal building. No principal building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height,
as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height except that buildings over
thirty-five (35) may be allowed pursuant to the approval of a conditional use permit.
b. Accessory building. The height of accessory buildings shall be as specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. The combined footprint of all principal and
accessory buildings on a parcel shall not exceed forty (40) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
D. Special Requirements for Parcels in the Ashland Industrial Park
Those parcels zoned HI Heavy Industrial District in the Ashland Industrial Park shall comply
with the provisions of Section 5.3, A.: Ashland Industrial Park and City of Ashland Ordinance
469.
Sections 4.23 – 4.24 (Reserved for potential additional industrial districts.)
Section 4.25 W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District
A. Intent
The intent of the W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District is to recognize existing
single-family dwellings within the waterfront area and to permit redevelopment and continued
use of the dwellings in a manner that enhances their relationship with the waterfront.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family
Residential District, pursuant to all applicable specific uses standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: single-family detached
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
d. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary or seasonal uses.
Waterfront Districts
Sections 4.25 – 4.34 describe the waterfront zoning districts. The waterfront zoning districts promote a variety of uses that are
intended to have a strong relationship with the waterfront.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.25: W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-77
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the W-SFR Waterfront Single-
Family Residential District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified
in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(5) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(6) Emergency residential facility, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(7) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(8) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(9) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Government or community service use
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Outdoor wood-fired furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750,
Section 750.B.17.
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy facility system, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
d. Temporary or seasonal uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.25: W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District
4-78 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
e. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District, pursuant to all
applicable specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fences, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.25: W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-79
(15) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements.
a. Minimum parcel area.
(1) A parcel that has a single-family detached dwelling as its principal use shall
have a minimum area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
(2) A parcel that has a principal use other than a single-family detached dwelling
shall have a minimum area of fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet, except as
may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
b. Minimum parcel width.
(1) A parcel that has a single-family detached dwelling as its principal use shall
have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet, except as may be modified pursuant to
Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
(2) A parcel that has a principal use other than a single-family detached dwelling
shall have a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this Section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building.
a. Minimum principal building setback from the road right-of-way.
(1) A single-family detached dwelling shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet from the road right-of-way, except as may be modified based on the
average setback from the front parcel line calculation pursuant to Section 6.1,
B.: Setbacks.
(2) A principal use, other than a single-family detached dwelling, shall be set back
a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the road right-of-way.
b. Minimum principal building setback from the ordinary high water mark of Lake
Superior. Where a parcel has frontage on Lake Superior, the principal building shall
be setback from the ordinary high water mark as specified in Section 4.46:
Waterfront Overlay District.
c. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line.
(1) A single-family detached dwelling shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20)
feet from the corner street side parcel line, except as may be modified based on
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.25: W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential District
4-80 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
the average setback from the corner street side parcel line calculation pursuant
to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
(2) A principal building, other than a single-family detached dwelling, shall be set
back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the corner street side parcel line.
d. Minimum principal setback from interior side parcel line.
(1) A single-family detached dwelling shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet
from an interior side parcel line, except as modified pursuant to Section 6.1, B.:
Setbacks.
(2) A principal building, other than a single-family detached dwelling, shall be set
back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from an interior side parcel line.
e. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. All principal buildings
shall be set back a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the rear parcel line.
3. Setback requirements for accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be set back
from parcel lines and principal buildings pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
and as specified in Section 4.46: Waterfront Overlay District.
4. Maximum building height.
a. Principal building. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, as
measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, except that a principal
building associated with a government or community service, a religious institution,
or a primary or secondary school may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height provided
the setback requirements from the side parcel lines are increased one (1) foot for
every additional foot that the building is over thirty-five (35) feet in height.
b. Accessory building. The height of accessory buildings shall be as specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. The combined footprint of all principal and
accessory buildings on a parcel shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the parcel area.
6. Maximum impervious coverage of the parcel: Forty (40) percent
D. Special Requirements
1. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
2. Waterfront Overlay District requirements. All uses shall meet the requirements
specified in Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District.
Section 4.26 W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
A. Intent
The W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District encompasses an area between
US Highway 2 and Lake Superior that may have existing industrial, commercial, and residential
uses that do not have a strong relationship to the waterfront, nor do they provide public views or
access to the waterfront. The primary intent of the district is to encourage existing industrial uses
in the district to relocate to appropriate industrial districts in the city. Also, where feasible, the
intent of the district is to encourage redevelopment of existing commercial and residential uses in
a manner that enhances the relationship of these uses to the waterfront and, to the maximum
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.26: W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-81
extent possible, provides public views and access to the waterfront. More specifically, the intent
of the district is as follows:
1. Encourage existing industrial uses in the district to relocate to appropriate industrial
districts in the city;
2. Encourage the development and redevelopment of residential and/or commercial uses in a
manner that promotes public views and access to the waterfront, where feasible;
3. Allow a mixture of residential uses, but encourage housing that includes public open space
that promotes views and access to the waterfront;
4. Encourage development of commercial uses that cater to people using the waterfront and to
the traveling public. Examples of such uses may include tourist-oriented retail, indoor and
outdoor recreation facilities, lodging establishments, and restaurants. This district is not
intended to accommodate large-scale regional commercial development;
5. Where feasible, encourage waterfront public/institutional uses in the district;
6. Encourage development in the district to occur through the planned unit development
(PUD) process at a neighborhood or district scale to help ensure coordination between uses.
Where feasible, encourage shared parking and pedestrian and vehicular access between
uses. If the City of Ashland has adopted a plan for an area in the W-MRC District, the
application of this Ordinance is intended to be consistent with the vision, goals, objectives,
and policies of that plan.
B. Uses
1. Allowable uses that are part of an approved planned unit development (PUD).
Allowable uses that are part of an approved planned unit development (PUD) in the WMRC
Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District shall be established in accordance
with the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District. The uses shall be consistent with the
intent of this district and the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s Comprehensive
Plan as well as all other applicable plans approved by the City.
2. Permitted uses that are not part of an approved planned unit development (PUD).
a. Uses in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance. Any residential or
commercial use (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent) that was in existence on the subject parcel prior to the adoption of
this ordinance (and was a conforming permitted or conditional use at that time) shall
be a permitted use.
b. Residential.
(1) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment, and provided that is associated with a permitted
residential use or a residential use in existence prior to the adoption of this
ordinance
(2) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that not more than four (4) persons are
served by the facility
(3) Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) to eight (8) units per building
(4) Dwelling: single-family attached, two (2) to six (6) units per building
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.26: W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
4-82 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(5) Dwelling: single-family detached
(6) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(7) Dwelling combined with a permitted commercial use
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Government or community service use
(2) Public park
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Seasonal market pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
g. Other uses.
(1) Minor or accessory uses that do not have a major impact on the district,
including fences, signs, minor renovations, and other similar uses incidental
and customary to permitted and conditional uses.
3. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the W-MRC Waterfront Mixed
Residential/Commercial District and are subject to the special requirements of this section
and to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Boarding or Rooming House
(3) Emergency residential facility, provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons
are served
(4) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(5) Rehabilitation center/transitional facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living
(6) Tourist home, provided that it is associated with a single-family detached
dwelling, and pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
b. Commercial.
(1) Animal boarding
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.26: W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-83
(2) Animal grooming or training facility
(3) Artist studio
(4) Assembly hall
(5) Bank or other financial institution
(6) Business service
(7) Car wash
(8) Day care center: commercial and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care
Center: Commercial
(9) Dry cleaning and laundry drop off and pick up, excluding processing
(10) Food center
(11) Funeral home
(12) Garden supply or landscaping center
(13) Household maintenance and repair
(14) Individual/family social services
(15) Laundromat
(16) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(17) Lodging establishment: short and extended stay
(18) Manufactured home dealer
(19) Office as a principal use
(20) Personal care/drop-in center
(21) Personal service
(22) Recreation facility: commercial indoor/outdoor
(23) Restaurant: sit-down, fast food or carry-out
(24) Retail establishment: convenience or general
(25) Tavern
c. Public, civic, and institutional.
(1) Boat landing
(2) Clinic
(3) Club or association
(4) Museum
(5) Nursing home
(6) Religious Institution
(7) School: primary, secondary, specialty, or personal instruction
d. Utility and communication uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.26: W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
4-84 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a public, civic, institutional, or communication
service use, and pursuant to Section 5.4, A.: Communication Equipment:
Major
(2) Communication service
(3) Outdoor wood-fired furnace associated with a single-family detached dwelling,
pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750 B., 17.: Outdoor
Wood-fired Furnace
(4) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(5) Wind energy facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, landfilling,
and/or excavation
(2) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of this district may be considered and processed as
per the conditional use permit provisions of this Ordinance.
4. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential Commercial District,
pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fences, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.26: W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-85
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court or play equipment for private recreation use, pursuant to Section
5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(19) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
5. Prohibited uses. Industrial uses (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or the
Common Council) shall be prohibited uses in the W-MRC Waterfront Mixed
Residential/Commercial District. Any existing industrial use that was a conforming use
prior to the date of this ordinance shall be considered a nonconforming use and shall
comply with the nonconforming provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Basic dimensional requirements for uses associated with a planned unit development
(PUD). Basic dimensional requirements (including parcel area and width, principal
building setback, allowable height, maximum building coverage, maximum impervious
coverage, and other pertinent dimensional requirements) for uses associated with a planned
unit development (PUD) shall be determined through the planned unit development (PUD)
ordinance and shall be consistent with the Waterfront Overlay District requirements and the
Gateway Overlay District requirements of this Ordinance, where applicable.
2. Basic dimensional requirements for uses that are not part of an approved planned
unit development. Basic dimensional requirements (including parcel area and width,
principal building setback, allowable height, maximum building coverage, maximum
impervious coverage, and other pertinent dimensional requirements) for uses that are not
part of an approved planned unit development (PUD) shall be identical to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in this Ordinance that best resembles the use of the said
parcel, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent of the
City. For example, the dimensional requirements for a single-family detached dwelling
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.26: W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District
4-86 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
shall meet the dimensional requirements for a single-family detached dwelling in the WSFR
Waterfront-Single Family Residential District. All uses shall be consistent with the
Waterfront Overlay District and the Gateway Overlay District requirements of this
Ordinance, where applicable.
3. Buffer requirements between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the W-MRC District abuts a less intense
existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer pursuant to Section 6.4:
Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening.
D. Special Requirements
1. Design standards. All uses shall meet the applicable design standards specified in Section
6.2: General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
2. Waterfront overlay district requirements. All uses shall be consistent with the provisions of
the Waterfront Overlay District as specified in Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay
District.
3. Gateway Overlay District requirements. All uses on parcels that have frontage on US
Highway 2 shall meet the Gateway Overlay District requirements specified in Section 4.47:
GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District.
Section 4.27 W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District
A. Intent
The W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District is intended to provide a unique area
in the city where a mixture of conference, lodging, and compatible residential and commercial
uses are coordinated in a planned setting to produce a vibrant and relatively self-contained area
that caters to conferences, special events, and tourist activities. More specifically, the intent of
the district is as follows:
1. Encourage the development and/or redevelopment of uses in the district that will have a
synergistic relationship with the existing lodging establishment/conference facility in the
district. Examples of such uses may include tourist-oriented retail, indoor and outdoor
recreation facilities, additional lodging establishments, and restaurants. This district is not
intended to accommodate large-scale regional commercial development;
2. Allow the continuation, enhancement, and expansion of existing detached single-family
dwellings in the district, but also allow parcels with detached single-family dwellings to
sensitively transition to higher density housing or commercial uses that relate to the mixed
conference/residential intent of this district;
3. Encourage development in the district to occur through the planned unit development
(PUD) process at the neighborhood or district scale to help ensure coordination between
uses. Where feasible, encourage shared parking and pedestrian and vehicular access
between uses;
4. Where feasible, encourage development of uses that relate to the waterfront and that
provide strong visual and pedestrian connections to the waterfront.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the W-CRM Waterfront
Conference/Residential Mix District pursuant to all specific use standards.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.27: W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-87
a. Residential.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that not more than four (4) persons are
served by the facility
(2) Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) to eight (8) units per building
(3) Dwelling: single-family attached, two (2) to six (6) units per building
(4) Dwelling: single-family detached
(5) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(6) Dwelling combined with a permitted commercial use
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Assembly hall
(2) Business service
(3) Conference center
(4) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(5) Lodging establishment: short stay or extended stay
(6) Personal service
(7) Retail: convenience or general, not to exceed two thousand five hundred
(2,500) gross square feet
(8) Restaurant: carry-out, fast food, or sit-down
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Festival grounds
(2) Government or community service use
(3) Public park
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Seasonal market pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
g. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with intent of the permitted uses in this district.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.27: W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District
4-88 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the W-CRM Waterfront
Conference/Residential Mix District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as
specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and Breakfast
Establishment
(3) Boarding or rooming house
(4) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(5) Dwelling: accessory, provided that it is associated with a single-family
detached dwelling, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(6) Dwelling combined with a conditional use
(7) Dwelling: multi-family, more than eight (8) units per building
(8) Emergency residential facility
(9) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(10) Rehabilitation center/transitional facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(11) Tourist home, provided that it is associated with a single-family detached
dwelling, and pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Artist studio
(2) Bank or financial institution
(3) Car wash associated with a filling station
(4) Day care center: commercial and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care
Center: Commercial
(5) Dry cleaning and laundry drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
(6) Filling station with or without a convenience store
(7) Laundromat
(8) Office as a principal use
(9) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(10) Restaurant: drive-in
(11) Retail: convenience or general, exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500)
gross square feet
(12) Tavern
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.27: W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-89
(13) Theater
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Boat landing
(2) Campground, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 871
(3) Club or association
(4) Museum
(5) School: specialty or personal instruction
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Outdoor wood-fired furnace associated with a single-family-detached dwelling,
pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.17.
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District, pursuant to
all applicable specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.27: W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District
4-90 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(13) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(19) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Basic dimensional requirements. Basic dimensional requirements including parcel area
and width requirements, principal building setback requirements, allowable height
requirements, maximum building coverage requirements, maximum impervious coverage,
and other pertinent requirements shall be identical to the dimensional requirements of the
zoning district that best resembles the use of the said parcel, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent of the City. For example, the dimensional
requirements for a commercial use shall relate to the dimensional requirements for a
commercial use in the W-C Waterfront Commercial District.
2. Buffer requirements between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the W-CRM District abuts a less intense
existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer pursuant to Section 6.4:
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening.
D. Special Requirements
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.27: W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-91
1. Gateway Overlay District requirements. Parcels that have frontage on a US Highway 2
shall meet the Gateway Overlay requirements specified in Section 4.47: GTWY-O Gateway
Overlay District.
2. Waterfront overlay district requirements. Development in the W-CRM District shall be
consistent with the requirements of the waterfront overlay district specified in Section 4.46:
W-O Waterfront Overlay District.
3. Design standards. All uses shall meet the pertinent design standards specified in Section
6.2: General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
Section 4.28 W-C Waterfront Commercial District
A. Intent
The W-C Waterfront Commercial District encompasses an area between US Highway 2 and Lake
Superior. Existing uses in the district consist primarily of regional (highway) commercial uses,
but may also include existing residential and existing industrial uses. The intent of the district is
to allow the existing commercial uses and structures to continue while encouraging all uses and
structures to transition to commercial uses that have a strong relationship to the waterfront. More
specifically, the intent of the district is as follows:
1. Encourage the development and redevelopment of commercial properties in a manner that
enhances their relationship with the waterfront. Encourage uses to provide public views
and access to the waterfront, where feasible;
2. Encourage uses that cater to people using the waterfront and to the traveling public. This
district is not intended to accommodate large-scale regional commercial development;
3. Encourage existing residential and industrial uses to relocate to other appropriate districts
in Ashland;
4. Encourage development and redevelopment in the district to occur through the planned unit
development (PUD) process that includes at least several parcels. Encourage connections
between commercial uses that allow for shared parking and shared access from US
Highway 2;
5. If the City of Ashland has adopted a plan for the W-C Waterfront Commercial District,
then the application of this Ordinance is intended to be consistent with the vision, goals,
objectives, and policies of that plan;
6. Where commercial development or redevelopment on a parcel in this district cannot occur
in a manner that is reasonably consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance (due to the
dimensional characteristics of the parcel or other reasons), it is the intent of this district to
encourage said parcel to transition to a waterfront oriented public, civic, or institutional use
(such as a public park) that will be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the
provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. Due to the dimensional constraints of the existing parcels in the district
and the intent of the district to enhance the relationship of structures and uses to the
waterfront, outright permitted uses in the W-C Waterfront Commercial District shall be
limited to the following.
a. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.28: W-C Waterfront Commercial District
4-92 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Festival grounds
(2) Government or community service use
(3) Public park
b. Utility, communication, and public service uses.
(1) Essential services
c. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
d. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Seasonal market pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
e. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent of the City has determined that
the use is consistent with the intent of permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the W-C District subject to the
special requirements of this section and to the issuance of a conditional use permit as
specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons are
served by the facility
(3) Dwelling combined with a permitted or conditional commercial use
(4) Emergency residential facility
(5) Home occupation associated with a permitted dwelling, if the use exceeds the
pertinent standards specified in Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(6) Rehabilitation center/transitional facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Animal boarding, animal training, or animal grooming, except that no outdoor
kennels nor outdoor runs shall be allowed
(2) Artist studio
(3) Assembly hall
(4) Bank or financial institution
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.28: W-C Waterfront Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-93
(5) Business service
(6) Car wash
(7) Conference center
(8) Currency exchange, payday loan establishment, or title loan agency, pursuant
to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment, Payday Loan
Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own Establishment, or
Similar Use
(9) Day care center: commercial and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care
Center: Commercial
(10) Dry cleaning and laundry, drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
(11) Filling station
(12) Funeral home
(13) Garden supply or landscaping center
(14) Household maintenance and repair establishment
(15) Laundromat
(16) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(17) Lodging establishment: short stay or extended stay
(18) Office
(19) Pawn shop, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment,
Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own
Establishment, or Similar Use
(20) Personal service
(21) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(22) Rent-to-own, pursuant to Section 5.2, B.: Currency Exchange Establishment,
Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own
Establishment, or Similar Use
(23) Restaurant: carry-out, fast food, or sit-down
(24) Retail establishment: convenience or general, not to exceed two thousand five
hundred (2,500) gross square feet per building
(25) Tavern
(26) Theater
(27) Veterinary clinic: small animal, except that no outdoor kennels nor outdoor
runs shall be allowed
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Clinic
(2) Club or association
(3) Museum
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.28: W-C Waterfront Commercial District
4-94 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(4) School: specialty or personal instruction
(5) Religious institution
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the W-C Waterfront Commercial District, pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
(1) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(2) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(3) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(4) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(5) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(6) Foster care: family home
(7) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(8) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(9) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(10) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.28: W-C Waterfront Commercial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-95
(11) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(12) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(13) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(14) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(15) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(16) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(17) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(18) Outdoor merchandise sales, pursuant to Section 5.6 M.: Outdoor Merchandise
Sales.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the W-C District shall be as
follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from road right-of-way. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from the ordinary high water mark of Lake
Superior. Where a parcel has frontage on Lake Superior, the principal building shall
be setback from the ordinary high water mark as specified in Section 4.46:
Waterfront Overlay District.
c. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Fifteen (15) feet.
e. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, except that a principal building may exceed thirty-five
(35) feet subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building and as specified in Section 4.46: Waterfront Overlay District.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.28: W-C Waterfront Commercial District
4-96 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
D. Special Requirements
1. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
2. Waterfront overlay district requirements. All uses shall meet the waterfront overlay
district requirements specified in Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District.
3. Gateway Overlay District requirements. All uses on parcels that have frontage on U.S.
Highway 2 shall meet the Gateway Overlay District requirements specified in GTWY-O
Gateway Overlay District.
4. Additional requirements. Additional requirements (including, but not limited to setbacks
from a bluff) may apply to parcels and uses in this district. Refer to the pertinent
provisions of this Ordinance for specific requirements.
Section 4.29 W-CC Waterfront City Center District
A. Intent
The W-CC Waterfront City Center District includes a mixture of existing residential, commercial,
and industrial uses that are located near the heart of the city, between US Highway 2 and Lake
Superior. The intent of the district is to allow the continuation of single-family residential uses in
the district while also allowing the district to sensitively transition to commercial and
public/institutional uses that have a strong relationship to the waterfront. More specifically, the
intent of the district is as follows:
1. Encourage existing industrial uses in the district to relocate to other appropriate districts in
the city;
2. Allow the continuation, enhancement, and expansion of existing residential uses in the
district, but also allow the sensitive conversion of parcels with existing single-family
dwellings to transition to appropriate “city center” uses that have a strong relationship to
the waterfront;
3. Ensure that development and redevelopment in the district occurs in a manner that
reasonably protects the integrity of the surrounding existing single-family dwellings in the
district; and
4. Encourage the transition to waterfront city center uses to occur through the planned unit
development (PUD) process at a neighborhood scale or block scale. If the City of Ashland
has adopted a plan for the W-CC Waterfront City Center District, the application of this
Ordinance is intended to be consistent with the vision, goals, objectives, and policies of that
plan.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the W-CC Waterfront City Center
District, pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.29: W-CC Waterfront City Center District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-97
(1) Residential use, provided that the use was in existence prior to the adoption of
this ordinance and provided that the use has not lapsed for more than twelve
(12) consecutive months since the adoption of this ordinance.
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Dwelling combined with permitted use
(4) Dwelling: single-family detached
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Artist studio
(2) Assembly hall
(3) Conference center
(4) Local food store, pursuant to Section 5.2, D.: Local Food Store
(5) Lodging establishment: short stay or extended stay
(6) Personal service
(7) Retail: convenience or general, not to exceed two thousand five hundred
(2,500) gross square feet
(8) Restaurant: carry-out, fast food, or sit-down
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Festival grounds
(2) Government or community service use
(3) Museum
(4) Public park
d. Utility, communication, and public service uses.
(1) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
(2) Seasonal market pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
g. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of the permitted uses in this district.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.29: W-CC Waterfront City Center District
4-98 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the W-CC District subject to the
special requirements of this section and to the issuance of a conditional use permit as
specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Boarding or rooming home
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons are
served by the facility
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(5) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(6) Dwelling combined with a conditional use
(7) Dwelling: single-family attached, two (2) to six (6) units per building
(8) Dwelling: multi-family, three (3) or more units per building
(9) Dwelling: two-family or duplex
(10) Emergency residential facility
(11) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(12) Rehabilitation center/transitional facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(13) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Bank or financial institution
(2) Business service
(3) Day care center: commercial and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care
Center: Commercial
(4) Dry cleaning and laundry, drop off and pick up, but excluding processing
(5) Laundromat
(6) Office
(7) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(8) Retail establishment: convenience or general, exceeding two thousand five
hundred (2,500) gross square feet
(9) Tavern
(10) Theater
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.29: W-CC Waterfront City Center District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-99
(1) Clinic
(2) Club or association
(3) Nursing home
(4) School: primary, secondary, specialty, or personal instruction
(5) Religious institution
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, provided that it is located on a parcel for
which the principal use is a government or community service use, a religious
institution, or a primary or secondary school, and pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavating (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) or more
cubic yards of material, and as a separate activity not associated with a building
permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling, and/or excavation.
(2) Temporary real estate sales office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary
Real Estate Office
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Drive-through window associated with a permitted or conditional use
(3) Parking lot as a principal use
(4) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the W-CC Waterfront City Center District, pursuant to all applicable
specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Foster care: family home
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.29: W-CC Waterfront City Center District
4-100 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(8) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(9) Landscaping and/or gardening
(10) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(11) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(12) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(13) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(14) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(15) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(16) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(17) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(18) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel area in the W-CC District shall be as follows,
except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel area for properties located in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay
District. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except that a smaller parcel area may
be allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit.
c. Minimum parcel width. Twenty-five (25) feet.
d. Minimum parcel width for properties located in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay
District. One-hundred forty (140) feet, except that a smaller parcel width may be
allowed with approval of a conditional use permit.
2. Setback requirements of a principal building from all parcel lines. Uses shall meet the
setback requirements specified in the zoning district of this Ordinance that best resembles
the use of the said parcel, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent. For example, the requirements for a single family use shall relate to the
setback requirements for the R-1 Single Family District. All parcels in the GTWY-O
Gateway Overlay District shall be required to follow the setbacks established in the RC
Regional Commercial District. Setbacks may be reduced with the approval of a conditional
use permit.
3. Maximum parcel coverage. Uses shall meet the requirements for maximum parcel
coverage specified in the zoning district of this ordinance that best resembles the use of said
parcel, except that all non-residential development shall meet the following:
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.29: W-CC Waterfront City Center District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-101
a. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty percent (50%).
b. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy percent (70%), except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
4. Maximum height of principal building. Forty-five (45) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height except that the City may allow a principal building to
exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.
5. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings in the district shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.:
Accessory Building.
6. Buffer requirements between different uses. Wherever a more intense proposed use (or
expansion of a more intense existing use) in the W-CC Waterfront City Center District
abuts a less intense existing use, the more intense use shall provide a landscaped buffer
pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening.
D. Special Requirements
1. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
2. Waterfront overlay district requirements. All uses shall meet the waterfront overlay
district requirements specified in Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District.
3. Gateway Overlay District requirements. All uses on parcels that have frontage on US
Highway 2 shall meet the Gateway Overlay District requirements specified in Section 4.47:
GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District.
Section 4.30 W–I Waterfront Industrial District
A. Intent
The intent of the W-I Waterfront Industrial District is to recognize areas of existing industrial
uses adjacent to Lake Superior that the City has determined are essential or otherwise acceptable
industrial uses in the area. These existing industrial uses may continue subject to the provisions
of this section. Should an existing industrial use in the district cease, it is the intent of this district
to encourage the use to transition to a “waterfront oriented” public, civic, and institutional use
pursuant to this section. Additions to the W-I Waterfront Industrial District are not anticipated.
New industrial uses shall be directed to a LI Light Industrial District or HI Heavy Industrial
District outside of the waterfront area.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the W-I Waterfront Industrial District
pursuant to all applicable specific use standards and the special requirements of this district.
a. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
b. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
c. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.30: W-I Waterfront Industrial District
4-102 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
d. Temporary, seasonal use, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
e. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in the district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the W-I Waterfront Industrial
District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards and the special
requirements of this district.
a. Industrial uses.
(1) Light manufacturing use provided that the use was in existence prior to the date
of adoption of this ordinance and provided that the use did not cease to exist for
a period of twelve (12) or more consecutive months since the date of adoption
of this ordinance.
(2) Power generation plant provided that the use was in existence prior to the date
of adoption of this ordinance and provided that the use did not cease to exist for
a period of twelve (12) or more consecutive months since the date of adoption
of this ordinance.
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Campground, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 871
(2) College
(3) Festival grounds
(4) Government and community services
(5) Marina
(6) Nursing home
(7) School: primary, secondary, or specialty
(8) Religious institution
(9) Water oriented research facility
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
d. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.30: W-I Waterfront Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-103
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
e. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other use not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in the district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the W-I Waterfront Industrial District, pursuant to all applicable specific
use standards and the special requirements of this district.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(3) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(4) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(5) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(6) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(7) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(8) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(9) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(10) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(11) Sport court for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court,
Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(12) Swimming pool for private recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.:
Swimming Pool
(13) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(14) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent of the City.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.30: W-I Waterfront Industrial District
4-104 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. Parcel requirements shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. One (1) acre.
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility,
communication, and public service uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements
of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. Setback requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, B.:
Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from road right-of-way line. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from the ordinary high water mark of Lake
Superior. Where a parcel has frontage on Lake Superior, the principal building shall
be setback from the ordinary high water mark as specified in Section 4.46:
Waterfront Overlay District.
d. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty (20) feet.
e. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
3. Setback requirements for accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be setback
from parcel lines and principal buildings pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
and as specified in Section 4.46: Waterfront Overlay District.
4. Maximum building height.
a. Principal building. No principal building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height,
as measured pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, except that height of a
principal building can be increased with the approval of a conditional use permit.
b. Accessory building. The height of accessory buildings shall be as specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. The combined footprint of all principal and
accessory buildings on a parcel shall not exceed forty (40) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
D. Special Requirements
1. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
2. Waterfront overlay district requirements. All uses shall meet the waterfront overlay
district requirements specified in Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.30: W-I Waterfront Industrial District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-105
3. Gateway Overlay District requirements. All uses on parcels that have frontage on U.S.
Highway 2 shall meet the Gateway Overlay District requirements specified in Section 4.47:
GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District.
Section 4.31 W–PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District
A. Intent
The intent of the W-PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District is to facilitate the development of
public and institutional uses that have a strong relationship with the waterfront.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the W-PI Waterfront Public District.
a. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Arboretum
(2) Festival grounds
(3) Government or community service use
(4) Marina
(5) Museum
(6) Public park with or without a campground, pursuant to City of Ashland
Ordinance 871
(7) Water oriented research facilities
b. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
c. Open spaces.
(1) Open spaces: public or private
d. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation
(2) Seasonal market pursuant to Section 5.5, D.: Seasonal Market
e. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of the permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following uses are conditional uses in the W-PI Waterfront Public
District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards and the special
requirements of this district.
a. Commercial uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.31: W-PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District
4-106 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Terminal: passenger ship, including, but not limited to a cruise or sightseeing
boat
(2) Water-oriented commercial use that is incidental or accessory to a public, civic,
or institutional uses. An individual water-oriented commercial use shall not
exceed a gross area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
b. Industrial uses.
(1) Terminal: ship, in accordance with applicable state or federal agreements for
use of said ship terminal and provided that the use was in existence and a
conforming use prior to adoption of this ordinance
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Boat landing
(2) College
(3) School: primary, secondary or specialty
(4) Zoo
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation
(2) Temporary construction building
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory building, if the accessory building exceeds the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are permitted as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the W-PI District, pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(3) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.31: W-PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-107
(4) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(5) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(6) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(7) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(8) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(9) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(10) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(11) Sport court for recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play
Equipment, and Similar Uses
(12) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(13) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(14) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the W-PI District shall be as
follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
b. Minimum parcel width. One hundred (100) square feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirements for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from road right-of-way line. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from the ordinary high water mark of Lake
Superior. Where a parcel has frontage on Lake Superior, the principal building shall
be setback from the ordinary high water mark as specified in Section 4.46:
Waterfront Overlay District.
d. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Ten (10) feet.
e. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Twenty-five (25) feet.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.31: W-PI Waterfront Public/Institutional District
4-108 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
3. Maximum height of principal building. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
D. Special Requirements
1. Design standards. All uses shall meet the design standards specified in Section 6.2:
General Building Design Standards and Guidelines.
2. Waterfront overlay district requirements. All uses shall meet the waterfront overlay
district requirements specified in Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District.
3. Gateway Overlay District requirements. All uses on parcels that have frontage on US
Highway 2 shall meet the Gateway Overlay District requirements specified in Section 4.47:
GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District.
Sections 4.32 – 4.34 (Reserved for potential additional waterfront districts.)
Section 4.35 PI Public/Institutional District
A. Intent
The intent of the PI Public/Institutional District is to accommodate a variety public, semi-public,
and institutional uses in Ashland. Although public and institutional uses are allowed as permitted
or conditional uses in many other districts in the city, the PI Public/Institutional District is
intended for the exclusive use of significant public or institutional uses (including, but not limited
to colleges, schools, hospitals, and cemeteries). Public parks are intended to be included in the
PP Public Parks District. Public/institutional uses adjacent to Lake Superior are intended to be
included in the W-P/I Waterfront Public/Institutional District.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the PI Public/Institutional
District.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that not more than fifteen (15) persons are
served
Other Districts
Sections 4.35. – 4.44. describe the zoning districts in the City of Ashland that accommodate public and institutional uses, public
open spaces and parks, commercial and industrial airport uses, and minimal land uses that allow for future development.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.35: PI Public/Institutional District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-109
(2) Convent, rectory, or monastery, pursuant to Section 5.1, D.: Convent, Rectory,
or Monastery
(3) Dormitory
(4) Emergency residential facility
(5) Fraternity or sorority
(6) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Day care center: commercial and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day Care
Center: Commercial
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Arboretum
(2) Cemetery
(3) Clinic and/or medical office
(4) College
(5) Festival grounds
(6) Government or community service use
(7) Hospital
(8) Museum
(9) Nursing home
(10) Public park
(11) Religious institution
(12) School: primary or secondary
(13) Water oriented research facility
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
e. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: private or public
f. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation
(2) Land filling: temporary
g. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in the district.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.35: PI Public/Institutional District
4-110 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the PI Public/Institutional
District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses
(1) Community-based Residential Facility
b. Commercial uses
(2) Social services, pursuant to Section 5.2, F.: Social Services
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Research and development facility
(2) Composting facility: indoor, pursuant to Section 5.3 C., Community
Composting Facilities
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) School: specialty or special instruction
(2) Zoo
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Outdoor wood furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section
750.B.17.
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
f. Agriculture and forestry uses.
(1) Agriculture
(2) Agricultural services
(3) Agriculture research facility
(4) Forestry
g. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
h. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the accessory buildings exceed the pertinent standards
specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent of the conditional uses in the district.
3. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to permitted or conditional
uses in the PI Public/Institutional District, pursuant to all specific use standards.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.35: PI Public/Institutional District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-111
(1) Animal: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(2) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(3) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(4) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(5) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6 D.: Day Care: Family Home
(6) Fences, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(7) Greenhouse: local
(8) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(9) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(10) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(11) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(12) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(13) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(14) Sport court or play equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play
Equipment, and Similar Uses
(15) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(16) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(17) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. The minimum parcel requirements in the PI Public/Institutional
District shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 10.3:
Nonconforming Parcels.
a. Minimum parcel area. One (1) acre.
b. Minimum parcel width. Two hundred (200) feet.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements. Public parks, public open space, and utility and
communication uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. The minimum setback requirement for
principal buildings from parcel lines shall be as follows, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, B.: Setbacks.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.35: PI Public/Institutional District
4-112 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height, except that a principal building height between thirty-five
(35) feet and sixty (60) feet may be permitted with the issuance of a conditional use permit
as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. Fifty (50) percent.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. Seventy (70) percent, except as may be modified
pursuant to Section 6.1, D.: Impervious Coverage.
Section 4.36 PP Public Parks District
A. Intent
The intent of the PP Public Parks District is to accommodate a variety of public parks and public
open spaces in Ashland. Although public parks and public open spaces are permitted uses in
many other districts in the city, the PP Public Parks District is intended for the exclusive use of
public parks, significant public open spaces, and park related accessory uses. The W-P/I
Waterfront Public/Institutional District may also accommodate public parks and public open
space.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the PP Public Parks District.
a. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Government or community service use
(2) Public festival grounds
(3) Public parks and recreation uses and related buildings and uses
b. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
c. Open space uses.
(1) Open space: public
d. Temporary or seasonal use.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) involving fifty (50) cubic
yards or less of material and three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or
less of land disturbance, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.36: PP Public Parks District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-113
e. Other uses.
(1) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent of the City has determined that
the use is consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following uses are conditional uses in the PP Public Parks District
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional
Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Dwelling that serves as a caretaker’s residence for a public park
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Commercial use incidental to a public park use; for example, a seasonal food
stand
(2) Specialty school incidental to a public park use
c. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Arboretum
(2) Boat landing
(3) Campground and/or recreational vehicle park, pursuant to City of Ashland
Ordinance 871
(4) Museum
(5) Water oriented research facility
(6) Zoo
d. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Outdoor wood furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section
750.B.17
(3) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(4) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining), involving more than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet of land disturbance, and as a separate activity that is not associated
with a development permit, pursuant to Section 6.1, H.: Grading, land filling,
and/or excavation.
f. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.36: PP Public Parks District
4-114 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory to a permitted or
conditional use in the PP Public Parks District, pursuant to all applicable specific use
standards.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(3) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7.
(4) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(5) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(6) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(7) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(8) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(9) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(10) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(11) Sport court or play equipment for public recreation use, pursuant to Section 5.6,
K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(12) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(13) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5 B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(14) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Parcel requirements. There shall be no parcel requirements in the PP Public Parks
District.
2. Setback requirements for principal building. Setbacks requirements for principal
buildings shall be as follows, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, B.:
Setbacks.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Eight (8) feet.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.36: PP Public Parks District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-115
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. Thirty-five (35) feet in height, as measured
pursuant to Section 6.1, C.: Building Height.
4. Setback and height requirements for accessory buildings. The setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory
Building.
5. Maximum building coverage of the parcel. There shall be no maximum building
coverage in the PP Public Parks District.
6. Maximum impervious coverage. There shall be no maximum impervious coverage in the
PP Public Parks District.
Section 4.37 FD Future Development District
A. Intent
The intent of the FD Future Development District is to allow the use of land (not served with
municipal utilities) in a manner that will not preclude future development at urban densities,
pending the extension of municipal utilities or market conditions that justify development at
urban densities. Land in this district shall be rezoned consistent with the Comprehensive Plan,
pending the proper timing for the economical provision of municipal sewer and water, streets,
parks, storm drainage, and other public utilities and services, so that orderly development can
occur. Where feasible, conservation subdivisions (pursuant to Section 4.56: Conservation
Subdivision Overlay District) are encouraged for residential uses in this district.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the FD Future Development District,
pursuant to all applicable specific uses standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided not more than four (4) persons are served by
the facility
(2) Dwelling: single-family detached
(3) Dwelling: single-family detached in a conservation subdivision pursuant to
Section 4.56: Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
b. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Public park
c. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
d. Agriculture, forestry, and open space uses.
(1) Agriculture
(2) Forestry
(3) Open space: private or public
e. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.37: FD Future Development District
4-116 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation.
(2) Land filling: temporary
(3) Seasonal market
f. Other uses.
(1) Personal storage building as a principal use pursuant to Section 5.6, G.:
Personal Storage Building as a Principal Use. Personal storage buildings as a
principal use shall not be permitted in association with a conservation
subdivision in the FD Future Development District.
(2) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for permitted uses in this district.
2. Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the FD Future Development
District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and pursuant to all applicable specific use standards.
a. Residential uses.
(1) Adult family home, pursuant to Section 5.1, A.: Adult Family Home
(2) Bed and breakfast establishment, pursuant to Section 5.1, B.: Bed and
Breakfast Establishment
(3) Community living arrangement, pursuant to Section 5.1, C.: Community
Living Arrangement and provided that five (5) to fifteen (15) persons are
served
(4) Convent, rectory, or monastery
(5) Emergency residential shelter
(6) Dwelling: accessory, pursuant to Section 5.1, E.: Dwelling: Accessory
(7) Home occupation, if the use exceeds the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(8) Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility, pursuant to Section 5.1, J.:
Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living Facility
(9) Tourist home, pursuant to Section 5.1, K.: Tourist Home
b. Commercial uses.
(1) Animal boarding facility
(2) Day care center: commercial, provided that it is an accessory use to a religious
institution or primary or secondary school and pursuant to Section 5.2, C.: Day
Care Center: Commercial
(3) Recreation facility: commercial indoor or outdoor
(4) Veterinary clinic: small and large animal
(5) Warehouse: self-storage
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.37: FD Future Development District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-117
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Composting facility: indoor
(2) Salvage operation: indoor/outdoor
d. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Arboretum
(2) Campground and/or recreational vehicle park, pursuant to City of Ashland
Ordinance 871
(3) Cemetery
(4) Community composting facility or construction debris facility, provided that
the facility is contiguous to, or directly across a public right-of-way from, the
Ashland land fill.
(5) Festival grounds
(6) Government or community service use
(7) Religious institution
(8) School: primary or secondary
e. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
f. Agriculture, forestry, and open spaces.
(1) Agricultural research facility
(2) Agricultural services
g. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
(1) Model home, pursuant to Section 5.5, A.: Model Home
(2) Mining, consistent with Chapter NR 135 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
and all other applicable regulations
(3) Temporary real estate office, pursuant to Section 5.5, C.: Temporary Real
Estate Office
h. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.37: FD Future Development District
4-118 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
3. Accessory uses. The following are allowed accessory uses to permitted and conditional
uses in the FD Future Development District.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Animals: keeping domestic animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(3) Animals: keeping horses, mules, or donkeys, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.:
Animals: Keeping of
(4) Animals: raising family farm animals, pursuant to Section 5.6, C.: Animals:
Keeping of
(5) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(6) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7
(7) Day care: family home, pursuant to Section 5.6, D.: Day Care: Family Home
(8) Fences, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(9) Foster care: family home
(10) Greenhouse: local
(11) Landscaping and/or gardening
(12) Home occupation, pursuant to Section 5.1, F.: Home Occupation
(13) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(14) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, including solar equipment (but
not including outdoor wood furnaces), pursuant to Section 5.6, E.: Outdoor
Mechanical Equipment
(15) Outdoor wood-fired furnace, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750,
Section 750.B.17.
(16) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
(17) Signs
(18) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(19) Sport court, play equipment, and similar private recreation uses, pursuant to
Section 5.6, K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(20) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6, L.: Swimming Pool
(21) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(22) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.37: FD Future Development District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-119
1. Parcel requirements.
a. Minimum parcel area.
(1) A parcel that has a use that is not associated with an approved conservation
subdivision shall have a minimum parcel area of five (5) acres, except as may
be modified pursuant to Subparagraph c. of this Section or Section 10.3:
Nonconforming Parcels.
(2) A parcel that is associated with an approved conservation subdivision shall
have a minimum parcel area pursuant to Section 4.56: Conservation
Subdivision.
b. Minimum parcel width.
(1) A parcel that is not associated with an approved conservation subdivision shall
have a minimum parcel width of two hundred (200) feet, except as may be
modified pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels.
(2) A parcel that is associated with an approved conservation subdivision shall
have a minimum parcel width pursuant to Section 4.56: Conservation
Subdivision.
c. Exceptions to parcel requirements.
(1) Public parks, public open space, and utility, communication, and public service
uses shall be exempt from the parcel requirements of this section.
(2) The minimum parcel area for a conventional subdivision in the FD District
may be calculated based on the gross developable area of the parcel including
road right-of-ways. Consequently, a forty (40) acre parcel could be subdivided
into eight (8) parcels, even if part of the forty (40) acre parcel were conveyed
for a public road, but provided that no parcel has less than four (4) net
developable acres.
2. Setback requirements for principal building.
a. Minimum principal building setback from front parcel line. Forty (40) feet.
b. Minimum principal building setback from corner street side parcel line. Thirty (30)
feet.
c. Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line. Twenty-five (25)
feet.
d. Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line. Thirty (30) feet.
3. Maximum height of principal building. Thirty-five (35) feet, as measured pursuant to
Section 6.1, C.: Building Height.
D. Design Standards for Agricultural Buildings and Other Accessory Buildings
1. Applicability. All agricultural buildings and other accessory buildings over twelve
hundred (1,200) square feet shall comply with the design standards and guidelines of this
Subsection. All other accessory buildings shall comply with Section 5.6, A: Accessory
Building.
2. Architectural features and colors. All buildings shall be complimentary to the principal
structures and surrounding area in terms of architectural features and colors.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.37: FD Future Development District
4-120 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
3. Maximum height. The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
4. Setbacks. Setbacks from side and rear parcel lines shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
5. Design review. Buildings located within the Gateway Overlay District or readily visible
from U.S. Highway 2, State Highway 13, or State Highway 112 shall be subject to design
review by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. Such buildings shall
have a decorative exterior with special features that may include decorative windows or
rooflines, cupolas, or columns. Long, uninterrupted roof or wall planes greater than
seventy-five (75) feet shall be prohibited. Not less than fifteen (15) percent of the building
façade visible from the highway shall be decorative material such as, brick, stone, stucco,
or decorative masonry units.
Section 4.38 AIR Airport District
A. Intent
The intent of the AIR Airport District is to accommodate the John F. Kennedy Memorial Airport.
The district is also intended to accommodate commercial and industrial uses that have a
synergistic and incidental relationship with the airport, such as a flight school, an air cargo
facility, an aviation repair and service shop, and retail uses that serve air travelers and others at
the airport.
B. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the AIR Airport District, pursuant to
all applicable specific use standards and any requirements in an adopted AIR-O Airport
Overlay District.
a. Public, civic, and institutional uses.
(1) Airport terminal
(2) Airport hangar
(3) Other airport uses customarily provided in conjunction with an airport use
(4) Buildings and uses associated with public works or public services
b. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Essential services
c. Agriculture and open space uses.
(1) Agriculture, excluding structures, provided that the agriculture use does not
attract wildlife that could constitute a hazard to air navigation or the safe
operations of the airport.
(2) Open space, provided that the open space does not attract wildlife that could
constitute a hazard to air navigation or the safe operations of the airport.
d. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavating uses.
(1) Land filling and/or excavation (excluding mining) pursuant to Section 6.1, H.:
Grading, land filling, and/or excavation
(2) Land filling: temporary
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.38: AIR Airport District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-121
2. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses are allowed in the AIR Airport District
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional
Use Permit and all applicable specific use standards as well as any requirements in an
adopted AIR-O Airport Overlay District.
a. Commercial uses and industrial uses.
(1) Commercial and industrial uses that have a synergistic and incidental
relationship with the airport, such as a flight school, an air cargo facility, an
aviation repair/service shop, a car rental facility, or a retail store that serves as
travelers and others at the airport.
b. Utility and communication uses.
(1) Communication equipment: major, pursuant to Section 5.4, A.:
Communication Equipment: Major
(2) Utility facilities, pursuant to Section 5.4, C.: Utility Facilities
(3) Wind energy facility, pursuant to Section 5.4. D. Wind Energy Facility
c. Temporary, seasonal, or land filling/excavation uses.
d. Other uses.
(1) Accessory buildings, if the buildings exceed the pertinent standards specified in
Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Parking lot as a principal use
(3) Other uses not specifically listed in this Ordinance, but for which the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has determined that the use is
consistent with the intent for conditional uses in this district.
3. Accessory uses. The following are allowed as an accessory use to a permitted or
conditional use in the AIR Airport District, pursuant to all applicable specific use standards
and any requirements in an adopted AIR-O Airport Overlay District.
(1) Accessory buildings, pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building
(2) Communication equipment: minor, pursuant to Section 5.4, B.:
Communication Equipment: Minor
(3) Composting, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section 750.B.7
(4) Fence, pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences
(5) Landscaping and/or gardening, pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers,
and Screening
(6) Navigational aids and weather observation equipment incidental to airport use
(7) Off-street parking, loading, and access drives, pursuant to Section 6.3: Parking
and Loading
(8) Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, E.:
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
(9) Patio, deck, terrace, and similar uses, pursuant to Section 5.6, G.: Patio, Deck,
Terrace, and Similar Uses
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.38: AIR Airport District
4-122 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Overlay Zoning Districts
The following sections describe the overlay zoning districts in the city. An overlay zoning district specifies special requirements
that address specific issues that are not addressed in the underlying (or base) zoning districts. An overlay zoning district may
cover multiple underlying (or base) zoning districts (for example, the F-O Floodplain Overlay District may overlay the R-1, R-2,
and R-4 Districts).
(10) Signs, pursuant to Section 6.6: Signs
(11) Solar equipment, pursuant to Section 5.6, J.: Solar Equipment and Solar
Rights
(12) Sport court or play equipment, and similar private recreation uses, pursuant to
Section 5.6 K.: Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
(13) Swimming pool, pursuant to Section 5.6 L.: Swimming Pool
(14) Temporary construction building, pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary
Construction Building
(15) Other accessory uses incidental and customary to permitted and conditional
uses of this district as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
C. Dimensional Requirements
1. Setback requirements. All new principal and accessory buildings or structures shall
require a minimum twenty (20) foot setback from all parcel lines.
2. Height Limitations. No structure shall be constructed, altered, located, or permitted to
remain after such construction, alteration, or location, and no trees shall be allowed to grow
to a height in excess of the height limit indicated on the Height Limitations Zoning Map in
City of Ashland Ordinance 453.
Sections 4.39 – 4.44 (Reserved for potential additional other zoning districts.)
Section 4.45 Reserved
Section 4.46 W-O Waterfront Overlay District
A. Intent
1. The area encompassed by the W-O Waterfront Overlay District is a valuable asset to the
City of Ashland. The intent of the district is to impose land use controls (in addition to
those in the applicable underlying zoning districts) to accomplish the following:
a. Use property in the district in a manner that promotes economic development, affords
a high quality of life, and protects and enhances the natural environment;
b. Protect and enhance public investment in the waterfront area while stimulating
private development where appropriate;
c. Encourage high quality development that is attractive and that promotes a unique
sense of place tied to the waterfront; and
d. Enhance and encourage public access and enjoyment of the waterfront;
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-123
2. If the City of Ashland has adopted a plan for any area in the W-O Waterfront Overlay
District, then the application of this Ordinance is intended to be consistent with the vision,
goals, objectives, and policies of that plan. Such plans include, but are not limited to, the
Waterfront Development Plan and various plans included in the Ashland Comprehensive
Plan.
B. District Boundaries
The W-O Waterfront Overlay District overlays and is bound by the following underlying
districts: W-SFR Waterfront Single-Family Residential, W-MRC Waterfront Mixed
Residential/Commercial, W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix, W-C Waterfront
Commercial, W-CC Waterfront City Center, W-I Waterfront Industrial, and W-PI Waterfront
Public/Institutional.
C. Administration
1. General application. The design guidelines specified in this Section shall apply to all
properties in Waterfront Overlay District.
2. Underlying zoning district. The regulations for the underlying zoning district shall
remain in effect, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
3. Compliance with design guidelines. Given the pattern of existing development in this
District and the size and configuration of the existing parcels, it may not be feasible for all
new development or redevelopment in the District to be consistent with all of the design
guidelines specified in this Section. Consequently, prior to action on a building permit, site
plan approval, or other applicable approvals associated with a proposed development
application, the appropriate review and approval authority (pursuant to Part 2 of this
Ordinance) shall make a determination that the proposed development is consistent with the
intent of the design guidelines of this Section when considered as a whole. However, the
development proposal need not be in complete conformance with every design guideline
specified herein in order to receive approval.
4. Supremacy of regulations. In some cases, parcels may be in more than one overlay
district. If any conflict between the regulations applicable in another overlay district (or the
underlying zoning district) and the design guidelines of the Waterfront Overlay District
occurs, the more restrictive provisions shall take precedence.
D. Design Standards and Guidelines
1. Intent. The following design standards and guidelines are intended to further the intent of
Waterfront Overlay District by providing review guidance relating to specific design
elements that affect the appearance and function of uses in the Waterfront Overlay District.
The standards and guidelines are not intended to discourage development, but to encourage
development that is functional, attractive, and meets the intent of this District. The word
“shall” as used in this Ordinance refers to a standard that is a mandatory requirement. The
word “should” refers to a guideline that is encouraged and discretionary, but not
mandatory.
2. Principal building setback from the ordinary high water mark. All principal buildings
with frontage on Lake Superior shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from
the ordinary high water mark of Lake Superior and thirty (30) feet from the top of bluffs,
unless issued a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
Requirements set forth in Part 8: Environmental Protection may also apply. Where
principal buildings exist on the adjoining parcels on both sides of a proposed building site,
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District
4-124 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
the subject principal building setback may be altered to conform to the prevailing setback,
but in no case shall a principal building be set closer than fifty (50) feet to the ordinary high
water mark.
3. Accessory building setback from the ordinary high water mark. Accessory buildings
shall not be placed between the principal building and the ordinary high water mark, on
properties with frontage on Lake Superior. However, a water oriented accessory building
(such as a boathouse or gazebo) may be placed within ten (10) feet of the ordinary high
water mark, provided that the accessory building does not exceed four hundred (400) gross
square feet and one (1) story in height.
4. Impervious surface setbacks. Impervious surfaces shall have a minimum setback of fifty
(50) feet from the ordinary high water mark of Lake Superior and a minimum setback of
thirty (30) feet from the top of bluffs. Trails, walks, and similar uses shall be exempt from
this standard provided the use will not contribute to destructive erosion or allow unfiltered
runoff into Lake Superior.
5. Undisturbed vegetative buffer adjacent to Lake Superior. Where feasible, a minimum
undisturbed vegetative buffer of thirty five (35) feet shall be maintained from the ordinary
high water mark of Lake Superior. Slopes over twenty (20) percent extending beyond the
minimum vegetative buffer shall necessitate a wider buffer. Native waterfront vegetation
should be established in the buffer area to stabilize the soils and to protect water quality.
Selective removal of dying, diseased, invasive vegetation, and weeds is permitted;
however, replacement with native waterfront vegetation is encouraged.
6. Building design. Building design shall be consistent with the design standards specified in
Section 6.2: General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines. In addition, the
following guidelines shall apply to the maximum extent practical:
a. Architectural style or theme. New buildings shall relate to City adopted or approved
plans that specify an architectural style or theme for the waterfront. If an approved
plan does not exist, but a particular neighborhood in the waterfront has a desirable
existing architectural theme or style as determined by the applicable approval
authority, then the new buildings in the neighborhood should be compatible with the
existing theme.
b. Materials. Construction shall be of quality finish materials including, but not limited
to, brick, stone, stucco, wood, and architectural concrete. Composite boards
manufactured from wood or other products, such as hardboard or hardplank, may be
used when the board product is less than six (6) inches wide. Where horizontal
siding is used, it must be shiplap or clapboard siding composed of boards with a
reveal of three (3) to six (6) inches, or vinyl or aluminum siding that is in a clapboard
or shiplap pattern where the boards in the pattern are six (6) inches or less in width.
Unfinished concrete or masonry units, corrugated metal, plywood, and sheet
pressboard are not allowed.
c. Colors. Predominate exterior colors should be neutral or earth tone, but bright colors
may provide a compatible accent.
d. Screening. Service areas, refuse collection areas, storage areas, and loading areas
shall be located away from or screened from public view, including views from Lake
Superior.
7. Views.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-125
a. Views of Lake Superior. New structures and plantings shall not be located in a
manner that restricts views of Lake Superior from north-south avenues and from
public trails.
b. Views of Lake Superior from Structure. Where views of Lake Superior are
possible from within the structure, the structure design shall maximize views
of Lake Superior for employees and customers, considering orientation and
window coverage.
c. Views from Lake Superior. Views of the proposed development from Lake Superior
shall be considered. Landscape screening shall be provided to screen objectionable
views (such as refuse collection areas and storage areas) from the perspective of
those viewing the development from Lake Superior.
8. Parking, access, and circulation. Parking, access, and circulation shall be as specified in
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading of this Ordinance. In addition, the following guidelines
shall apply:
a. Location of parking. Parking between the principal building and the public right-ofway
or between the principal building and Lake Superior is discouraged unless no
other practical alternatives exist or unless proper buffering and landscaping measures
are used pursuant to Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening .
b. Connection to public trail or sidewalk. Pedestrian systems that provide public access
to the waterfront should be provided where feasible. The quality of the pedestrian
system should be enhanced by means of appropriate landscaping, lighting, graphics,
and furnishings. Internal pedestrian systems should coordinate with adopted City
plans for public trails, bikeways, walks, and other movement systems associated with
the waterfront.
9. Landscaping and grading. Landscaping shall be consistent with the landscaping
standards specified in Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening and the grading
standards specified in Section 6.1, H.: Grading, Filling, and/or Excavation. In addition,
the following standards and guidelines shall apply:
a. Landscaping and grading should provide continuity and harmony between
development parcels;
b. The use of native landscaping materials is strongly encouraged;
c. The modification of existing grades should consider the scenic quality of the
waterfront area and storm water management best management practices.
10. Signs. Signs shall be consistent with the standards specified in Section 6.6: Signs. In
addition, the following guidelines shall apply:
a. Signs should enhance the Waterfront Overlay District’s visual appeal and its sense of
place;
b. Signs should not block views of Lake Superior;
c. Other than small identification or directional signs, signs should not be placed so that
they are visible from Lake Superior;
d. Wall signs should be designed to fit within the architectural space intended for
signage;
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.46: W-O Waterfront Overlay District
4-126 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
e. Signs seen in relation to other signs should be compatible in location, shape, style,
graphics, size, material, illumination, and color, while allowing individual expression
and identification. When viewed as a whole, signs in the district should be seen as
having been coordinated. A cluttered, haphazard appearance should be avoided.
11. Utilities. All utilities (including, but not limited to, telephone, electrical, and cable) shall
be installed underground, where feasible. Utility components required to be above ground
(including, but not limited to, transformers and meters) shall be screened by landscaping or
decorative wall and/or be located away from public view.
Section 4.47 GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District
A. Intent
This Section specifies general design standards and guidelines that are intended to help enhance
and unify the appearance of development along the major roadways leading into and through
Ashland. If the City of Ashland has adopted a plan for any area in the GTWY-O Gateway
Overlay District, then the application of this Ordinance is intended to be consistent with the
vision, goals, objectives, and policies of that plan. Such plans include, but are not limited to, the
Ellis Avenue Redevelopment Plan and various plans included in the Ashland Comprehensive
Plan.
B. District Boundaries
The Gateway Overlay Districts encompasses those parcels that have full or partial frontage on the
following road segments.
1. U.S. Highway 2 (Lake Shore Drive) from the western to the eastern City limits.
2. Beaser Avenue from Binsfield Road to U.S. Highway 2 (Lake Shore Drive).
3. Ellis Avenue from Binsfield Road to U.S. Highway 2 (Lake Shore Drive).
4. Sanborn Avenue from Maple Lane to U.S. Highway 2 (Lake Shore Drive).
C. Administration
1. General application. The design standards and guidelines specified in this Section shall
apply to all properties with full or partial frontage on the gateway roads specified in this
Section.
2. Underlying zoning district. The regulations for the underlying zoning district shall
remain in effect, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
3. Compliance with the design standards and guidelines. Given the pattern of existing
development in this District and the size and configuration of the existing parcels, it may
not be feasible for all new development or redevelopment in the District to be consistent
with all of the design standards and guidelines specified in this Section. Consequently,
prior to action on a building permit, site plan approval, or other applicable approvals
associated with a proposed development application, the appropriate review and approval
authority (pursuant to Part 2 of this Ordinance) shall make a determination that the
proposed development is consistent with the intent of the design standards and the intent of
the design guidelines of this Section when considered as a whole.
4. Supremacy of regulations. In some cases, parcels may be in more than one overlay
district. In case of any conflict between the regulations applicable in another applicable
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.47: GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-127
overlay district (or the underlying zoning district) and the design guidelines of the Gateway
Overlay District, the more restrictive provisions shall take precedence.
D. Design Standards and Guidelines
1. Intent and application. The following design standards and guidelines are intended to
further the intent of Gateway Overlay District by providing standards and guidelines
relating to specific design elements that affect the appearance and function of uses in the
Gateway Overlay District. The standards and guidelines are not intended to discourage
development, but to encourage development that is functional and attractive. The word
“shall” as used in this Ordinance refers to a standard that is a mandatory requirement. The
word “should” refers to a guideline that is encouraged and discretionary, but not
mandatory.
2. Building setbacks. Buildings in the Gateway Overlay District shall meet the setbacks of
the underlying district and relate to prevailing setbacks in the area. However, in no case
shall a new building (nor an addition to an existing building) be less than fifteen (15) feet
from the public right-of-way, regardless of the prevailing setback, except that parcels with
frontage on one of the following road segments may be allowed to build up to the right-ofway
line consistent with the pattern of existing development and provided such is
consistent with the requirements of other applicable jurisdictions:
a. Beaser Avenue from Main Street to Lake Shore Drive West (U.S. Highway 2); and
b. Ellis Avenue from 6th Street to Lake Shore Drive (U.S. Highway 2);
3. Building design. Building design shall be consistent with the design standards specified in
Section 6.2: General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines. In addition, the
following guidelines shall apply:
a. Materials. Construction shall be of quality finish materials including, but not limited
to, brick, stone, stucco, and architectural concrete. Unfinished concrete masonry
units and corrugated metal or plastic siding shall be prohibited.
b. Colors. Predominate exterior colors should generally be neutral or earth tone, but
bright colors may provide a compatible accent.
c. Walls. Walls over eighty (80) feet in length should be avoided to the extent practical.
Where unavoidable, the visual impact of long walls shall be minimized with
landscaping, screening, or architectural treatments of the wall (glazing, material
changes, relief, etc.) that break up the monotony of the wall pursuant to Section 6.2:
General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines.
d. Screening. Service areas, refuse collection areas, storage areas, and loading areas
shall be located away from or screened from public view.
4. Parking, access, and circulation. Parking, access, and circulation shall be as specified in
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading of this Ordinance. In addition, the following guidelines
shall apply:
a. Location of parking. To the greatest extent possible, no parking shall be allowed in
the front yard between the principal building and the public right-of-way. Parking
should generally occur to the side or the rear of the principal building.
b. Parking area standards. Parking areas in this District shall be asphalt or concrete.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.47: GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District
4-128 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
c. Combining of parking lots. The combining of existing, small, underutilized parking
lots to create shared parking areas that are more efficient and more accessible is
encouraged.
d. Curb-cuts. The number and width of curb-cuts shall be minimized and where
feasible shall occur on the side streets rather than the primary roadway. To promote
pedestrian circulation, existing continuous curb cuts should be reduced to widths
necessary for vehicular traffic.
e. Connection to public trail or sidewalk. Where a public trail or sidewalk exists in the
public right-of-way, the adjacent development should provide a connection to the
trail or sidewalk.
5. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be consistent with the landscaping standards specified in
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening. In addition, the following guidelines
shall apply:
a. Landscaped buffer. Where feasible, a minimum fifteen (15) foot wide landscaped
buffer shall screen parking from the public right-of-way. Where a fifteen (15) foot
landscaped buffer is not feasible, alternative screening features, such as a decorative
fence, may be allowed to help provide an attractive delineation between the public
right-of-way and the development.
b. Complement streetscape. Landscaping should complement street trees and other
streetscape elements in the public right-of-way.
c. Vision triangle. Landscaping shall not interfere with the required vision triangle as
specified in Section 6.1, H.: Vision Triangle of this Ordinance.
6. Signs. Signs shall be consistent with the standards specified in Section 6.6: Signs. In
addition, the following guidelines shall apply:
a. Signs should enhance the Gateway Overlay District’s visual appeal and its ability to
attract the traveling public.
b. In general, wall signs should be designed to fit within the architectural space intended
for signage.
c. Signs seen in relation to other signs should be compatible in location, shape, style,
graphics, size, material, illumination, and color, while allowing individual expression
and identification.
d. When viewed as a whole, signs in the district should be seen as having been
coordinated. A cluttered, haphazard appearance should be avoided.
7. Utilities. All utilities (including, but not limited to, telephone, electrical, and cable) shall
be installed underground, where feasible. Utility components required to be above ground
(including, but not limited to, transformers and meters) shall be screened by landscaping or
decorative wall and/or be located away from public view.
Section 4.48 Reserved
Section 4.49 BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay District
A. Intent
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.49: BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-129
The intent of the BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay District is to ensure that new development
within the Bay City Creek Corridor helps protect and enhance quality land and water resources in
the corridor. More specifically, the intent of the District is as follows:
1. Prevent the loss of high quality visual character in the corridor;
2. Prevent destructive soil erosion and stream siltation;
3. Prevent significant damage to hillsides, bluffs, and valleys caused by improper
development; and
4. Prevent the destruction of mature and/or valuable trees and other vegetation and wildlife
habitat in the corridor.
B. District Boundaries
The District boundaries shall extend three hundred (300) feet outward from both sides of the
ordinary high water mark of Bay City Creek within the city limits of the City of Ashland.
C. Administration
1. General application. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new development in
the Bay City Creek Overlay District, including new subdivisions, new construction, and
clearing and grading of land.
2. Underlying zoning district. The regulations for the underlying zoning district shall
remain in effect, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
3. Supremacy of regulations. In case of any conflict between the regulations applicable in
the underlying zoning district and the regulations of the Bay City Creek Overlay District,
the regulations of the Bay City Creek Overlay District shall take precedence.
D. Design Standards
The following design standards shall apply to all new development in the District:
1. Required undisturbed vegetative buffer. A minimum undisturbed vegetative buffer of
fifty (50) feet shall be maintained on each side of Bay City Creek as measured from the
ordinary high water mark. Slopes of twenty (20) percent or more extending beyond the
minimum vegetative buffer shall necessitate a wider buffer. Riparian vegetation shall be
established, as necessary, and maintained along the stream banks to stabilize the banks and
protect water quality. Selective removal of dying, diseased, or invasive vegetation and
weeds is permitted; however, replacement with native riparian vegetation is encouraged.
2. Impervious surface setbacks. All impervious surfaces shall have a minimum setback of
fifty (50) feet from the ordinary high water mark of Bay City Creek and a minimum
setback of thirty (30) feet from the top of bluffs. Trails, walks, footbridges, and similar
uses shall be exempt from this provision provided they are not constructed in a manner that
will cause destructive erosion.
3. Building setbacks. All buildings shall have a minimum setback of seventy-five (75) feet
from the ordinary high water mark of Bay City Creek and a minimum setback of thirty (30)
feet from the top of bluffs.
4. Grading. The grading of land for development purposes shall consider the scenic quality
of the Bay City Creek Corridor. Fill operations shall not encroach into the required
undisturbed vegetative buffer. Required grading shall be varied in contour to present a
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.49: BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay District
4-130 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
natural appearance. Continuity between the grades of adjacent parcels shall be maintained
to greatest extent possible.
5. Additional standards in the PRI Planned Residential Institutional District. A planned
unit development (PUD) in the PRI Planned Residential Institutional District may include
additional design standards relating to the Bay City Creek Corridor.
Section 4.50 F-O Floodplain Overlay
A. Intent
The City of Ashland finds that uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and water
bodies in the city would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare, and tax
base. Therefore, it is the intent of the F-O Floodplain Overlay to regulate development to
accomplish the following:
1. Protect life, health, and property;
2. Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
3. Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
4. Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
6. Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
7. Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
8. Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in conflicts
between property owners;
9. Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use, or structure outside of the
floodplain;
10. Provide for aesthetically pleasing open space adjacent to Lake
Superior and other water bodies in the City of Ashland; and
11. Provide for the protection of natural resources.
B. General Provisions
1. Areas to be regulated. This section regulates all areas within the
limits of the City of Ashland that would be covered by the regional
flood or base flood. Base flood elevations are derived from the
flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study. Regional flood
elevations may be derived from other studies. Areas covered by the base flood are
identified as “A-Zones” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
2. Official floodplain maps. The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as
floodplains or “A-Zones” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), community number
550005, panel number 0001, dated September 30, 1977 and panel number 0002, dated
September 30, 1977, and the revisions in the City of Ashland Floodplain Appendix, if
applicable.
3. Amendments to the official floodplain maps. Any changes to the base flood information
in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall
Helpful Note.
To view copies of the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps
electronically, visit the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps
website. Visit the following
website: Flood Insurance
Rate Map tutorial for
information on how to read a
Flood Insurance Rate map.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-131
follow the amendment procedures described in Section 3.6: Map and/or Text Amendments
to the Floodplain Overlay.
4. Establishment of districts. The Floodplain Overlay is divided into three (3) districts as
follows:
a. FW Floodway District. The FW Floodway District is the channel of a river or stream
(or a portion of water body) and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the
channel (or portion of a water body) required to carry the regional floodwaters.
b. FF Flood fringe District. The FF Flood fringe District is that portion of the
floodplain between the regional flood limits and the floodway.
c. GFP General Floodplain District. The GFP General Floodplain District comprises
those areas that have been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional
flood.
5. Locating floodplain boundaries and resolving boundary discrepancies.
a. Profile elevation. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent can
rely on a boundary derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a development
permit, whether or not a map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall be responsible for documenting actual predevelopment
field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was
determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this Ordinance.
b. Discrepancies. Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning
map specified in this Section and actual field conditions shall be resolved as follows:
(1) If a flood profile exists, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine
the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevation shall govern if there
are any discrepancies. Where the flood profiles are based on established base
flood elevations from a Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) must approve a map amendment, pursuant to
Section 3.6: Map and/or Text Amendments to the Floodplain Overlay;
(2) Where flood profiles do not exist, the location of the boundary shall be
determined by the map scale, visual onsite inspection, and any information
provided by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
c. Disputes. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent and an owner of owner’s agent shall be resolved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals pursuant to Section 3.12: Appeals, Variances, and Boundary Disputes
relating to the Floodplain Overlay.
6. Removal of lands from the floodplain.
a. Compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall not be grounds for removing
land from the floodplain unless the following conditions are met:
(1) The subject area is filled at least two (2) feet above the regional or base flood
elevation;
(2) The subject area filled is contiguous to land outside the floodplain; and
(3) The map is amended pursuant to Section 3.6: Map and/or Text Amendments to
the Floodplain Overlay.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
4-132 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
b. Removing land from the floodplain does not remove the requirements for the
mandatory purchase of flood insurance. The property owner must contact the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to request a Letter of Map Change
(LOMC).
7. Compliance. Any development or use within the areas regulated by this Ordinance shall
be in compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable, local, state, and
federal regulations. Unless exempted by law, all government agencies are required to
comply with this Ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to
comply if Section 13.48(13) of the Wisconsin Statutes applies. The construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation are exempt when Section 30.2022 of the Wisconsin Statutes
applies.
8. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
a. This Ordinance supersedes all provisions of any zoning ordinance enacted in the City
of Ashland under Section 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes, which relates to
floodplains. If another ordinance is more restrictive than this Ordinance, that
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
b. This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants, or easements. If this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
9. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance are
the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are not a
limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. If a
provision of this Ordinance, required by Chapter NR 116 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the
date of the adoption of this Ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this Ordinance.
10. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The flood protection standards of this Ordinance are
based on engineering experience and scientific research. Larger floods may occur or the
flood height may be increased by human or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply
or guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from
flooding and flood damages. Nor does this Ordinance create liability on the part of, or a
cause of action against, the City of Ashland or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from
reliance on this Ordinance.
C. Development Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts
1. Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses.
a. Except as allowed in this subparagraph, no floodplain
development shall do any of the following:
(1) Obstruct flow, defined as development that blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters by itself or with other development, increasing regional flood
height; or
(2) Increase regional flood height due to floodplain storage area lost, which equals
or exceeds one one-hundredths (0.01) foot.
Helpful Note.
Refer also to Part 8:
Environmental Protection for
additional requirements and
standards.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-133
b. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall deny development
permits if it is determined the proposed development will obstruct flow or increase
regional flood heights one one-hundredths (0.01) foot or more, based on the officially
adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other adopted map, unless the
provisions of Subparagraph c. are met.
c. Obstructions or increases equal to or greater than one one-hundredths (0.01) foot may
only be permitted if amendments are made to this Ordinance, the official floodplain
zoning map, floodway lines, and water surface profiles pursuant to Section 3.6: Map
and/or Text Amendments to the Floodplain Overlay. Any such amendments must be
reviewed and approved by the Regional Office of the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
2. Watercourse alterations.
a. No development permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain
shall be issued until the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent has
notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the Regional Office of the Department
of Natural Resources, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and
required the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The flood
carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
b. As soon as practical, but not later than six (6) months, after the date of the
watercourse alteration or relocation, the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
of the changes by submitting appropriate technical or scientific data in accordance
with National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) guidelines that shall be used to revise
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), risk premium rates, and floodplain
management regulations as required.
3. Development of docks, piers, wharves, bridges, and similar structures. Development
that requires a permit from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Chapter
30 of the Wisconsin Statutes and Chapter 31 of the Wisconsin Statutes, such as docks, piers,
wharves, bridges, culverts, dams, and navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary
permits are obtained and amendments to the floodway lines, water surface profiles, base
flood elevations established in the Flood Insurance Study, or other data from the officially
adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or other floodplain zoning maps or the
provisions of this Section are made pursuant to Section 3.6: Map and/or Text Amendments
to the Floodplain Overlay.
4. Public or private campgrounds. Public or private campgrounds in the Floodplain
Overlay shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions:
a. The campground is approved by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services;
b. A development permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent;
c. The character of the water body and the elevation of the campground are such that a
seventy-two (72) hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all
campground occupants;
d. There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the
minimum notice required under this Section to all persons in the campground. The
procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
4-134 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
local emergency government coordinator, and chief law enforcement official, which
specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur, personnel responsible
for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to be used, and the
procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and personnel responsible
for conducting the evacuation;
e. This agreement shall be for no more than one (1) calendar year, at which time the
agreement shall be reviewed and updated (by the officials specified in Subparagraph
d. above) to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of
the Wisconsin Department of Health Services and all other applicable regulations;
f. Only camping units are allowed;
g. The camping units may not occupy any site in the campground for more than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be
removed from the floodplain for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours;
h. All camping units that remain on site for more than thirty (30) days shall be issued a
limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on
file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit
for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days and shall ensure compliance
with all provisions of this Section;
i. The City of Ashland shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the
campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this Section;
j. All camping units that remain in place for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days shall meet the applicable requirements Subsection D or Subsection
E of this Section for the floodplain district in which the structure is located;
k. The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood
hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued;
l. All service facilities, including, but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service,
natural gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems, and wells shall be properly
anchored and placed at or flood proofed to the flood protection elevation.
D. Development Standards Applicable to the FW Floodway District
1. Applicability. This Subsection applies to all floodway areas on the official floodplain
zoning maps or as may be amended pursuant to this Section.
2. Permitted uses. The following open space uses shall be allowed in the Floodway District
and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain District, if they are not prohibited in the
underlying zoning district, they meet the standards of this Subsection, and all permits or
certificates have been issued pursuant to this Ordinance:
a. Agricultural uses, including, but not limited to, farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture, and wild crop harvesting;
b. Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas,
and airport landing strips;
c. Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap, and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-135
areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of this
Subsection;
d. Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures
that comply with this Subsection;
e. Extraction of sand, gravel, or other materials that comply with this Subsection;
f. Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers, wharves, dams, flowage
areas, culverts, navigational aids, and river crossings of transmission lines and
pipelines that comply with Chapter 30 of the Wisconsin Statutes and Chapter 31 of
the Wisconsin Statutes;
g. Public utilities, streets, and bridges that comply with this Subsection.
3. Standards for development in floodway areas.
a. General.
(1) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with Subsection C, General
Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts and have low flood damage
potential.
(2) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the
proposal according to the hydraulic and hydrologic analyses specified in
Subsection C:
? A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the
watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow; or
? An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood height.
(3) The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall deny the
development permit application if the project will increase flood elevations
upstream or downstream one one-hundredths (0.01) foot or more, based on the
data submitted in Clause (2) above.
b. Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally
dependent on a waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply
with the following criteria:
(1) The structure is not designed for human habitation and does not have a high
flood damage potential;
(2) The structure must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
(3) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed to or
above the flood protection elevation; and
(4) The structure must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
c. Public utilities, streets, and bridges. Public utilities, streets, and bridges may be
allowed by permit if the following conditions are met:
(1) Adequate flood proofing measures are provided to the flood protection elevation;
and
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
4-136 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) Construction meets the development standards specified in Subsection C.,1. of
this Section.
d. Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by
permit if the following conditions are met:
(1) The requirements of Subsection C.,1. of this Section are met;
(2) No material is deposited in the navigable channel unless a permit issued by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Chapter 30 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, and a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 United States Code 1344 has
been issued, if applicable, and the other requirements of this Section are met;
(3) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling, or bulkheading; and
(4) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
4. Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in the Floodway District are
prohibited, including the following uses:
a. Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not
associated with permanent open space uses;
b. Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property, water
quality, or human, animal, plant, fish, or other aquatic life;
c. Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
d. Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed prior
to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of
local ordinances and Chapter SPS 383 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
e. Any public or private wells that are used to obtain potable water, except those for
recreational areas that meet the requirements of the City of Ashland’s ordinances and
Chapter NR 811 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code and Chapter NR 812,
Wisconsin Administrative Code;
f. Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
g. Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under Section
NR 110.15,(3),(b) of the Wisconsin Administrative Code; or
h. Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or proposed
development located outside the floodway that complies with the regulations for the
floodplain area occupied.
E. Development Standards Applicable to the FF Flood fringe District
1. Applicability. This Subsection applies to flood fringe areas shown on the official
floodplain zoning maps or as may be amended pursuant to this Section.
2. Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Flood fringe
District if they are not prohibited in the underlying zoning district, they meet the standards
of this Subsection, and all permits or certificates have been issued pursuant to this
Ordinance.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-137
3. Standards for development in flood fringe areas. In addition the following
requirements, any development in floodway areas shall comply with Subsection C, General
Standards Applicable to All Floodplain Districts and have low flood damage potential.
a. Residential uses. Any habitable structure, including a manufactured home, which is
to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved into the flood fringe area,
shall meet or exceed the following standards:
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor, excluding the basement or crawlspace, shall
be at or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill shall be one foot
or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least fifteen (15) feet
beyond the limits of the structure. The Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources may authorize other floodproofing measures if the elevations of
existing streets or sewer lines makes compliance with the fill standards
impractical;
(2) The basement or crawlspace floor may be placed at the regional flood level if it
is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or crawlspace
floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation;
(3) Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to land outside of
the floodplain, except as provided in Clause (4) below;
(4) In development where existing street or sewer line elevations make compliance
with Clause (3) above impractical, the City of Ashland may permit new
development and substantial improvements where access roads area at or
below the regional flood elevation if one or more of the following conditions
are met:
? The City of Ashland has written assurance from police, fire, and emergency
services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by wheeled
vehicles during a regional flood event; or
? The municipality has a natural disaster plan approved by Wisconsin
Emergency Management and the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
b. Accessory structures or uses.
(1) Except as provided in Clause (2) below, an accessory structure that is not
connected to a principal structure may be constructed with its lowest floor at or
above the regional flood elevation.
(2) An accessory structure that is not connected to the principal structure and that
is less than six hundred (600) square feet in size and valued at less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) may be constructed with its lowest floor no more
than two feet below the regional flood elevation if it is subject to flood
velocities of no more than two (2) feet per second and it meets all the
provisions of Subsection D.,3.,b.,Structures of this Section and Subsection
E.,3.,e., Storage of Materials of this Section.
c. Commercial uses. Any commercial structure that is erected, altered, or moved into
the floodfringe area shall meet the requirements of this Subsection. Subject to the
requirements of Subsection E.,3.,e., Storage of Materials of this Section, storage
yards, surface parking lots, and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if
an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
4-138 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
d. Manufacturing and industrial uses. Any manufacturing and industrial structure that
is erected, altered, or moved into the floodfringe area shall be protected to the flood
protection elevation using fill, levees, floodwalls, or other flood proofing measures
specified in this Section. Subject to the requirements of Subsection E.,3.,e., Storage
of Materials, storage yards, surface parking lots, and other such uses may be placed
at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
e. Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious
to property, water quality or human, animal, plant, fish, or aquatic life shall be stored
at or above the flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with this
Section. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not
enter the water body during flooding.
f. Public utilities, streets, and bridges. All utilities, streets, and bridges shall be
designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain development plans and as
follows:
(1) When failure of public utilities, streets, and bridges would endanger public
health or safety, or where such utilities are deemed essential, construction of
and substantial improvements to such facilities may only be permitted if they
are floodproofed in compliance with this Section to the flood protection
elevation; and
(2) Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations if
they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
g. Sewage systems. All onsite sewage disposal systems shall be floodproofed, pursuant
to this Section, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of all
local ordinances and Chapter SPS 383 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
h. Wells. All wells shall be floodproofed, pursuant to this Section, to the flood
protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Chapter NR 811 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code and Chapter NR 812 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
i. Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in
floodfringe areas.
j. Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this
Ordinance.
k. Manufactured homes.
(1) Owners or operators of all manufactured home communities and subdivisions
shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and
prepare, secure approval, and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular
access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(2) In existing manufactured home communities, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall have the
lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation and be anchored so they
do not float, collapse, or move laterally during a flood.
(3) Outside of existing manufactured home communities, including new
manufactured home communities and all single units outside existing
manufactured home communities, all new, replacement, and substantially
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-139
improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential development
standards for the flood fringe as specified in this Section.
l. Mobile recreational vehicles. All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or more or are not fully licensed and ready for
highway use shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements specified in this
Section. A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities and
security devices, and has not permanently attached additions.
F. Development Standards Applicable to the GFP General Floodplain District
1. Applicability. The provisions of the General Floodplain District shall apply to all
floodplains for which flood profiles are not available or where flood profiles are available,
but floodways have not been delineated. Floodway and flood fringe districts shall be
delineated when adequate information is available.
2. Permitted uses.
a. Pursuant to Subsection F.,4., Determining Floodway and Flood fringe Limits, it shall
be determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or flood fringe
area.
b. Those uses permitted in the floodway and flood fringe areas as specified in this
Section are allowed within the General Floodplain District, according to the
standards of this Subsection and provided that all permits or certificates required
under this Section have been issued.
3. Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. Subsection D.,
Development Standards Applicable to the FW Floodway District applies to floodways.
Subsection E., Development Standards Applicable to the FF Flood fringe District applies to
flood fringe areas. All other provisions of this Section apply to either district.
4. Determining floodway and flood fringe limits. Upon receiving an application for
development within the general floodplain district, the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall complete the following tasks:
a. Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan that
shows the proposed development with respect to the General Floodplain District
limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal
description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations, and
floodproofing measures;
b. Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to evaluate the effects of the
proposal upon flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation, and to
determine floodway boundaries:
(1) A typical valley cross-section showing the stream channel, the floodplain
adjoining each side of the channel, the cross-sectional area to be occupied by
the proposed development, and all historic high water information;
(2) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent
structure, fill, or storage elevations; size, location, and layout of all proposed
and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water
supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.50: F-O Floodplain Overlay District
4-140 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(3) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the
stream; and
(4) Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling,
dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply, and sanitary facilities.
c. Transmit one copy of the information described in 4.,a. and 4.,b. of this Subsection to
the Regional Office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources with a
written request for technical assistance to establish regional flood elevations and,
where applicable, floodway data. If a development permit is required, the applicant
shall provide all required information and computations to delineate floodway
boundaries and the effects of the project on flood elevations.
Section 4.51 WET-O Wetland Overlay District
A. Intent
Uncontrolled use of the shoreland and wetlands and pollution of the navigable waters of City of
Ashland would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare, and
impair the tax base. Consequently, the intent of the WET-O Wetland Overlay District is to
accomplish the following:
1. Promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare;
2. Maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands;
3. Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands, which filter or store sediments,
nutrients, heavy metals, or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters;
4. Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life, and wildlife by preserving wetlands
and other aquatic habitat;
5. Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland and wetland areas; and
6. Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural shoreland
cover and controlling shoreland and wetland excavation, filling and other earth moving
activities.
B. General Provisions
1. Compliance. The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within the City of
Ashland shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and other
applicable, local, state, or federal regulations. All permitted development shall require the
issuance of a development permit or building permit unless otherwise expressly excluded
by this Ordinance. Unless exempted by law, all government agencies are required to
comply with this Ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to
comply if Section 13.48(13) of the Wisconsin Statutes applies. The construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation is exempt when Section 30.12,(4),(a) of the Wisconsin
Statutes applies.
2. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
a. This Ordinance supersedes all provisions of any ordinance adopted by the City of
Ashland under Section 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes, which relates to floodplains
and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another applicable ordinance is more
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.51: WET-O Wetland Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-141
restrictive than this Ordinance, that ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to
the extent of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
b. This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants, or easements. However, where this Ordinance imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
3. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the
municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this Ordinance is required by a standard in
Chapter NR 117 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, and where the ordinance provision
is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the Chapter NR 117 standards in
effect on the date of the adoption of this Ordinance or in effect on the date of the most
recent text amendment to this Ordinance.
C. District Boundaries
1. Wetland zoning maps. The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this
Ordinance and are on file in the Office of the Clerk of the City of Ashland:
a. Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped “FINAL” on December 17, 1985;
b. Floodplain zoning maps titled “Flood Insurance Rate Map” dated September 30,
1977;
c. United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps current at the time of the adoption
of this Ordinance; and
d. Official City Zoning Map.
2. District boundaries. The Wetland Overlay District includes, at a minimum, all wetlands
in the City of Ashland that are five (5) acres or more and that are shown on the Wisconsin
Wetland Inventory Map stamped “Final”, which has been adopted and made a part of this
Ordinance, and provided that the wetlands are consistent with the following conditions:
a. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable lakes,
ponds, or flowages. Lakes, ponds, or flowages in the city shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps
or other zoning base maps that have been incorporated by reference and made a part
of this Ordinance; or
b. Within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high water mark of navigable rivers
or streams, or the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are designated as either
continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States Geological Survey
quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps that have been incorporated by reference
and made a part of this Ordinance. The adopted Flood Insurance Rate Maps or other
adopted community floodplain maps used to delineate the floodplain area shall be
used to determine the extent of the floodplain areas.
3. Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water mark location.
Determinations of navigability and ordinary high water mark locations shall be made by the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. When questions arise, the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall contact the Regional Office of the
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.51: WET-O Wetland Overlay District
4-142 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for a final determination of navigability or
ordinary high water mark.
4. Discrepancies between the official maps and field conditions. When an apparent
discrepancy exists between the Wetland Overlay District boundary shown on the adopted
maps and actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall contact the appropriate District Office
of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to determine if the Wetland Overlay
District boundary as mapped, is in error. If the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources staff concur with the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent that
a particular area was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent shall have the authority to immediately grant or deny a
development permit or building permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to the
correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors or acknowledge
exempted wetlands designated in this Section, the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable
time.
5. Additional wetlands. From time to time the City of Ashland may amend this Ordinance to
include additional wetlands in this District pursuant to the procedures specified in Section
3.7., Map and/or Text Amendment to the Wetland Overlay District.
D. Uses
1. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 30
of the Wisconsin Statutes and Chapter 31of the Wisconsin Statutes, and the provisions of all
other applicable local, state, and federal laws:
a. Activities and uses that do not require the issuance of a development permit or
building permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
(1) Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling, and boating;
(2) The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice, berries,
tree fruits, and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the natural
reproduction of such crops;
(3) The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning, and harvesting of
timber;
(4) The pasturing of livestock;
(5) The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
(6) The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
b. Uses that do not require the issuance of a development permit or building permit and
that may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
(1) The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level
stabilization measures that are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry
conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural
activities if not corrected;
(2) The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations necessary
for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.51: WET-O Wetland Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-143
(3) The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore pre-existing
levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling necessary to
dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise permissible and
that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
(4) The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of livestock,
including limited excavating and filling necessary for such construction or
maintenance;
(5) The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways, observation
decks, and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited excavating and fill
necessary for such construction or maintenance;
(6) The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of draining
lands outside the Wetland Overlay District, provided that such installation or
maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize impacts upon the
natural functions of the wetland specified in this Section; and
(7) The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of existing highways
and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such
maintenance, repair, replacement, or reconstruction.
c. Uses that are allowed upon the issuance of a development permit or building permit
and that may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided
below:
(1) The construction and maintenance of roads that are necessary for the continuity
of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility and emergency
services, or to provide access to uses permitted under this Section, provided
that the following conditions are met:
? The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
? The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts upon
the natural functions of the wetland specified in this Section;
? The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-sectional
area practical to serve the intended use;
? Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of the
roadbed only; and
? Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or
maintenance of the road.
(2) The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings provided that the
following conditions are met:
? The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in this
Section or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows, or other wetland or
aquatic animals;
? The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
? The building does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area;
and
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.51: WET-O Wetland Overlay District
4-144 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
? Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural support
for the building is allowed.
(3) The establishment and development of public and private parks and recreation
areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural, and scientific areas, game
refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game
bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves, and public boat launching ramps,
provided that the following conditions are met:
? Any private development under this clause shall be used specifically for
the permitted purpose;
? Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of
public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the construction of
park shelters, or similar structures is allowed;
? The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses
permitted under this Clause are allowed only where such construction and
maintenance meets the criteria specified in Subsection D., 1., c.,(1) of this
Section; and
? Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife
habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, and wildlife
preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to
otherwise enhance wetland values.
(4) The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines,
water and gas distribution lines, sewage collection lines and related facilities,
and the construction and maintenance of railroad lines provided that the
following are conditions are met:
? The utility transmission and distribution facilities and railroad lines cannot,
as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
? Only limited filling and excavating necessary for such construction or
maintenance is allowed; and
? Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland as
specified in Section 3.7: Map and/or Text Amendments to the Wetland
Overlay District.
2. Prohibited uses.
a. Any use not listed as a permitted use in this Section is prohibited, unless the wetland
or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this Ordinance
pursuant to Section 3.7: Map and/or Text Amendments to the Wetland Overlay
District.
b. The use of a boathouse for human habitation, and the construction or placement of a
boathouse or fixed boathouse below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable
waters, is prohibited.
Section 4.52 - 4.54 (Reserved for potential additional overlay districts other than PUDs.)
Section 4.55 PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.55: Planned Unit Development Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-145
A. Intent
The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District is intended to encourage efficient use of
land and provision of amenities by allowing, under certain circumstances, a more flexible means
of land development and redevelopment than is otherwise permissible under the parcel
restrictions of the standard or underlying zoning districts of this Ordinance.
B. Applicability
1. Ownership. A tract of land proposed to be developed as a planned unit development
(PUD) shall be under the control of a single owner, partnership, corporation, or association
where each owner agrees in advance to be bound by the conditions and regulations that will
be effective within the district and to record such covenants, easement, and other provisions
with Ashland County.
2. Minimum area. A planned unit development shall have a minimum of ten (10) acres
unless specified otherwise in this Ordinance. However, the Zoning Administrator, Plan
Commission or Designated Authorized Agent may waive the minimum area requirement if
the Zoning Administrator, Plan Commission or Designated Authorized Agent finds that it is
in the best interest of the community to allow a planned unit development with an area of
less than ten (10) acres.
3. Condominium projects. Condominium projects with jointly owned common spaces
and/or commonly owned structural walls, roofs, or other structural elements must be
approved as Planned Unit Development if, as a result of a condominium division of the
land, the parcel requirements of the district in which the development is located cannot
otherwise be met. This requirement would apply to townhouses where the resulting parcel
size would be less than otherwise required.
4. Conservation subdivision development. Conservation subdivision developments
pursuant to Section 4.56 Conservation Subdivision Overlay District shall be processed in
accordance with the planned unit development provisions of this Section.
5. Traditional neighborhood design development. Traditional neighborhood design
developments pursuant to Section 4.57: Traditional Neighborhood Design Overlay District
shall be processed in accordance with planned unit development provisions of this Section.
C. Administration
Refer to Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District for
application and administration of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District.
Section 4.56 Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
A. Intent
The intent of this Section is to allow the optional development and redevelopment of land in the
City of Ashland consistent with the principles of conservation subdivision developments and in
accordance with planned unit development (PUD) procedures. For the purpose of this Ordinance,
a conservation subdivision development is intended to allow for a more compact layout of rural
residential uses than is typically allowed in conventional rural residential development in return
for the conservation of a large contiguous area of common open space that helps conserve rural
character or significant natural or cultural resources. More specifically, the intent of the
Conservation Subdivision Overlay District is as follows:
1. Guide the future growth and development of the community consistent with the City of
Ashland’s adopted Comprehensive Plan;
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.56: Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
4-146 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Guide the detailed analysis of land so as to locate and coordinate appropriate areas for
development and conservation;
3. Preserve rural character through the permanent preservation of meaningful open space and
sensitive natural resources;
4. Preserve scenic views by minimizing views of new development from existing roads;
5. Preserve agricultural land by concentrating housing on lands that have low agricultural
potential;
6. Provide commonly owned open space areas for passive and/or active recreational use by
residents of the development and, where specified, the larger community;
7. Provide for a diversity of parcel sizes, housing choices, and building densities to
accommodate a variety of age and income groups;
8. Provide buffering between residential development and non-residential uses;
9. Protect and restore environmentally sensitive areas and biological diversity, minimize
disturbance to significant existing vegetation, and maintain environmental corridors;
10. Preserve significant archaeological sites, historic buildings, and their settings; and
11. Meet demand for housing in a rural setting.
B. Applicability
A conservation subdivision development is allowed pursuant to the following conditions:
1. Allowable underlying zoning district. A conservation subdivision development shall
only be allowed in the FD Future Development District;
2. Minimum area. A conservation subdivision development shall have a minimum area of
twenty acres (20) acres or more;
3. Minimum of four residential parcels. The conservation subdivision development shall
have at least four (4) residential parcels;
4. Planned unit development. A conservation subdivision development shall be designed
and processed pursuant to the planned unit development procedures specified in Section
4.55 PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District and Section 3.8: Creation of a
Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay; and
5. Plat. The creation of a conservation subdivision shall require preliminary and final plat
approval pursuant to Section 3.23: Preliminary Plat and Section 3.24: Final Plat.
C. Permitted Uses and Density
1. Permitted uses. Single-family detached residential dwellings, agriculture, parks, open
space, and similar and related uses are the only permitted uses in a conservation subdivision
development. Commercial and industrial uses shall be prohibited.
2. Overall density and development yield. The overall density for the parent parcel is the
same as would be allowed for a conventional development in the FD Future Development
District, except the base development yield may be increased if the development complies
with one or more of the following standards. Each standard provides a development yield
bonus of five (5) percent in addition to the base development yield. The maximum bonus
permitted is twenty (20) percent.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.56: Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-147
a. Endowment. Creation of an endowment where the principal would generate
sufficient annual interest to cover the conservation easement holder’s yearly costs
relating to taxes, insurance, maintenance, enforcement, and similar items.
b. Public access. Provision of access by the general public to trails, parks, or other
recreational facilities, excluding golf courses.
c. Affordable housing. Provision of affordable housing, to include a minimum of
twenty-five (25) percent of all units that would be affordable to moderate income
households, as defined by the United State Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
d. Historical buildings. Reuse of historical buildings and structures, including those
sites inventoried by the State Historical Society of Wisconsin. The United States
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties shall
apply.
D. Design Standards
1. Design theme. Conservation subdivision developments shall develop a conservation theme
or themes. This theme shall be identified at the time of the initial planned unit development
(PUD) application. Conservation themes may include, but are not limited to, forest
stewardship, water quality preservation, farmland preservation, natural habitat restoration,
viewshed preservation, or archaeological and historic properties preservation. The Plan
Commission shall have the ability to specify which areas shall be preserved.
2. Residential parcel requirements.
a. Parcel size. The minimum parcel size with onsite septic shall be one (1) acre. The
minimum parcel size with off-site or community septic shall be one-quarter (1/4)
acre.
b. Setback requirements for principal buildings. The setbacks of underlying FD Future
Development District may be modified as follows for an approved conservation
subdivision development:
(1) Minimum principal building setback from the front parcel line or corner street
side parcel line: Twenty five (25) feet;
(2) Minimum principal building setback from interior side parcel line: Eight (8)
feet;
(3) Minimum principal building setback from rear parcel line: Thirty-five (35)
feet.
c. Height requirements for principal buildings. Principal buildings shall not exceed two
stories above grade or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
d. Size, height, and setback requirements of accessory buildings. The size, height, and
setback requirements shall be as specified in Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building.
e. Maximum impervious coverage. Parcels shall be configured to minimize the amount
of impervious surfaces, but in no case shall the impervious coverage of parcel exceed
thirty-five (35) percent, except as may be modified pursuant to Section 6.1, D.:
Impervious Coverage.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.56: Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
4-148 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
f. Access. Most parcels shall take access from an interior local street. However
existing farmsteads to be preserved may have a driveway as part of the historic
landscape that does not access a local street.
g. Streets. Parcels shall, to the maximum extent practical, be configured to minimize
the amount of street length required for the development.
h. Development envelopes. Development envelopes shall, to the maximum extent
practical, be configured to minimize the loss of trees and other significant resources.
Development envelopes shall not be located on ridges, hilltops, along peripheral
public roads, or in other visually prominent areas.
i. Agricultural uses. If agricultural uses are being maintained, parcels shall be
configured in a manner that maximizes the usable area remaining for such
agricultural uses with appropriate buffers between agricultural uses and residential
structures.
j. Common open space. All parcels within a neighborhood should abut common open
space on at least one side. A local street may separate parcels from open space.
Parcels should generally be oriented around a central green square and/or a physical
amenity such as a meadow, a stand of trees, or some other natural or restored feature.
k. Energy efficiency. Residential structures should be sited to maximize energy
efficiency.
3. Residential cluster siting standards and guidelines.
a. Residential clusters. All residential parcels and dwellings shall be grouped into
clusters. Each cluster shall contain no less than four (4) dwelling units and no more
than twenty (20) dwelling units.
b. Location of residential clusters. Residential clusters shall be located to minimize
negative impacts on the natural, scenic, and cultural resources of the site and conflicts
between compatible uses.
c. Encroachment on significant natural resources prohibited. Residential clusters shall
avoid encroaching on rare plant communities, sites with high environmental or
cultural qualities, or endangered species identified by the Department of Natural
Resources.
d. Connections to adjacent open space. Whenever possible, open space shall connect
with existing or potential open space lands on adjoining parcels and local or regional
recreational trails.
e. Siting criteria. Residential clusters shall be sited to achieve the following goals, to
the extent practical:
(1) Minimize impacts to agricultural uses and avoid interference with normal
agricultural practices;
(2) Minimize disturbance to woodlands, wetlands, grasslands, and specimen trees;
(3) Prevent downstream impacts due to runoff through adequate onsite storm water
management practices pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance;
(4) Protect scenic views of open land from adjacent roads. Visual impact shall be
minimized through use of landscaping or other features; and
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.56: Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-149
(5) Protect archaeological sites and existing historic buildings or incorporate them
through adaptive reuse.
f. Landscape screening. Landscaping around the cluster may be necessary to reduce
off-site views of residence.
4. Common open space design standards and guidelines.
a. Ownership and use. The minimum common open space required shall be owned and
maintained under one of the alternatives listed in this Section and as approved by the
Common Council. The uses within the open space shall be accessible to residents of
the development. These uses may also be available to the general public providing
the proper approvals are received. The required common open space shall be
undivided and restricted in perpetuity from future development as specified in this
Section.
b. Minimum area. Common open space shall be designated as part of the development.
The minimum required common open space is sixty (60) percent of the gross
acreage.
c. Priorities. The areas to be preserved as common open space shall be identified on an
individual basis in an effort to conserve and provide the best opportunities to restore
and enlarge the best quality natural features of each particular site. In general,
common open space priorities shall be as follows:
(1) First priority shall be given to intact natural communities, rare and endangered
species, environmental corridors, natural and restored prairies, significant
historic and archaeological properties, and steep slopes;
(2) Second priority shall be given to areas providing some plant and wildlife
habitat and open spaces values;
(3) Third priority shall be given to areas providing little habitat, but providing
viewshed, recreation, or a sense of open space.
d. Allowable structures. The following areas or structures may be located within the
common open space area and shall be counted toward the overall common open
space percentage required:
(1) Parking areas for access to and use of the open space developed at a scale
limited to the potential users of the open space;
(2) Privately held buildings or structures provided they are accessory to the use of
the common open space;
(3) Shared septic systems and shared potable water systems.
e. Street right-of-ways. Street right-of-ways shall not be counted toward the required
minimum common open space.
f. Water bodies. No more than fifty (50) percent of the required common open space
may consist of water bodies, ponds, floodplains, or wetlands.
g. Plant and animal habitat. That portion of the common open space designed to
provide plant and animal habitat shall be kept as intact as possible. Trails shall be
designed to avoid fragmenting these areas to the extent practical.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.56: Conservation Subdivision Overlay District
4-150 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
h. Recreational use. Accessible common open space in upland areas shall be available
for recreational uses such as trails, play areas, or community gardens, but shall be
designed in a manner that avoids adversely impacting archaeological sites.
i. Trails. A trail system connection common open space areas accessible to
neighborhood residents, and connecting these areas to neighborhood streets and to
planned or developed trails on adjacent parcels shall be identified in the conservation
subdivision plan.
5. Sewage and water facilities.
a. Drinking water. Unless municipal water service is readily available, water for a
conservation subdivision shall be provided by individual onsite wells or by one or
more community wells meeting the requirements of the State of Wisconsin and the
City of Ashland. The use of shared or community wells is encouraged. Plans for
shared or community wells shall include a wellhead protection plan with separation
distances for the zones of influence and sources of pollution.
b. Sanitary sewer. Unless municipal sanitary sewer is readily available, sewer for a
conservation subdivision shall be provided with an onsite sewage system that
complies with the requirements of the State of Wisconsin and the City of Ashland.
The use of a common sewage treatment system and disposal unit located on the
common open space is encouraged.
Section 4.57 Traditional Neighborhood Design Overlay District
A. Intent
The intent of this Subsection is to allow the optional development and redevelopment of land in
the City of Ashland consistent with the principles of traditional neighborhood design and in
accordance with planned unit development (PUD) procedures. For the purpose of this Ordinance,
a traditional neighborhood design is intended to have the following characteristics:
1. A more compact layout of buildings and uses than is typically allowed in conventional
developments;
2. An emphasis on building and site design that relates well to the human scale;
3. A mixture of uses that may include residential, commercial, civic, light industries, green
industries, and open spaces in close and harmonious relationship with one another in the
neighborhood;
4. A mixture of housing styles, types, and sizes to accommodate a variety of household ages,
sizes, and incomes;
5. A system of relatively narrow, interconnected streets with sidewalks, bikeways, and transit
that offer multiple routes for motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists, and provides for
connections to existing and future developments;
6. Preservation of existing buildings with historical or architectural features that enhance the
visual character of the community;
7. Incorporation of significant environmental features into the development; and
8. Consistency with the goals, objectives, policies, and plans of the adopted Comprehensive
Plan of the City of Ashland.
B. Applicability
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.57: Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-151
A traditional neighborhood design development may be allowed pursuant to the following:
1. Allowable underlying zoning districts. A traditional neighborhood design development
shall only be allowed in the following underlying zoning districts:
a. MRC Mixed Residential/Commercial District;
b. PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District;
c. CC City Center District;
d. W-MRC Waterfront Mixed Residential/Commercial District;
e. W-CRM Waterfront Conference/Residential Mix; or
f. W-CC Waterfront City Center District.
2. Minimum area. A traditional neighborhood design development shall have an area of at
least twenty (20) acres if located in the PRI Planned/Residential Institutional District or at
least ten (10) acres if located in another allowable district. However, the Common Council
can waive the minimum area requirement if the Council finds that the proposed
development is consistent with the intent of this Section and that the development would be
in the best interest of the community.
3. Planned unit development. A traditional neighborhood design development shall be
designed and processed pursuant to the planned unit development procedures specified in
Section 4.55: PUD Planned Unit Overlay District and Section 3.8: Creation of a Planned
Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District.
4. Plat. The creation of a traditional neighborhood design development shall require
preliminary and final plat approval pursuant to Section 3.23: Preliminary Plat and Section
3.24: Final Plat.
C. Uses
Traditional neighborhood design developments shall have a mixture of uses consistent with the
permitted uses and conditional uses in the underlying zoning district. In cases where a traditional
neighborhood design involves infill or redevelopment, existing adjacent uses may help satisfy the
desired mixture of uses. The mixture of uses shall be consistent with the following criteria:
1. Residential. To the maximum extent practical, the development shall provide a mixture of
housing to address the diverse needs of the community. Housing may include singlefamily
detached dwellings, single-family attached dwellings, multi-family dwellings,
accessory dwellings, community living arrangements, and assisted living facilities where
appropriate in the underlying districts. The housing shall also be designed to address a
diverse range of incomes.
2. Commercial. A variety of commercial uses that cater to the daily needs of the
development shall be provided within the development. Such uses may include
neighborhood convenience stores, coffee shops, personal service uses, and similar uses.
Individual commercial uses shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet.
Commercial uses shall be designed and placed to promoted pedestrian access.
3. Industry. Light industries and/or green industries may be appropriate in certain underlying
districts. Industry shall be compatible with the residential and commercial uses in the
development.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.57: Traditional Neighborhood Design Overlay District
4-152 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
4. Public, civic, and institutional uses. Where feasible, public, civic, and institutional uses
shall be integrated into the development. Such uses may include schools, religious
institutions, community centers, and similar uses.
5. Open space. At least ten (10) percent of the development shall consist of common open
space accessible to the public. The type of open space will depend on the underlying
zoning district in which the development is located.
6. Ratio of residential to non-residential uses. The total area of non-residential uses shall
not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the traditional neighborhood design
development.
D. Design Standards and Guidelines
A traditional neighborhood design development shall be designed with coordinated and
harmonious building and site design integrated throughout the entire development. In addition to
the design standards specified in Section 6.2: General Building Design Standards and
Guidelines, design standards for traditional neighborhood design developments are as follows:
1. Basic dimensional requirements. Basic dimensional requirements including parcel area
and width requirements, principal building setback requirements, allowable height
requirements, maximum building coverage requirements, maximum impervious coverage,
and other dimensional requirements shall be similar to the dimensional requirements of the
underlying zoning district. However, the dimensional requirements can be adjusted
pursuant to the planned unit development (PUD) procedures of this Ordinance.
2. Distinct character. A variety of architectural features and building materials shall be
provided to give each building or group of buildings a distinct character that relates to the
overall theme of the development.
3. Building height. Buildings shall not exceed the height requirements of the underlying
zoning district. Buildings shall generally be no more than thirty (30) percent taller or thirty
(30) percent shorter than the average building height on the block.
4. Entries and facades. The maximum extent practical, entries and facades shall comply
with the following guidelines:
a. The architectural features, materials, and the articulation of a façade of a building
shall be continued on all sides visible from a public street;
b. The front façade of the principal building on any parcel shall face onto a public
street;
c. The front façade shall not be oriented to face directly toward a parking lot;
d. All building entrances shall be clearly identified through architectural features;
e. For commercial buildings, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the front façade on the
street level shall be transparent, consisting of window and door openings that allow
views into and out of the interior; and
f. New structures on opposite sides of the same street shall follow similar design
guidelines.
5. Exterior signage. A comprehensive sign program is required for the entire development
that establishes a uniform theme. Signs shall have a common style based on size, shape,
color, and material.
Part 4: Zoning Districts
Section 4.57: Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 4-153
6. Landscaping and screening. Overall composition and location of landscaping shall
complement the scale of the development and its surroundings. Larger, well-placed
contiguous plantings are preferred to smaller disconnected areas.
7. Energy efficiency. Structures should be sited to maximize energy efficiency.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-1
Part 5: Specific Use Standards specifies special standards or requirements related to specific uses in Ashland. Not all uses
allowed by this Ordinance have special requirements or standards associated with them. Furthermore, some special standards or
requirements relating to specific uses may be specified in other Parts of this Ordinance. For example, general uses such as
parking, landscaping and signs, are specified in Part 6: General Development Standards. The specific use standards described in
this Part are generally organized by major types of uses including residential, commercial, industrial and other types of uses.
PART 5
SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
Part 5: Table of Contents
Section Title Part-Page
Section 5.1 Residential Uses ........................................................................................................................ 3
A. Adult Family Home ................................................................................................................... 3
B. Bed and Breakfast Establishment .............................................................................................. 3
C. Community Living Arrangement ............................................................................................... 3
D. Convent, Rectory, or Monastery ................................................................................................ 4
E. Dwelling: Accessory ................................................................................................................. 4
F. Home Occupation ...................................................................................................................... 4
G. Mobile Homes and Mobile/Manufactured Home Communities ................................................ 8
H. Manufactured/Modular Home ................................................................................................. 10
I. Recreational Vehicles, Trailers and Camping.......................................................................... 11
J. Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living ............................................................................... 11
K. Tourist Home ........................................................................................................................... 11
Section 5.2 Commercial Uses .................................................................................................................... 11
A. Adult Entertainment Establishment ......................................................................................... 11
B. Currency Exchange Establishment, Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan Agency, Pawn
Shop, Rent-to-Own Establishment, or Similar Use ................................................................. 12
C. Day Care Center: Commercial ................................................................................................ 13
D. Local Food Store ...................................................................................................................... 13
E. Manufactured Home Dealer, Sales and Display ...................................................................... 13
F. Outdoor Merchandise Sales or Storage .................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
G. Social Services ......................................................................................................................... 14
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
5-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Section 5.3 Industrial Uses ........................................................................................................................ 15
A. Ashland Industrial Park ........................................................................................................... 15
B. Recycling Facilities and Indoor and/or Outdoor Salvage Operations ...................................... 18
C. Community Composting Facilities .......................................................................................... 19
Section 5.4 Utilities and Communication Uses ....................................................................................... 20
A. Communication Equipment: Major ........................................................................................ 20
B. Communication Equipment: Minor ........................................................................................ 25
C. Utility Facilities ....................................................................................................................... 28
D. Wind Energy Facility ............................................................................................................... 28
Section 5.5 Temporary or Seasonal Uses................................................................................................. 38
A. Model Home ............................................................................................................................ 38
B. Temporary Construction Building ........................................................................................... 39
C. Temporary Real Estate Office ................................................................................................. 39
D. Seasonal Market ....................................................................................................................... 39
E. Seasonal or Temporary Commercial Sales/Rentals ................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
Section 5.6 Accessory Uses and Other Uses .............................................................................................. 1
A. Accessory Building .................................................................................................................... 1
B. Accessory Structures .................................................................................................................. 3
C. Animals: Keeping of ................................................................................................................. 4
D. Day Care: Family Home ........................................................................................................... 7
E. Outdoor Mechanical Equipment ................................................................................................ 7
F. Outdoor/Indoor Temporary Sales and Auctions ........................................................................ 7
G. Patio, Deck, Terrace, and Similar Uses. .................................................................................... 8
H. Personal Storage Building as a Principal Building .................................................................... 8
I. Public Art ................................................................................................................................... 8
J. Solar Equipment and Solar Rights ........................................................................................... 10
K. Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses ...................................................................... 11
L. Swimming Pool ........................................................................................................................ 11
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-3
Section 5.1 Residential Uses
A. Adult Family Home
All residents of the adult family home, other than the operator or care provider and the operator or
care provider’s immediate family, shall be disabled persons, as indicated by the required state
license application. If this standard is not met, the use shall not be located within two thousand
five hundred (2,500) feet of a community living arrangement or another adult family home.
B. Bed and Breakfast Establishment
A bed and breakfast establishment shall be allowed only in those zoning districts where it is
permitted or permitted as a conditional use and only after the issuance of a conditional use permit
pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit. In addition, the following standards shall
apply:
1. Compliance with State standards. All bed and breakfast establishments and licensees
shall be subject to and comply with Chapter DHS 197 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code relating to bed and breakfast establishments and/or Chapter DHS 195 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code relating to hotels, motels, and tourist rooming houses.
2. Registry. Each bed and breakfast establishment shall provide a register and require all
guests to register their true names and addresses before assigning quarters. The register
shall be kept intact and available for inspection by a Designated Authorized Agent of the
City for a period of not less than one (1) year.
3. Permits required. In addition to the permit required by Chapter DHS 197 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code and/or Chapter DHS 195 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, every bed and breakfast establishment shall obtain a bed and breakfast establishment
permit pursuant to Section 3.37: Bed and Breakfast Establishment Permit, and all other
applicable permits pursuant to this Ordinance. An approved bed and breakfast
establishment permit shall be conspicuously displayed in the bed and breakfast
establishment.
4. Management. Bed and breakfast establishments shall be managed and occupied by the
owner of the property.
5. Limit of guest occupancy. Guest occupancy shall be limited to fourteen (14) days in any
thirty (30) day period.
C. Community Living Arrangement
1. All residents of the facility, other than the operator or care provider and the operator or care
provider’s immediate family, shall be disabled persons, as indicated by the required state
license application. If this standard is not met, the use shall not be located within two
thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of another community living arrangement.
2. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall receive notice from the
State of Wisconsin of application for licensure of the community living arrangement.
3. Prior to initial licensure of the community living arrangement by the State of Wisconsin,
the application for licensure shall make a good faith effort to establish a community
advisory committee consisting of representatives from the community living arrangement,
the neighborhood in which the proposed facility will be located, and a local unit of
government, in accordance with Section 48.68(4) of the Wisconsin Statutes or Section
50.03(4)(g) of the Wisconsin Statutes, as applicable.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
5-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
4. The loss of any state license or permit by a community living arrangement shall be an
automatic revocation of that facility’s use permit.
D. Convent, Rectory, or Monastery
A convent, rectory, or monastery shall be on the same parcel or contiguous to the associated
religious institution. If this standard is not met, the convent, rectory, or monastery shall comply
with the allowable density, number of units, and other applicable provisions of the zoning district
in which it is located.
E. Dwelling: Accessory
An accessory dwelling shall be allowed only in those zoning districts where it is permitted as a
conditional use and only after the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit. In addition, the following standards shall apply:
1. An accessory dwelling shall be located above a detached garage that is accessory to a
single-family detached dwelling and located within the rear yard;
2. Any exterior changes or additions for an accessory dwelling shall
be constructed of similar materials and shall be architecturally
compatible with the principal building;
3. The accessory dwelling unit shall not contain more than thirty (30)
percent of the total floor area on the subject parcel;
4. There shall be a total of no more than one accessory dwelling on
the subject parcel;
5. The minimum parcel area shall be two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet greater than the minimum parcel area required
for the principal building in the subject zoning district;
6. A detached garage with an accessory dwelling shall meet all requirements for accessory
buildings;
7. There shall be an unobstructed walkway leading from the public street to the accessory
dwelling; and
8. At least one dwelling unit on the subject parcel shall be owner-occupied.
F. Home Occupation
A home occupation shall be allowed in those zoning districts where they are a permitted use. A
person with a home occupation that exceeds any standard listed in Section 5.1 F.3.: Standards for
Permitted Home Occupations shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit. All home occupations shall also comply with all other
applicable local, State or Federal regulations.
1. Intent.
Establish criteria for operation of home occupations a. as a secondary use in all districts
permitting residential use;
b. Permit and/or regulate the conduct of home occupations as an accessory use in a
dwelling unit, whether owner- or renter-occupied;
c. Ensure that such home occupations are compatible with, and do not have a harmful
effect on, adjacent and nearby residential properties and uses;
Sustainability Tip.
Accessory dwellings can
provide economic and
social benefits for the
residents of the principal
dwelling and the residents
of the accessory dwelling.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-5
Ensure that public and private services, such as streets, d. sewers, or water or utility
systems, are not burdened by the home occupation to the extent that usage exceeds
that normally associated with residential use;
e. Allow residents of the community to use their place of residence to enhance or fulfill
personal economic goals, under certain specified standards, conditions, and criteria;
f. Enable fair and consistent enforcement of home occupation regulations; and
g. Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
2. Permitted Home Occupations.
a. Intent. Home occupations, as defined by this ordinance and permitted in this section,
are allowed as an accessory use where the principle use is residential, in all zoning
districts that permit residential use, for the reasons that they:
(1) Do not compromise the residential character of the area;
(2) Do not generate conspicuous traffic;
(3) Do not visually call unusual attention to the home; and
(4) Do not generate noise of a nonresidential level.
b. Standards. The standards set forth in this section shall be met. In cases where the
character of the home occupation exceeds the requirements, the home occupation will
either require a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit or the use is not considered a home occupation, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
c. Types of Permitted Home Occupations.
(1) Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping, and payroll services;
(2) Artists, sculptors, and composers;
(3) Baking and cooking;
(4) Catering;
(5) Child care: for 1 to 3 children as an unlicensed family daycare;
(6) Computer systems design, repair, and related services;
(7) Computer training;
(8) Craft work, such as jewelry-making and pottery;
(9) Drafting services;
(10) Engineering, architecture, and landscape architecture;
(11) Financial planning and investment services;
(12) Hair salon, barbering, hairdressing, and other personal care services;
(13) Home offices;
(14) Information and data processing services;
(15) Insurance sales;
(16) Interior decoration (no studio permitted);
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
5-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(17) Internet sales;
(18) Legal services;
(19) Mail order business;
(20) Musical instruction, voice, or instrument;
(21) Musical instrument tuning and repair;
(22) Offices for professional, scientific, or technical services or administrative
services;
(23) Photographic services;
(24) Professional services, including the practice of law;
(25) Real estate services and appraisal;
(26) Sale of firewood, provided that: no on-site processing occurs; and that all onsite
wood storage meets the requirements of the City of Ashland Ordinance
750: Property Maintenance Ordinance, Section 750 (B): Firewood Storage;
(27) Tailoring (e.g., dressmaking and alterations) services;
(28) Teaching of crafts and incidental sale of supplies to students;
(29) Telephone answering and message services; and
(30) Tutoring.
(31) Other uses as determined by Zoning Administrator or other authorized agent.
d. Exempted Home Occupations.
(1) Baking, cooking and craft work created entirely for not for profit use,
fundraising and donations, or for seasonal sales occurring no more than 4 times
per year;
(2) Sale of worms for bait, seasonally, from May 1 to September 30;
(3) Those occupations with an annual income less than the Federal IRS minimum
income requirement for self-employment. Refer to IRS Publication 334: Tax
Guide for Small Business.
3. Standards for Permitted Home Occupations. The following requirements shall be met
for the Home Occupations listed in this Subsection:
a. No more than 2 employees other than residents of the premises shall be permitted;
b. Sales shall be limited to: mail order sales; telephone sales; and/or internet sales, all
with off-site delivery;
c. Classes held on the premises shall have no more than four (4) students at any given
time and shall be given within the principal structure only;
d. The home occupation shall not result in the need for more than two (2) parking
spaces at any given time in addition to spaces required by the occupant of the home.
Exceptions include open house events, which shall not occur more than one per
quarter annually;
e. Not more than ten (10) customer vehicle trips for business purposes per day. Hours
for visits shall be between 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM;
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-7
No more than twenty five (25) percent of the total area f. of the principal structure shall
be used for the home occupation activity;
g. No structural alterations or construction involving features not customarily found in
dwellings;
h. Articles for sale may not be displayed outside the principal structure, with the
exception of firewood meeting the requirements of the City of Ashland Ordinance
750: Property Maintenance Ordinance, Section 750 (B): Firewood Storage;
i. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in connection with
the home occupation, with the exception of firewood meeting the requirements of the
City of Ashland Ordinance 750: Property Maintenance Ordinance, Section 750 (B):
Firewood Storage;
j. Shall not involve the repair of vehicles and motors or construction of equipment and
machinery;
k. Deliveries and pickups shall be those normally associated with residential services,
shall not block traffic circulation, and shall occur only between 8:00 AM and 8:00
PM, Monday through Saturday;
l. There shall be no detriments to the residential character of the neighborhood due to
the emission of noise, odor, smoke, dust, gas, heat, vibration, electrical interference,
traffic congestion, or other nuisances resulting from the home occupation;
m. Storage of goods and materials shall not include flammable, combustible, or
explosive materials which exceed typical levels allowable on a residential property;
n. Existing public facilities and utilities shall be adequate to safely accommodate
equipment used for the home occupation;
o. Signage for home occupations shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section
6.6: Signs.
4. Rural Home Occupations – Permitted Home Occupations. The following home
occupations are permitted in the Future Development District (FD), on parcels with five (5)
acres or more, in addition to those specified above in Section 5.1 F.2.
a. Auto repair work;
b. Computer and office machine repair and maintenance;
c. Contractor and trade shops, indoor operations only, including electrical, plumbing,
and mechanical;
d. Machine welding shops;
e. Office machinery and equipment rental and leasing; and
f. Processing and sale of firewood, provided that: all on-site wood storage meets the
requirements of the City of Ashland Ordinance 750: Property Maintenance
Ordinance, Section 750 (B): Firewood Storage.
5. Standards for Permitted Rural Home Occupations in the Future Development District
(FD). The Rural Home Occupations listed above in Section 5.1 F.4., shall meet the
standards listed above in Section 5.1 F.3., with exception, the following standards based on
the rural character of this district, are permitted.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
5-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Garages or detached accessory structures a. may be used for the home occupation
activity.
b. Exterior storage of equipment or materials may be used, only in connection with the
home occupation.
c. The repair of vehicles or motors or construction of equipment and machinery is
allowable as a home occupation.
d. Storage of flammable, combustible, or explosive goods and materials is allowable in
accessory structures if property storage and separate requirements are met and if
authorized in writing by the Fire Chief.
G. Mobile Homes and Mobile/Manufactured Home Communities
1. Permanent occupancy. A manufactured home (mobile home) intended for permanent
occupancy shall meet all licensing requirements and regulations in City of Ashland
Ordinance 871: Licensing and Regulating Mobile Homes, Manufactured Home
Communities (Mobile Home Parks), and Campgrounds and the following conditions:
a. No mobile home may be parked outside of an approved mobile/manufactured home
community (mobile home park).
b. Double-wide manufactured homes or mobile homes may be parked outside a
mobile/manufactured home community if they are attached to a foundation and meet
the requirements of the Uniform Dwelling Code and all other applicable state and
federal codes.
c. The Common Council, may in its discretion, and by a uniform rule, limit the number
of occupants in any manufacture home or mobile home occupying a space in a
manufactured home community (mobile home park) for reasons of health and public
welfare.
d. All manufactured homes and mobile homes shall be anchored to the ground.
Anchoring systems generally consist of ties and anchors. The ties are generally of
two types, over-the-top and frame which connect the I-beam to the anchor. Ties shall
be secured to either a ground anchor, which may be a screw auger or concrete
deadman anchor, or to a slab anchor, or to the foundation itself. Anchors shall be
sufficiently embedded to account for saturated soil conditions which accompany
flooding.
2. Temporary occupancy. A manufactured home or mobile home intended for temporary
occupancy shall meet the following conditions:
a. Mobile homes used as a temporary construction office shall follow the requirements
pursuant to Section 5.5, B.: Temporary Construction Building.
b. A building permit pursuant to Section 3.32: Building Permit, is required for field
offices located off-site. Temporary field office occupancy is limited to six (6)
months. Occupancy may be extended upon approval from of the Building Inspector
or Designated Authorized Agent.
c. A conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit, shall be
required for any educational institution for temporary occupancy of a mobile home
outside of an approved, licensed mobile home park. The mobile home shall be found
to be in the public interest and shall not damage or interfere with the character of the
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-9
neighborhood in which the mobile home unit will be parked. The conditional use
permit shall not permit temporary occupancy exceeding thirty-six (36) months.
3. License for manufactured home communities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, a. or maintain, or permit to be
established, operated, or maintained upon any property owned, leased, or controlled
by that person, a manufactured home community (mobile home park) within the
limits of the City of Ashland without first having obtained all necessary approvals
and/or permits from the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services
(Safety and Buildings Division),the Department of Health Services and the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. In addition, a license shall be obtained
for each such community or park from the City Clerk pursuant City of Ashland
Ordinance 871: Licensing and Regulating Mobile Homes, Manufactured Home
Communities (Mobile Home Parks), and Campgrounds.
b. It shall be the duty of any person intending to operate a manufactured home
community (mobile home park) to report to the local board of health and the City
Building Inspector the following information:
(1) Name of the manufactured home community (mobile home park);
(2) Name and address of owner, agent, or operator;
(3) Number of persons that may be accommodated; and
(4) The location of the community or park.
4. Management. The attendant or person in charge of the manufactured home community
(mobile home park) together with the licensee, shall be responsible for ensuring compliance
with City of Ashland Ordinance 871: Licensing and Regulating Mobile Homes,
Manufactured Home Communities (Mobile Home Parks), and Campgrounds.
5. Inspection and enforcement.
a. All manufactured/mobile homes and manufactured home communities shall be open
to inspection at all reasonable hours by representatives of the local and State Board of
Health and the City Building Inspector. Refer to City of Ashland Ordinance 871:
Licensing and Regulating Mobile Homes, Mobile/Manufactured Home Communities
(Parks), and Campgrounds for additional regulations and requirements.
b. Each manufactured home community (mobile home park) licensee and/or its
managing agent shall give written notice to the Building Inspector anytime a
manufactured home or mobile home is moved out of a manufactured home
community and another manufactured home (mobile home) is moved in to take its
place. The purpose of this notice is to permit the Building Inspector to make
inspections to determine that newly placed manufactured home (mobile home) has
been placed in compliance with this Ordinance and to permit proper fair market value
assessment of the newly placed manufactured home (mobile home).
6. Required plans. Every manufactured home (mobile home) and manufactured home
community (mobile home park) shall be located on a well-drained area, and the property
shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or other waters. Plans,
which indicate where the homes, a safe shelter (as defined by FEMA) and other structures
will be placed with a numbering system for the homes, shall be distributed to the Fire
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
5-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Department, Police Department, Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Public Works
Director, City Clerk and City Assessor.
7. Design standards for manufactured home community (mobile home park). The
dimensional standards associated with a manufactured home community (mobile home
park) shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 4.7: MHC Manufactured Home
Community and the following additional standards:
All drives, parking areas, and walkways shall a. be hard surfaced concrete or blacktop.
All roadways shall meet the required standards pursuant to Part 9: Land Divisions
and Improvements and all other applicable City Ordinances relating to road and street
construction. Roadways shall be complete to each site before they can be occupied.
Interior streets shall be maintained so as to be free from potholes and ruts;
b. Garages or accessory buildings may be constructed on existing concrete pads facing
the interior or exterior street used for access to the manufactured or mobile home. A
minimum distance of six (6) feet shall be maintained between garages or accessory
buildings and all homes. Accessory building shall comply with the provisions
pursuant to Section 5.6, A.: Accessory Building and Section 4.7: MHC Manufactured
Home Community (Mobile Home Park) District;
c. Lawns shall be in suitable condition, free from noxious weeds, and shall include a
parking pad and patio, complete before habitation of the home;
d. An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution system
connected with the public water main, or if a public main is not available, an
approved well shall be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes. The applicable
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services Administrative Codes,
and requirements from the Wisconsin Department of Health Services and Department
of Natural Resources shall apply;
e. A separate valved water service shall extend to each home;
f. Fire hydrants shall be maintained in proper working order and no home shall be
installed unless a hydrant is available within four hundred (400) feet;
g. When public sewage facilities are available, connection and use is required. If public
sewage facilities are not available, a treatment system approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Safety and Professional Services shall be used;
h. Every site for a home shall be provided with sewer connections that comply with the
Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services Administrative Codes.
The sewer connections shall be provided with the suitable fittings so that a watertight
connection can be made. Such connections shall be constructed so that they can be
closed when not connected and trapped in such a manner as to be maintained in an
odor-free condition;
i. All garbage that is not disposed of through a garbage disposal unit connected with the
sewerage system shall be kept in separate, leak proof, metal, or plastic garbage
containers. The requirements of the applicable City Ordinances that govern garbage
disposal shall apply.
j. Lighting shall be provided near newly constructed sites and shall follow all
requirements pursuant to Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting.
H. Manufactured/Modular Home
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.1: Residential Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-11
1. Manufactured/Modular homes permitted. A manufactured/modular home is permitted
in any zoning district that permits a single-family detached dwelling provided that it
conforms to all of requirements of the district in which it is located and the provisions of
this Subsection.
2. Basements or foundations. Each manufactured/modular home shall be installed on a
basement of masonry foundation.
3. Minimum size. Each manufactured/modular home shall have a minimum dimension,
when erected on site, of at least twenty-four (24) feet in width and a minimum floor area of
at least nine hundred sixty (960) square feet.
4. Siding and roofing materials. Siding and roofing materials shall be similar to materials
found on nearby non-modular homes dwellings or be a typed broadly and generally used in
residential construction and shall have an appearance harmonious with adjacent housing.
I. Recreational Vehicles, Trailers and Camping
1. Temporary Occupancy. A recreational vehicle, camper trailer, or tent intended for
temporary occupancy shall meet the following conditions:
Parking and occupying recreational vehicles or camper a. trailers for more than twentyfour
(24) hours shall be prohibited in areas other than approved campgrounds or
private residences.
b. Camping on streets or in parking lots shall be prohibited, except that overnight
parking of semi-trucks at locations approved by owners (such as truck stops and
industrial parking lots) may be permitted.
c. A recreational vehicle, camper trailer, or tent may not be occupied at a residence for
more than thirty (30) days annually, and must meet all requirements pursuant to City
of Ashland Ordinance 750, Section B., 22: Vehicles.
J. Rehabilitation Center/Transitional Living
A rehabilitation center/transitional living facility shall not exceed fifteen (15) occupants at one
time. The facility shall be managed by an organization operating a program that is approved by
the State of Wisconsin pursuant to Wisconsin State Statute 51, and all relevant Administrative
Codes, including but not limited to DHS 75, DHS 92, DHS 94. The facility shall also be
approved by all applicable government entities having authority under law to license or authorize
the operation.
K. Tourist Home
A tourist home shall only be allowed in those zoning districts where it is permitted as a
conditional use and only after issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit.
Section 5.2 Commercial Uses
A. Adult Entertainment Establishment
1. Intent. The concentration of adult entertainment establishments in one area can have a
substantially detrimental effect on the area in which such establishments are concentrated
and can impact the overall quality of life. Being mindful of the effects of adult
entertainment upon minors and the criminal activity or disruption of public peace
associated with such establishments, while also giving due consideration to civil rights of
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.2: Commercial Uses
5-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
persons partaking in such entertainment, it is the intent of this Subsection to regulate the
location of adult entertainment establishments.
2. Conditional use permit required. An adult entertainment establishment shall only be
allowed in those zoning districts where it is permitted as a conditional use and only after
issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit. A
conditional use permit shall be required for a new adult entertainment establishment, a
change of use to an adult entertainment establishment, or an increase in building activity
where an adult entertainment use becomes the primary activity. Review of a conditional
use permit for an adult entertainment establishment shall consider the image and design of
the exterior building and the site, such as colors and schemes and landscaping.
3. Signage limitations. Signage for Adult Entertainment Establishments shall be required to
conform to all applicable sign regulations and standards in Section 6.6: Signs and the
following:
The establishment shall have no merchandise a a. dvertisement or pictures of
entertainment displayed in window areas or in any location visible from a public
right-of-way;
b. A one (1) square foot sign may be placed on the main entrance door stating hours of
operation and admittance to adults only;
c. No sign shall contain any flashing lights, moving elements, or mechanically
energized messages;
d. Signs shall not contain any explicit language or explicit or sexual graphic
representations;
e. Off-premise signs are prohibited.
4. Distance separation.
a. Each adult entertainment establishment shall be at least two thousand six hundred
forty (2,640) feet from any other adult entertainment establishment or similar use.
b. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located closer than one thousand
(1000) feet from the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, PRI, MRC, W-MRC, W-CRM
and W-SFR Zoning Districts, places of worship, schools, day care centers,
community living arrangements, rehabilitation center/transitional living uses, nursing
homes, senior housing, and similar uses.
B. Currency Exchange Establishment, Payday Loan Establishment, Title Loan
Agency, Pawn Shop, Rent-to-Own Establishment, or Similar Use
1. Intent. The City of Ashland has experienced a substantial increase in the number and
location of currency exchange establishments, payday loan establishments, title loan
agencies, pawn shops, rent-to-own establishments, and similar uses. Furthermore, the
clustering of these businesses may create and undesirable image of the vitality of the
commercial districts and the community as a whole. Consequently, it is the intent of this
Subsection to regulate the distance between these uses and prevent clustering of these uses.
2. Allowable zoning districts and separation. Currency exchange establishment, payday
loan establishments, title loan agencies, pawn shops, rent-to-own establishments and
similar uses shall be allowed only in the zoning districts as specified in this Ordinance and
only after the issuance conditional use permit. No such use shall be permitted closer than
twelve hundred (1,200) feet from any other such use.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.2: Commercial Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-13
C. Day Care Center: Commercial
1. A commercial day care center shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet from an
adult entertainment establishment.
2. A commercial day care center shall comply with all applicable laws including those
specified in Chapter 46 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Local Food Store
1. Location. Local food stores, as defined, shall be located on lots with frontage on an
arterial or collector street. On lots fronting more than one public street, local food stores
shall be allowed only on lots where the greater street frontage falls on the arterial or
collector street.
2. Design. The local food store shall be limited, so as to be proportionate in scale and
compatible in design, to the structures and lands within five-hundred (500) feet of the
proposed local food store.
3. Signage. Signage for local food stores shall be in accordance with Section 6.6: Signs, and
the specific requirements for the zoning district the food store is, or is proposed to be,
located in.
4. Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with Section 6.3: Parking and Loading, except as
specifically allowed by the Plan Commission upon consideration of the local food store
type and size, neighborhood compatibility, and site-specific limitations. Use of on-street
parking shall be subject to review by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized
Agent and the City Police Department upon consideration of street design, maintenance
requirements, traffic loads and speeds, related safety considerations and consistency with
applicable City Ordinances.
5. Screening. Screening of local food stores shall be in accordance with Section 6.4:
Landscaping, Buffers and Screening, or as otherwise conditioned by the Plan Commission.
6. Hours of operation. The Plan Commission may limit operating hours for the local food
store based on the nature of business activity and character of adjacent uses.
7. Other conditions. Other conditions specific to the proposed use may apply to ensure
harmony with adjacent uses, including placement of garbage receptacles in the vicinity.
Local food store developments shall likewise be subject to Site Plan Review pursuant to
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval, and shall be conditioned upon compliance with laws
applicable to food stores.
E. Manufactured Home Dealer, Sales and Display
A manufactured home dealer, sales and display use shall only be allowed in those zoning districts
where it is permitted as a conditional use and only after issuance of a conditional use permit,
pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit. In addition, a model home shall be consistent
with all of the following standards:
1. Maximum percent of building coverage. Forty (40) percent.
2. Office use. No more than fifteen (15) percent of the area of the main floor shall be used for
office area.
3. Spacing. Manufactured homes shall have at least twenty (20) feet of separation between
other manufactured homes or structures.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.2: Commercial Uses
5-14 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
4. Building orientation. Manufactured homes shall be organized at various angles and
oriented in a manner compatible and representative of a residential neighborhood.
5. Allowable time before manufactured home must be moved. A manufactured home shall
not remain on the sales and display lot for a period of more than two (2) years.
6. Hours of operation. Hours of operation for showing of the manufactured home shall be
between 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM, or other reasonable times as may be required by the
conditions of an approved conditional use permit or as may be permitted by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
7. Site plan approval. In addition to the issuance of a conditional use permit, a manufactured
home dealer, sales and display use shall be required to receive site plan approval.
8. Utilities. Electric service lines to manufactured home units shall be placed underground.
At no time shall a manufactured home on display be connected to a water or sewage
system.
F. Social Services
1. Intent. The intent of this section is to allow the operational needs of social service uses
and establishments to be met while identifying potential concerns and preventing a negative
impact on surrounding properties and the community. The following standards shall be
considered on a case by case basis.
Location & Building. Refer to each zoning district a. for permitted or conditionally
permitted uses.
(1) Social service uses may not be located within one thousand two hundred
(1,200) feet from another social service use unless the Plan Commission
determines that the cumulative impacts of the existing and proposed uses will
not adversely affect the living and working conditions of the properties located
within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the proposed uses;
(2) The establishment should be served by or easily accessible to public transit;
(3) The establishment shall be of adequate size and design to reasonably
accommodate its projected capacity;
(4) The establishment shall have internal and/or external waiting areas if deemed
appropriate by the Plan Commission;
(5) The establishment shall provide safe access and mobility for all patrons on the
property.
b. Signage.
(1) All signage shall be consistent with the requirements of Section 6.6: Signs.
(2) Warning and/or safety signs shall be posted in areas where pedestrians and
vehicles may come in contact.
c. Parking.
(1) Parking spaces shall be provided at one (1) space for every two hundred (200)
square feet net floor area.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.2: Commercial Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-15
(2) The standards of Section 6.3: Parking and Loading shall be met except as
specifically allowed by the Plan Commission upon consideration of the social
service type and size, neighborhood compatibility and site-specific limitations.
Screening. Exterior waiting, gathering, or d. smoking areas shall be adequately
screened from abutting properties and public rights-of-way to a height of six (6) feet.
e. Hours of operation. The Plan Commission may limit operating hours for the social
service use based on the nature of the use and the character of adjacent uses.
f. Density of housing units. The density of housing units shall be compatible for the
neighborhood.
Section 5.3 Industrial Uses
A. Ashland Industrial Park
1. Intent. The intent of this Subsection is to preserve the value of property in the Ashland
Industrial Park as well as property located near or adjacent to the Ashland Industrial Park.
This Subsection places restrictions, covenants, and conditions on all parcels within the
Ashland Industrial Park, regardless of ownership. Refer also to City of Ashland Ordinance
469: An Ordinance Establishing Covenants Governing the Subdivisions of Land in the
Ashland Industrial Park.
2. Supremacy. If a conflict exists between the provisions of this Subsection and City of
Ashland Ordinance 469: An Ordinance Establishing Restrictive Covenants Governing the
Subdivisions of Land in the Ashland Industrial Park on file with the Ashland City Clerk,
the provisions of Ordinance 469 shall prevail. If a conflict exists between the provisions of
this Subsection and the provisions of the underlying Zoning District, the provisions of this
Subsection shall prevail.
3. Boundaries of the Ashland Industrial Park. The boundaries of the Ashland Industrial
Park are depicted on a map on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
4. Restrictions, covenants, and conditions.
a. General use. Land in the Ashland Industrial Park is intended only for general
industrial use as specified in the underlying Zoning District, provided that the uses
are not in conflict with any laws of the State of Wisconsin or any ordinance of the
City of Ashland.
b. Other possible uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying Zoning
District, the Common Council may, after first referring the matter to the Plan
Commission for investigation, public hearing, and recommendation, authorize the
location of any of the following uses in the Ashland Industrial Park, provided that the
Common Council shall find that such location will tend to minimize the effects upon
the neighborhood and the community of any noxious and deleterious characteristics
of such uses such as smoke, gas, odor, noise, heat, and glare.
(1) Acid, ammonia, bleach, chlorine, or soap manufacture;
(2) Ammunition manufacture, explosives or fireworks manufacture, or storage;
(3) Asphalt, coal and coal tar, or coke manufacture;
(4) Automobile wrecking yard; junk yard;
(5) Bones, distillation of;
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.3: Industrial Uses
5-16 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(6) Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture;
(7) Fat rendering;
(8) Fertilizer manufacture;
(9) Forge plant;
(10) Gelatin, glue, or size manufacture;
(11) Inflammable gases or liquids, refining or manufacture of, over ground tank
farms;
(12) Slaughterhouse, stockyard;
(13) Smelting
Required approvals. No building, or c. any improvement thereto, shall be erected,
placed or altered on any building site in the Ashland Industrial Park until the plans
for such building or improvement, including site plan, landscape plan, building plan,
and specifications have been approved by the Plan Commission of the City of
Ashland pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. The Ashland City Plan
Commission shall approve or disapprove such plans with respect to conformity with:
(1) These restrictions and other applicable enactments of the City, and with respect
to harmony of external design and land use as it affects property within and
adjacent to the Ashland Industrial Park.
(2) Failure of the City Plan Commission to act upon such building or improvement
plans within sixty (60) days after submission to the Ashland City Plan
Commission shall constitute an approval of such plans.
(3) The Plan Commission may, at its discretion, recommend relief to the
provisions of this section pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
d. Minimum parcel area. No building or structure shall be constructed or erected within
the Ashland Industrial Park on parcels containing less than two (2) acres total land
area.
e. Required setbacks from front parcel line. No part or portion of any building shall be
erected, constructed or extended nearer than fifty (50) feet from the front parcel line
in the Ashland Industrial Park. Corner street side yards shall be a minimum of thirty
(30) feet. Employee parking of automobiles shall be prohibited at all times within the
fifty (50) foot front setback of any parcel of the Ashland Industrial Park. Limited
visitor or customer parking may be allowed within the fifty (50) foot front setback,
provided that a minimum fifteen (15) foot boulevard is provided. The front and
corner street side setback shall be entirely graded and sodded or seeded between said
parcel lines, and from the road shoulder to the building face in a manner that would
produce an acceptable lawn, excepting only such areas as may be required for
driveways, visitor parking, or walks.
f. Required setbacks from interior side parcel line. No part or portion of any building
shall be erected, constructed or extended nearer than twenty (20) feet to any interior
side parcel line. The combined total of side yards for any interior parcel shall not be
less than forty (40) feet.
g. Driveways and walks. All driveways shall be surfaced with hot-mixed asphalt
concrete or cement concrete from the city street surface to the front building face.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.3: Industrial Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-17
All walks shall be of cement concrete. All such drives and walks shall be completed
during the time of construction of the building.
Required parking. Refer to Section 6 h. .3: Parking and Loading and Table 6.3-A:
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces. City streets will not be designed by the City of
Ashland to provide parking.
i. Underground utilities.
(1) Wherever practical, industries purchasing land and constructing buildings in
the Ashland Industrial Park shall bury all utilities to a depth of at least thirtysix
(36) inches from the point of delivery at the Ashland Industrial Park
provided by the private utility company or the Wisconsin Telephone Company.
As a rule of thumb, all power lines carrying 13.8 KV or less shall be buried
from the point of delivery by the power company to the point of the connection
to the industrial structure. In instances where specific industries require power
lines carrying 34.5 KV, a decision shall be reached on underground installation
requirements on an individual case basis. This decision shall be reached by the
Ashland Plan Commission (following consultation with the private power
utility) at the time that the prospective industry submits a detailed site plan for
review, as required by the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Wherever practical, however, the Plan Commission shall, as a matter of policy,
require underground installation of power lines carrying 34.5 KV from the
point of delivery made by the private power utility to the point of connection to
the industrial structure.
(3) In all cases, natural gas and telephone service lines shall be buried to a depth of
at least thirty-six (36) inches between the point of delivery made by the private
utility and the point of connection with the industrial structure.
j. Demonstration areas. In the event that an industry wishes to develop and use an area
for the demonstration of power equipment (farm machinery, logging equipment,
earth-moving equipment, etc.) to potential customers, the boundaries of such areas
shall be clearly defined and conform to the setback, side yard, and rear yard
requirements of these restrictions. Demonstration areas shall be clearly defined, and
be separated from the primary industrial plant structure by a distance of at least thirty
(30) feet. Such areas shall be screened from view from all public and private access
roads within the Ashland Industrial Park by a fence which shall be eight (8) feet in
height. Wire mesh fencing is unsuitable as a screening device.
5. Maintenance and controls.
a. Control of particulate emissions.
(1) The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to
endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
(2) The general level of control of particulate emissions by any and all industrial
plants which occupy land in the Ashland Industrial Park shall comply with
Chapter NR 415 and Chapter 431 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. In
addition, any industry which intends to employ a production process which will
lead to immediate discharge of particulate emissions shall, as required by the
State Administrative Code, file a letter of intent prior to commencing
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.3: Industrial Uses
5-18 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
operations with the Environmental Protection Section, Department of Natural
Resources, Spooner, Wisconsin, and send a copy to the Ashland City Clerk,
Ashland, Wisconsin.
Rubbish burning. No rubbish may be burned on the property b. except in an incinerator
especially constructed and designed for this operation.
c. Solid waste management.
(1) All firms which purchase land and establish a producing industry within the
Ashland Industrial Park shall arrange for adequate disposal of solid waste
materials generated as a part of the production processes so established. Solid
waste materials so generated shall be disposed of at weekly intervals in a lawful
manner, as prescribed and specified in the Wisconsin State Administrative Code.
(2) Solid waste materials must be stored in a protected manner and be screened from
view behind a fence of solid materials or slatted cyclone, such as will provide a
suitable visual screen. The minimum height of such fence shall be six (6) feet.
The fence must be kept painted or have such other finish as
is generally accepted for good appearance.
B. Recycling Facilities and Indoor and/or Outdoor Salvage
Operations
1. License required. It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain a
recycling facility or indoor and/or outdoor salvage operation without
having obtained a license pursuant the following:
a. Filing date. Every applicant for such license shall annually file
by April 15 a written application with the City Clerk upon a
form prepared and provided by the City.
b. Inspections. The property shall be inspected by the Building
Inspector, a representative of the Police Department, and a
representative of the Fire Department to determine whether the
use complies with all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
c. License fee. An annual license fee, found on the City of Ashland’s Comprehensive
Fee Schedule, shall be paid at the time of application.
d. Expiration of license. All licenses shall expire on June 30 following their issuance,
unless revoked sooner.
e. Posting. The current license shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the
property described.
2. Location of outdoor recycling and/or salvage materials. No recycling and/or salvage
materials, nor the accumulation of such materials, shall be allowed within seven
hundred fifty (750) feet of the center line of any county trunk, state trunk or federal
highway or within five hundred (500) feet of the center line of a town road (unless
approved through the issuance of a permit by the town board). All recycling and/or
salvage materials and the accumulation of such materials, within one thousand feet
(1000) of the nearest edge of a state or federal highway shall be stored in an
enclosed structure or shall be screened so as to not be visible from the state or
federal highway. Recycling facilities and indoor and/or outdoor salvage operations shall
Sustainability Tip.
Properly designed, operated
and maintained, recycling
facilities and salvage
operations can help the
community reduce, reuse,
and recycle resources
locally, thereby providing
local economic benefit while
reducing transportation and
other environmental costs
typically associated with the
disposal of waste.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.3: Industrial Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-19
be accessible from a designated approved heavy haul route as determined by the Public
Works Director, County Highway Commissioner or Designated Authorized Agent.
3. Lost or stolen goods. Every keeper of a recycling facility or salvage operation who
receives or is in possession of any goods, articles, or things of value that may have been
lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any member of the Police
Department for examination.
4. Fencing and screening. Any recycling and/or salvage materials stored in the open shall be
enclosed and screened by a solid wall or non-transparent fence so that the salvage materials
are not visible from other properties in the vicinity, or from a public right-of-way, such as
roads, streets, highways, and waterways. The screening shall be eight (8) feet in height and
kept in good repair. The eight (8) foot height requirement may be waived and an
appropriate height set by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission may in its discretion
waive the fencing and screening requirement for any property perimeter for which it
determines that the visibility of the storage material is not a
detriment to the public interest.
5. Condition of property. All property licensed or used for a
recycling facility or an indoor and/or outdoor salvage operation shall
be maintained in proper and sanitary condition with no articles piled
so as to protrude beyond the enclosure.
C. Community Composting Facilities
1. Intent. A community composting facility, if not properly designed
and operated, can be harmful to the safety and general welfare of the
City and it citizens. This section is therefore intended to define
basic requirements necessary to protect the public and our natural
resources, as well as enhance the welfare of the public while
providing waste alternatives and promoting sustainability within the community. This
section does not relieve any obligation or requirements imposed by any Federal, State or
local law or regulation. Refer to Department of Natural Resources Chapter 502 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
2. Location and Site Requirements.
Location. The materials storage, curing, pr a. ocessing and composting areas of the
composting facility shall not be located within a mapped floodplain. Refer to the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for minimum separation/setbacks
distances.
b. Access. The composing facility shall be accessible from a designated and approved
heavy haul route as determined by the Public Works Director, County Highway
Commissioner, or Designated Authorized Agent.
c. Design standards. Design standards for the composting facility at a minimum, shall
be consistent with those specified in Department of Natural Resources Chapter
502.12 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
3. Performance Standards. All community composting facilities shall be required to
comply with the standards in Part 7: Performance Standards of this ordinance.
4. Buffers and Screening.
Note.
Refer also to the
Department of Natural
Resources website for
more information regarding
regulations and permitting
of composting at
www.dnr.state.wi.us/topic/R
ecycling/regs.html
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.3: Industrial Uses
5-20 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Buffer. Parcels containing a community composting a. facility shall be required to
maintain a vegetative buffer of at least twenty (20) feet around the entire parcel.
b. Screening. Outdoor composting and storage areas shall be screened by a minimum
six (6) foot high, sight-obscuring fence, wall, landscaping berm, or planting strip as
required by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
Section 5.4 Utilities and Communication Uses
A. Communication Equipment: Major
1. Satellite dishes between three (3) feet and twelve (12) feet in diameter. The placement,
erection, or installation of satellite dishes between three (3) feet and twelve (12) feet in
diameter shall require the approval of a conditional use permit and a building permit. In
addition, the dish shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Residential properties. On residential properties, satellite dishes that are between (3)
feet and twelve (12) in diameter shall only be located in rear yards or on the roof of a
detached garage, so long as the height of the detached garage and the dish is equal to
or less than the height of the principal building.
b. Non-residential properties. Satellite dishes between three (3) feet and twelve (12)
feet in diameter that are located on non-residential properties may be erected on the
roof of a principal or accessory building, and in side or rear yards, but shall not be
located within front yards.
c. Variance for location. In the event that a usable signal cannot be obtained by
locating the satellite dish in locations permitted by this Ordinance, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may grant a variance, following proper variance procedures, to allow the
placement of a satellite dish in another location.
d. Advertising or graphic designs. No advertising or graphic designs, excluding
communication call letters or frequencies, are permitted on satellite dishes.
2. Wireless telecommunication facilities. Towers, antennas, and related accessory uses and
structures associated with wireless telecommunication facilities shall be installed, erected,
and maintained pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection.
a. Intent. The intent of this Subsection is as follows:
(1) Ensure the provision of personal wireless service within the corporate
boundaries of, and for the benefit of, the residents of the City of Ashland;
(2) Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, public
and private property, and community aesthetics;
(3) Minimize the visual impacts of wireless telecommunication facilities through
design and siting standards;
(4) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate multiple antennas to reduce the number of towers required to
serve the community;
(5) Avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural
standards and setback requirements; and
(6) Avoid conflicts with an AIR-O Airport Overlay.
b. Interpretation and applicability.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-21
(1) This Subsection shall be interpreted consistent with the provisions of the
Federal Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 and any subsequent amendments;
(2) This Subsection shall apply to all persons, partnerships, corporations, and other
entities seeking to locate, site, place, modify, or construct wireless
telecommunication facilities within the City of Ashland;
(3) This Subsection reserves to the City of Ashland all authority contained in state
law and this Ordinance regarding land use, zoning, and regulation that has not
been preempted by the federal government pursuant to Section 704 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (or subsequent amendments) as to the
placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service
facilities;
(4) This Subsection does not apply to the use or location of private, residential
citizen band radio towers, amateur radio towers or television antennas, or
public safety communication facilities owned or operated by the City of
Ashland or other governmental entity;
Permits required. All wireless telecommunication facilities c. shall require the issuance
of a building permit. In addition, all wireless telecommunication facilities shall
require the issuance of a conditional use permit, except as exempted below:
(1) City-owned water towers. Wireless telecommunication antennas shall be
permitted upon city-owned water towers provided the applicant has
incorporated the applicable performance standards specified in this Subsection,
a lease agreement with the City has been approved by the Common Council, a
development permit and a building permit have been obtained, and all
applicable fees have been paid;
(2) Co-location on existing towers or structures. Wireless telecommunication
antennas shall be permitted to be attached to existing, conforming, steeples,
bell towers, smokestacks, public and institutional buildings, and radio towers in
accordance with the applicable co-location requirements and performance
standards of this Subsection, and after the applicant has provided the City a
written statement of approval from the tower or structure owner or lessor, has
obtained a development permit and a building permit from the City, and has
paid all applicable fees. The antenna shall not serve to extend the height of the
existing, conforming, steeple, tower, smokestack or radio tower, by more than
fifteen (15) feet;
(3) Utility poles. Wireless telecommunication antenna shall be permitted to be
attached to utility poles after the applicant has provided a written statement of
approval from the utility owner or lessor, has obtained a development permit
and a building permit from the City, and has paid all applicable fees. The
height of the antenna shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the pole. Existing
lattice constructed utility pole structures may also be used provided the
approval of the owner and a development permit and building permit is
obtained.
d. Permit application requirements. In addition to the application requirements
specified in Part 3: Application, Review, and Approval Procedures relating to
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-22 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
conditional use permits, development permits, and building permits, applicants shall
provide the following additional application materials:
(1) A document from the owner or lessor that allows the applicant to apply for a
conditional use permit and/or development permit and building permit to erect
a wireless telecommunication facility;
(2) An accurate site plan that shows parcel lines, location of wireless
communication tower or antenna setback distances, any accessory equipment
or structure, and proposed fencing and landscaping;
(3) An illustrative drawing showing how the wireless communication facility will
be as aesthetically in keeping with the surroundings as possible;
(4) Sufficient information to show that the construction, installation, and
maintenance of the wireless telecommunication facility will not create a safety
hazard or damage to property of other persons;
(5) A report or plan from a qualified and registered engineer or firm that specifies
the tower height and design (including cross-sections and elevations); the
height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-location
antennae and the minimum separation distances between antennae; structural
mounting designs and materials list; and the capacity of the tower (including
the number and type of antennae that the tower can accommodate). As
applicable, an engineer’s stamp and number shall be required;
(6) Structural and electrical plans showing how the proposed tower will
accommodated the co-location of the applicants antenna and comparable
antennas of additional users; and the plans and specification whereby the
proposed tower is designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas to
accommodate additional users and the mounting of additional antennas at
varying heights;
(7) Plans and specifications showing how the proposed facility will be maintained
in keeping with all applicable codes and ordinances.
Inspection. The Building Inspector e. or Designated Authorized Agent may, at any
time, inspect any wireless telecommunication facility to ensure its structural integrity.
If upon such inspection it is determined that the facility fails to comply with such
applicable codes and/or ordinances, and that such failure constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility, the
owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring the facility into compliance with applicable
codes and standards. Failure to bring the facility into compliance within the said
thirty (30) days shall constitute cause for removal at the owner’s expense.
f. Non-interference. All new or existing wireless telecommunication facilities shall
comply with all relevant Federal Communication Commission (FCC) and Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) standards and shall not interfere with public safety
and other city and private telecommunication operations.
g. Insurance. The applicant shall provide the City with proof of liability insurance that
protects against losses due to personal injury or property damage resulting from the
construction, operation, or collapse of the tower, antennae, or accessory equipment.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-23
Co-location requirements. An application f h. or a new wireless telecommunication
tower shall document that co-location is not feasible, in that the antenna planned for
the proposed tower cannot be reasonably accommodated,
(1) on a City-owned water tower;
(2) on an existing and conforming co-location tower or structure; or
(3) on an existing utility pole.
The application shall document that existing co-location options, both within and
transcending the municipal borders is not feasible. In addition, the application shall
document, for the purpose of providing service to the residents and businesses of the
City of Ashland, co-location of the tower would do one or more of the following:
(1) The antenna would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved
tower or structure;
(2) The antenna would cause interference with other existing or planned equipment
at the tower or structure;
(3) Existing or approved towers or structures cannot reasonably accommodate the
antenna at a height necessary for the proposed antenna to provide service to the
residents and businesses of the City of Ashland;
(4) Existing or approved structures suitable for the antenna are outside the
documented search area;
(5) The owners or lessors of the existing or approved towers and structures are
unwilling to allow co-location upon their facilities.
i. Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to all wireless
telecommunication facilities erected, constructed, placed, modified or replaced in the
City of Ashland. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed and
situated to be visually unobtrusive, to minimize the impact on neighboring uses, and
shall conform to the following design and siting criteria:
(1) Height. In a residential district, or on residential properties, a wireless
telecommunication facility shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in height. In all
zoning districts, the height shall comply with City of Ashland Ordinance 453.
(2) Setbacks. The minimum setback from any parcel line, public right-of-way,
building or structure, except for accessory buildings or equipment structures,
for a wireless telecommunication tower shall be equal to one hundred (100)
percent of the height of the tower. Setbacks for accessory buildings and
equipment structures associated with wireless telecommunication facilities
shall comply with the zoning district in which the facility is located.
(3) Accessory equipment structures. All accessory equipment structures adjacent
to an antenna system and/or tower shall be screened or architecturally designed
to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum
setback requirements of the applicable zoning district.
(4) Fencing. Pursuant to the conditions of the approved conditional use permit,
appropriate safety fencing shall be incorporated within the site accommodating
the tower and accessory equipment structures.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-24 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(5) Landscaping and screening. Pursuant to the conditions of the approved
conditional use permit, proper landscaping and screening shall be incorporated
into the site accommodating a tower and its accessory equipment.
(6) Color. The wireless telecommunication tower and antenna shall be a neutral
color such as a light gray or sky blue, except as may be otherwise dictated by
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and be designed to minimize
visibility and to blend into the surrounding environment.
(7) Materials and wind loads. Towers and antennas shall be designed to withstand
applicable wind load requirements as prescribed in the applicable building
codes. Towers and/or antenna systems shall be constructed of, or treated with,
corrosive resistant material. A regular maintenance schedule shall be followed.
(8) Roof mounted wireless telecommunication antennas. Roof mounted wireless
telecommunication antennas shall not be permitted on pitched roofs, unless
they are stealth antenna incorporated into upward thrusting architectural
elements, such as a steeple, spire, bell tower, or smoke stack. On flat roofs, the
height of the antenna and mounting hardware may not be more than fifteen (15)
feet above the highest point of the roof to which the antenna is attached.
(9) Structurally mounted wireless telecommunication antennas. A wireless
telecommunication antenna mounted to the side of a building, shall be attached
flush to the side of the building and shall not protrude more than three (3) feet
from the side of the building. Structurally mounted antennas not affixed to
towers shall be made to blend into the design and contours of the structure.
(10) Lights. No antenna or tower shall have lights, reflectors, flashers, daytime
strobes, steady night lights, or other illuminating devices affixed or attached to
it in any way, except as may otherwise be required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). Lights shall also comply with an AIR-O Airport
Overlay.
(11) Signs and advertising. No signs and/or advertising message, excluding
communication call letters or frequencies, shall be affixed to the antenna or
tower structure.
(12) Other attachments. No antenna or tower shall have constructed thereon, or
attached thereto, any platform, catwalk, crow’s nest, or similar structure for the
purpose of human support, except during periods of construction or repair.
Obsolete or abandoned towers. j. All obsolete, damaged, unused, or abandoned
wireless telecommunication towers and accompanying accessory structures shall be
removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations unless a time
extension is approved by the Common Council. If the tower is not removed, it may
be deemed a nuisance pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes. In the event a tower obsolete
or abandoned tower is determined to be a nuisance, the City may act to abate such
nuisance and require the removal of the tower at the owner’s expense. The owner
shall provide the City with a copy of the notice of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) intent to cease operations and shall be given twelve (12) months
from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete or abandoned tower and
all accessory structures. In the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a single
tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months. The equipment on the ground is not to be
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-25
removed until the tower structure has first been dismantled. After the facilities have
been removed, the site shall be restored to its original condition, or to an improved
state.
d. Applicability. This section 5.4A applies to communication equipment that is not
regulated under section 5.4E.
B. Communication Equipment: Minor
1. Amateur radio. Amateur radio tower installed, erected, maintained and/or operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator shall be permitted with the issuance of a
development permit and building permit provided that the antenna use involved is
accessory to the primary use of the property, which is not a telecommunication facility; on
residential property, no more than one support structure for licensed amateur radio operator
is allowed on a parcel; and sufficient anti-climbing measures have been incorporated into
the facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury.
2. Television antenna.
Development permit and building permit required. a. Except as otherwise contained
herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, either as owner or agent, servant
or employee of the owner, or as an independent contractor for the owner, or
otherwise, any outside antenna for television receiving apparatus or equipment or any
additions to, or substitutions for, such additions or substitutions therefore, until a
development permit and building permit has first been obtained from the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent. A permit shall not be required for a roof
mounted antenna not exceeding eight (8) feet in height over the highest peak of the
roof.
b. Certificate of approval required. It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of,
or maintain in place, any outside antenna for television receiving apparatus or
equipment unless and until the same has been inspected and approved by the
Building Inspector and a certificate of approval issued therefore.
c. Height. In residential districts, or on residential property, freestanding mast-type
television antennas shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in height.
d. Mechanical construction and guying. The television antenna system shall comply the
following standards relating to mechanical construction and guying:
(1) Television antenna systems shall be made of non-corrosive material consistent
with the standards of the Underwriter Laboratories, Inc., in compliance with
the now current issue of such standards except as the same are herein
specifically varied. Television antenna systems installed on roofs musts be
mounted on their own platforms or plate covering two or more parallel rafters
of roof and securely anchored. The antenna and mast may be of design with a
heavy base to make it self-supporting.
(2) In all cases, where possible and practical, the tower or mast support shall,
unless of the self-supporting type, be supported from the vertical wall of the
building. No such system may be mounted so as to project over any street,
sidewalk, alley, or public thoroughfare, or in such a manner as might be a
hazard to public safety or endanger electric power and communication lines in
periods of high winds.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-26 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(3) Any television antenna mast over ten (10) feet in height shall be supported by
at least four (4) guy wires. Towers or mast supports constructed of a single
pipe or a series of lengths of pipe telescoped shall require four (4) guy wires at
each joint or at such joints as are considered to be adequate for support, or
within the standards of accepted engineering practices.
(4) The television antenna system shall be so designed and erected as to withstand
the pressure of an eighty (80) mile per hour wind.
(5) Where the height of any television antenna system is twenty-five (25) feet or
over, a detailed sketch thereof and the location of the antenna with respect to
the sidewalks and existing electric or communication lines, shall accompany
the application for a development permit and building permit; and such sketch
shall comply with all the requirements of this Ordinance.
(6) Anchor points for guy wires must be secured to withstand a strain of at least six
hundred (600) pounds of guy wire. Rawl plugs may not be used for anchor
points.
(7) Guy wires must be of non-corrosive material with a tensile strength of at least
six hundred (600) pounds.
(8) Poles used for electric power or communication lines shall not be used for
guying television antenna systems in any manner whatsoever.
(9) Miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets, turn buckles, and thimble clips,
shall be hot dipped galvanized or similarly treated for weather protection and
be able to withstand a strain of six hundred (600) pounds.
Transmission lines. The television antenna system e. shall comply with the following
standards relating to transmission lines:
(1) Transmission lines shall be of a type consistent with standards of the
Underwriter Laboratories, Inc., in accordance with the now current issue of
such standards and must be kept at least six (6) inches from existing telephone
and electric wires.
(2) The transmission line shall not be attached to the same cross armor supports for
light, power, or communication conductors, and shall not come within six (6)
feet of a lightning rod.
(3) The wires from the television antenna mast on the outside of the building wall
shall be supported in a manner to hold the wires taut on both horizontal and
vertical runs. They shall be protected and insulated when entering buildings by
use of an insulating tube and where exposed to mechanical injury shall be
suitably protected. They shall have a permanent separation of two (2) feet
from open wires up to two hundred fifty (250) volts potential, and greater
separation at higher voltages.
(4) The transmission line shall be suitably insulated. The wires shall be supported
by approved brackets and standoff insulators placed at least every ten (10) feet
on the side of the building.
f. Lightning arresters. The television antenna system shall comply with the following
standards relating to lightning arresters:
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-27
(1) Lightning arresters shall be of a type consistent with the standards of
Underwriter Laboratories, Inc., in accordance with the new current issue of
such standards. Both sides of the line shall be adequately protected with proper
resistors or neon lights to remove the static charges accumulated on the line
and shall match the transmission line at television frequencies.
(2) The arresters shall be located outside the building, if practical. If the arresters
must be placed inside the building, they shall be located at the nearest
accessible space where the transmission line enters the building, away from
combustible materials, and not in hazardous locations. If installed outdoors, it
shall be connected to an electrode installed in accordance with the requirements
of the state electrical code.
(3) When lead-in conductors of polyethylene ribbon type are used, lightning
arresters shall be installed in each conductor. If a coaxial cable is used for the
lead-in, suitable protection may be provided without lightning arresters by
grounding the exterior metal sheaths.
Grounding. The television antenna system shall comply g. with the following standards
relating to grounding:
(1) Television antenna systems shall be adequately grounded for protection against
a direct stroke of lightning. Ground wires shall be a minimum No. 8 aluminum
or copper for grounding masts and lightning arresters, and shall be
mechanically and electrically secured to the antenna mast and grounding
electrode by the use of approved fittings. The grounding conductor shall be
run in as straight a line as practical.
(2) The ground electrode for the television antenna mast may also serve as the
ground electrode for the lighting arrester.
(3) In the case where coaxial cable is used, it is permissible to ground the antenna
mast to the shield of the cable.
3. Satellite dish three (3) feet or less in diameter.
a. Permitted locations. In any district, satellite dishes that are less than three (3) feet in
diameter shall be located in the rear or side yard, or located on a principal or
accessory building. In no case shall a satellite dish be located in the front yard or
corner street side yard.
b. Variance for location. In the event that a usable signal cannot be obtained by
locating the satellite dish in locations permitted by this Ordinance, the Board of
Appeals may grant a variance, following proper variance procedures, to allow the
placement of a satellite dish in another location.
c. Advertising or graphic designs. No advertising or graphic designs are permitted on
satellite dishes.
d. Development permit not required. A development permit shall not be required for a
roof mounted satellite dish three (3) feet or less in diameter.
4. Temporary communication structures. The temporary use of wheeled communication
structures, properly anchored, shall be accepted, but they shall not remain at any given
location for more than thirty (30) days and shall be registered with the Zoning
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-28 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent if they are going to be used for more than
seventy-two (72) hours.
C. Utility Facilities
All structures associated with a utility facility shall meet the setbacks for principal structures in
the subject zoning district and shall be adequately landscaped and screened pursuant to Section
6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening.
D. Wind Energy Facility
1. Intent. The intent of this Subsection is as follows:
Oversee the permitting of wind energy facilities i a. n the City of Ashland; and
b. Preserve and protect public health and safety without significantly increasing the cost
or decreasing the efficiency of the wind energy facility pursuant to Section 66.0401
of the Wisconsin Statutes.
2. General provisions.
a. Authority. This Subsection is adopted pursuant to the authority granted in Section
62.23(7) of the Wisconsin Statutes and Section 66.0401 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
b. Applicability. The requirements of this Subsection shall apply to all wind energy
facilities proposed after the effective date of this Subsection. Wind energy facilities
for which a required permit has been properly issued before the effective date of this
Subsection shall not be required to meet the provisions of this Ordinance; provided,
however, that any such pre-existing wind energy facility that does not provide energy
for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall meet the requirements of this
Subsection prior to recommencing production of energy. However, no modification
or alteration to an existing wind energy facility shall be allowed without full
compliance with this Ordinance.
c. Conditional use permit required. Approval of a conditional use permit shall be
required for the installation of a wind energy facility. In addition to the general
conditional use permit requirements described in Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit, a conditional use permit application for installation of a wind energy facility
shall include the following:
(1) Parcel lines and physical dimensions of the parcel;
(2) Locations, dimensions, height, and types of existing
major structures on the parcel;
(3) Location of the proposed wind energy facility;
(4) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous
with the parcel;
(5) Any overhead utility lines;
(6) Wind energy facility specifications, including
manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height,
tower type (freestanding or guyed); and
(7) Tower and tower foundation drawings.
Sustainability Tip.
A wind energy facility,
when properly designed,
located, and operated,
can provide a renewable
source of energy that can
help reduce our
dependence on fossil
fuels.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-29
Building permit required. A building permit d. pursuant to Section 3.32: Building
Permit shall be required for the installation of a wind energy facility.
e. Abandonment.
(1) A wind energy facility that is out of service for a continuous twelve (12) month
period shall be deemed to have been abandoned. The Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner
of the wind energy facility that is deemed to have been abandoned. The owner
shall have the right to respond the notice of abandonment within thirty (30)
days of notice receipt date. The Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the
owner that the notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides information
that demonstrates the wind energy facility has not been abandoned.
(2) If the wind energy facility is determined to be abandoned, the owner of the
wind energy facility shall remove the wind generator from the tower at the
owner’s sole expense within three (3) months of receipt of notice of
abandonment. If the owner fails to remove the wind generator from the tower,
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may pursue a legal
action to have the wind generator removed at the owner’s expense.
3. Design standards. A wind energy facility shall be permitted in all zoning districts after
issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the following standards:
a. Capacity and total height. A wind energy facility shall have a nameplate capacity of
one hundred (100) kilowatts or less and shall have a total height, as measured from
ground level to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point, of
one hundred seventy (170) feet or less. The total height of the wind energy facility
shall not exceed the allowable height specified in the City of Ashland Ordinance 453
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. If the height in this section is greater
than that maximum height allowable for each zoning district, the maximum height
allowed by this section shall govern.
b. Setbacks. A tower for a wind energy facility shall be set back a distance equal to its
height from the following:
(1) Any public road right-of-way, unless written permission is granted by the
governmental entity with jurisdiction over the road;
(2) Any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted by the affected
utility; and
(3) All parcel lines, unless written permission is granted from the affected property
owner or neighbor.
c. Access. Access to the wind energy facility shall be controlled as follows:
(1) All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled or
secured to prevent unauthorized access; and
(2) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a
ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight (8) feet
above the ground.
d. Noise. Audible noise from wind energy facilities shall not exceed fifty (50) dB(A)
when measured from the outside of the nearest residence, business, school, hospital,
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-30 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
religious institution, or other inhabited structure. In the event the noise emitted from
the wind energy facility contains a steady pure tone such as a whine, screech, or hum
the wind energy facility shall not exceed forty-five (45) dB(A) when measured
outside the nearest inhabitable structure.
Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with e. a wind energy facility, other
than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower
wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall be located
underground.
f. Signal interference. The applicant shall minimize or mitigate any interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, or television signals
caused by the wind energy facility.
g. Lighting. A tower and wind generator shall not be artificially lighted unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the City of Ashland to
minimize potential air navigation hazards. Lighting shall also be consistent with an
AIR-O Airport Overlay.
h. Appearance, color, and finish.
(1) The wind generator and tower shall remain painted or finished the color or
finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer, unless required
otherwise as a condition of the conditional use permit.
(2) The design of wind energy facility related buildings and structures shall, to the
extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend the buildings and structures to the natural setting
and the existing environment.
i. Signs. All signs, other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s identification,
appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on a wind generator, tower,
building, or other structure associated with a wind energy facility are prohibited.
j. Code compliance. A wind energy facility, including the tower, shall comply with all
applicable state construction and electrical codes, and the National Electrical Code.
k. Utility notification and interconnection. A wind energy facility that connects to the
electric utility shall comply with the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin’s Rule
119, Rules for Interconnecting Distributed Generation Facilities.
l. Meteorological tower. Meteorological towers shall be permitted under the same
standards, permit requirements, restoration requirements, and permit procedures as a
wind energy facility.
E. Mobile Tower Siting Ordinance
1. Definitions. In this section:
a. "Antenna" means communications equipment that transmits and receives
electromagnetic radio signals and is used in the provision of mobile services.
b. "Application" means an application for a permit under this section to engage in an
activity specified in sub. (2) (a) or a class 2 collocation.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-31
c. "Class 1 collocation" means the placement of a new mobile service facility on an
existing support structure such that the owner of the facility does not need to construct
a free standing support structure for the facility but does need to engage in substantial
modification.
d. "Class 2 collocation" means the placement of a new mobile service facility on an
existing support structure such that the owner of the facility does not need to construct
a free standing support structure for the facility or engage in substantial modification.
e. "Collocation" means class 1 or class 2 collocation or both.
f. "Distributed antenna system" means a network of spatially separated antenna nodes that
is connected to a common source via a transport medium and that provides mobile
service within a geographic area or structure.
g. "Equipment compound" means an area surrounding or adjacent to the base of an
existing support structure within which is located mobile service facilities.
h. "Existing structure" means a support structure that exists at the time a request for
permission to place mobile service facilities on a support structure is filed with a
political subdivision.
i. "Fall zone" means the area over which a mobile support structure is designed to
collapse.
j. “Mobile service” means a radio communication service carried on between mobile
stations or receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating among
themselves, and includes (A) both one-way and two-way radio communication
services, (B) a mobile service which provides a regularly interacting group of base,
mobile, portable, and associated control and relay stations (whether licensed on an
individual, cooperative, or multiple basis) for private one-way or two-way land mobile
radio communications by eligible users over designated areas of operation, and (C) any
service for which a license is required in a personal communications service established
pursuant to the proceeding entitled "Amendment to the Commission's Rules to
Establish New Personal Communications Services" (GEN Docket No. 90-314; ET
Docket No. 92-100), or any successor proceeding.
k. "Mobile service facility" means the set of equipment and network components,
including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and
associated equipment, that is necessary to provide mobile service to a discrete
geographic area, but does not include the underlying support structure.
l. "Mobile service provider" means a person who provides mobile service.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-32 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
m. "Mobile service support structure" means a freestanding structure that is designed to
support a mobile service facility.
n. “Public utility” means a public utility as defined in sec. 196.01, Wis. Stats.
o. "Search ring" means a shape drawn on a map to indicate the general area within which
a mobile service support structure should be located to meet radio frequency
engineering requirements, taking into account other factors including topography and
the demographics of the service area.
p. "Substantial modification" means the modification of a mobile service support
structure, including the mounting of an antenna on such a structure, that does any of the
following:
(1) For structures with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases the overall
height of the structure by more than 20 feet.
(2) For structures with an overall height of more than 200 feet, increases the overall
height of the structure by 10 percent or more.
(3) Measured at the level of the appurtenance added to the structure as a result of the
modification, increases the width of the support structure by 20 feet or more,
unless a larger area is necessary for collocation.
(4) Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound to a total area of
more than 2,500 square feet.
q. "Support structure" means an existing or new structure that supports or can support a
mobile service facility, including a mobile service support structure, utility pole, water
tower, building, or other structure.
r. "Utility pole" means a structure owned or operated by an alternative
telecommunications utility, as defined in s.196.01 (1d)Wis. Stats.; public utility, as
defined in s. 196.01 (5) Wis. Stats.; telecommunications utility, as defined in s. 196.01
(10) Wis. Stats.; political subdivision; or cooperative association organized under ch.
185 Wis. Stats.; and that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or
wires for telecommunications service, as defined in s. 182.017 (1g) (cq) Wis. Stats.; for
video service, as defined in s. 66.0420 (2) (y) Wis. Stats.; for electricity; or to provide
light.
e. New construction or substantial modification of facilities and support structures.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-33
a. Any person seeking to engage in either of the following activities must submit an
application for a conditional use permit as described in subsection (b), together with the
applicable fee, to the Zoning Administrator. Either of the activities described in this
section is a conditional use in all zoning districts.
(1) The siting and construction of a new mobile service support structure and
facilities.
(5) With regard to a class 1 collocation, the substantial modification of an existing
support structure and mobile service facilities.
b. The application which a person must complete to engage in the siting, construction, or
modification activities described in par. (a) shall be in writing and shall contain all of
the following information:
(1) The name and business address of, and the contact individual for, the applicant.
(2) The location of the proposed or affected support structure.
(3) The location of the proposed mobile service facility.
(4) If the application is to substantially modify an existing support structure, a
construction plan which describes the proposed modifications to the support
structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related
equipment associated with the proposed modifications.
(6) If the application is to construct a new mobile service support structure, a
construction plan which describes the proposed mobile service support structure
and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters,
receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment to be
placed on or around the new mobile service support structure.
(7) If an applicant is to construct a new mobile service support structure, an
explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed location and why the
applicant did not choose collocation, including a sworn statement from an
individual who has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service
support structure attesting that collocation within the applicant's search ring
would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity;
is technically infeasible; or is economically burdensome to the mobile service
provider.
c. If an applicant submits to an application for a permit to engage in an activity described
under par. (a), which does not contain all of the information required under par. (b), the
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-34 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, within 10 days of receiving
the application, that the application is not complete. The written notification shall
specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may
resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete.
d. Within 45 days of receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application to determine whether it complies with all applicable
aspects of the City's building code and, subject to the limitations in this section,
zoning ordinances.
e. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete application, the City Council shall make a final
decision whether to approve or disapprove the application and shall, within the same 90
day period, notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision.
f. If the decision of the City Council is to disapprove the application, the Zoning
Administrator shall include with the written notification substantial evidence which
supports the decision.
g. The 90 day time period set forth in subsection (e), above, may be extended by
agreement of the City and applicant.
h. The City Council may disapprove an application if an applicant refuses to evaluate the
feasibility of collocation within the applicant's search ring and provide the sworn
statement described under subsection (b) (6).
i. A party who is aggrieved by the final decision of the City Council may bring an action
in the circuit court of Ashland County.
j. If an applicant provides the City with an engineering certification showing that a
mobile service support structure, or an existing structure, is designed to collapse within
a smaller area than the setback required in the zoning district in which the facility is
proposed, this ordinance does not apply to such a structure unless there is substantial
evidence, which the City provides to the applicant, that the engineering certification is
flawed.
f. Collocation on existing support structures.
a. A class 2 collocation is a permitted use in all zoning districts.
b. A class 2 collocation is subject to the same requirements for the issuance of a building
permit to which any other type of commercial development or land use development is
subject.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-35
c. Any person seeking to engage in a class 2 collocation shall submit an application for a
development permit and site plan approval together with the applicable fees, to the
Zoning Administrator. The application shall contain all of the information required
under subsection (2) (b) (1) to (3). If any of the required information is not in the
application, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, within 5
days of receiving the application, that the application is not complete. The written
notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An
applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete.
d. Within 15 days of receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall
review the application to determine whether it complies with all applicable aspects of
the law.
e. Within 45 days of receipt of an application, the City Council shall make a final decision
whether to approve or disapprove the application, and shall, within the same 45 day
period, notify the applicant, in writing, of its final decision, and if the application is
approved, shall issue the applicant the relevant permit.
f. If the decision is to disapprove the application, the Zoning Administrator shall include
with the written notification substantial evidence which supports the decision.
g. The 45 day period set forth in subsection (e), above, may be extended by agreement of
the City and applicant.
h. A party who is aggrieved by the final decision of the City Council under par. (e) may
bring an action in the circuit court of Ashland County.
g. Limitations. With regard to an activity described in subsection (2) (a) or a class 2
collocation, the City Council shall not do any of the following:
a. Impose environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring requirements, or other
compliance measures for radio frequency emissions, on mobile service facilities or
mobile radio service providers.
b. Permit third-party consultants to charge the applicant for any travel expenses incurred
in the consultant's review of mobile service permits or applications.
c. Disapprove an application to conduct an activity described under subsection (2) (a)
based solely on aesthetic concerns.
d. Disapprove an application to conduct a class 2 collocation on aesthetic concerns.
e. Prohibit the placement of emergency power systems.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-36 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
f. Require that a mobile service support structure be placed on property owned by the
City.
g. Disapprove an application based solely on the height of the mobile service support
structure or on whether the structure requires lighting.
h. Condition approval of such activities on the agreement of the structure or mobile
service facility owner to provide space on or near the structure for the use of or by the
City at less than the market rate, or to provide the City other services via the structure
or facilities at less than the market rate.
i. Limit the duration of any permit that is granted.
j. Require an applicant to construct a distributed antenna system instead of either
constructing a new mobile service support structure or engaging in collocation.
k. Disapprove an application based on an assessment of the suitability of other locations
for conducting the activity.
l. Require that a mobile service support structure, existing structure, or mobile service
facilities have or be connected to backup battery power.
m. Impose a setback or fall zone requirement for a mobile service support structure that is
different from a requirement that is imposed on other types of commercial structures.
n. Consider an activity a substantial modification under subsection (1) (q) (1) or (2) if a
greater height is necessary to avoid interference with an existing antenna.
o. Consider an activity a substantial modification under sub. (1) (q) (3) if a greater
protrusion is necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the
antenna to the existing structure by cable.
p. Limit the height of a mobile service support structure to under 200 feet.
q. Condition the approval of an application on, or otherwise require, the applicant's
agreement to indemnify or insure the City in connection with the City's exercise of its
authority to approve the application.
r. Condition the approval of an application on, or otherwise require, the applicant's
agreement to permit the City to place at or collocate with the applicant's support
structure any mobile service facilities provided or operated by, whether in whole or in
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-37
part, the City or an entity in which the City has a governance, competitive, economic,
financial or other interest.
h. Collocation preference.
a. As a matter of municipal policy, the City strongly supports collocation. Applicants
proposing new construction shall have the burden of demonstrating the necessity of
new construction in lieu of collocation. Facilities proposed for approval shall generally
be sized and designed to allow flexibility for addition of more facilities by the same
applicant entity or other entities, and the City may negotiate terms and conditions
facilitating collocation. Once approved, additional antennas and accessory facilities
may be added to a site in accordance with the sharing conditions of the conditional use
approval.
b. Permittees shall exercise good faith in collocating and/or clustering with other
communication companies and sharing the permitted site, provided such shared use
does not give rise to a substantial technical level or quality-of-service impairment of
the permitted use (as opposed to a competitive conflict or financial burden). In the
event a dispute arises as to whether permittee has exercised good faith in
accommodating other users, the City may require a third party technical study at the
expense of either or both the applicant and complaining user, and such a requirement
shall be deemed a condition of any conditional use permit or development permit
approved hereunder.
i. Additional criteria and requirements for conditional use permit and development
permit and site plan approval.
a. All changes made to towers exceeding what was requested in the original application or
otherwise legally existing at the date of adoption of this section, including, but not
limited to, adding microwave dishes, or increasing the height, or profile, shall require
review and approval by the Plan Commission.
b. All towers and sites shall be properly maintained and shall be kept in a condition as not
to become a public nuisance or eyesore. Proper maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, regular lawn and landscaping care, painting of an accessory building, fences,
and tower. Additionally, the site shall be kept clear of junk and trash.
c. Landscaping and other requirements. As part of permitting and site plan approval
under Sections (2) and (3), the Plan Commission may prescribe landscaping, screening,
fencing, and other incidental requirements as a condition of approval, provided no such
requirement is prohibited under Section (4).
d. Every three years, beginning with the adoption of this section or following completion
of construction of a tower, whichever is later, the owner of the tower shall submit to the
Zoning Administrator a report from a structural engineer or other expert acceptable to
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.4: Utilities and Communication Uses
5-38 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
the Zoning Administrator reflecting the fact that such tower is structurally sound and
does not pose any threat to life or property.
e. Obsolete or abandoned towers shall be treated as provided in Section 5.4A(2)(j).
f. No apparatus shall be attached to any tower except as approved by the Plan
Commission. Apparatus attached legally to existing towers prior to enactment of this
section may remain but not be increased in any way except with approval of the Plan
Commission. Plan Commission approval for additional apparatus will be granted only
after the applicant demonstrates a need for additional apparatus.
j. Surety required. Prior to final approval for a new mobile service facility, the owner
shall furnish a financial guarantee in the form of a letter of credit to the City in the
amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000). Funds from the letter of credit may be
used by the City to pay any professional fees associated with the removal of the tower
or restoration of the site upon which it is located.
k. Construction and Severability.
a. This ordinance shall be construed to be in conformity with Sec. 66.0404, Wis. Stats.
Should any provision hereof be inconsistent with any provision of Sec. 66.0404, the
provision of Sec. 66.0404 shall control.
b. Should any section or subsection of this ordinance be found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to violate any provision of Sec. 66.0404, Wis. Stats., or any other law, the
remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Section 5.5 Temporary or Seasonal Uses
A. Model Home
A model home use shall only be allowed in those zoning districts where it permitted as a
conditional use and only after issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit. In addition, a model home use shall be consistent with all of the
following standards:
1. Office use. No more than fifteen (15) percent of the area of the model home’s main floor
shall be used for office area.
2. Spacing. Model homes shall have at least five hundred (500) feet of separation between
other model homes. Model homes may have less than five hundred (500) feet of separation
if located on separate conforming parcels, and if all required setbacks are met for that
zoning district.
3. Allowable time before model home must cease its use as a model home. A model home
shall not be used a model home for a period of more than two (2) years. After which, the
model home must be converted to a use permitted in the zoning district.
Part 5: Specific Use Standards
Section 5.6: Accessory and Other Uses
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 5-39
4. Hours of operation. Hours of operation for showing of the model home shall be between
8:00 AM and 8:00 PM, or other reasonable times as may be required by the conditions of
an approved conditional use permit.
5. Advertising. Advertising placed on the same parcel with such model home shall be limited
to a real estate “For Sale” sign, not to exceed an area of six (6) square feet.
B. Temporary Construction Building
A temporary construction building shall be permitted after issuance of a development permit (and
any other required permits) and shall be removed at or before the time of completion of the
construction project.
C. Temporary Real Estate Office
The sales office and any associated model homes or units shall be open only until the homes or
units specifically being marketed are sold out and only between the hours of 8:00 AM and 8:00
PM.
D. Seasonal Market
1. General applicability. Seasonal market uses, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be
allowed after issuance of a development permit and any other applicable permits, including
a building permit, pursuant to the following:
The seasonal market shall be located on the parcel a. owned or leased by the operator of
the seasonal market. Alternatively, the market operator may furnish the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent with written evidence that the
property owner has given the operator permission to use the parcel for a seasonal
market. A certificate of occupancy shall not be required for a seasonal market
meeting the requirements of this Subsection.
b. If fish sales, flowers, plants, Wisconsin-grown farm products, or holiday trees
constitute at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the merchandise offered for sale, the
activity shall be limited to not more than ninety (90) days in one (1) calendar year.
Otherwise, the duration of the seasonal market shall be limited to not more than
fourteen (14) days in one (1) calendar year.
c. The seasonal market shall not produce glare or spill light or noise in violation of this
Ordinance.
d. Signage shall be limited to two (2) signs and a total display area of twenty four (24)
square feet for all signs combined.
e. Sales shall occur between the hours of 7:00 AM and 10:00 PM
f. The site shall be restored to its previous condition following termination of the
seasonal market.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-1
Section 5.6 Accessory Uses and Other Uses
A. Accessory Building
Accessory buildings shall comply with the following conditions:
1. Size of accessory buildings on residential parcels.
An accessory building on a residential parcel a. may not occupy more than twenty-five
(25) percent of a required rear yard or thirty-five (35) percent of any non-required
rear yard. In no instance shall the accessory building exceed the ground floor area of
the principal building.
2. Measurement of setbacks. Measurement of setbacks for accessory buildings shall be
consistent with Section 6.1 B., 1.: Measurement of Setbacks.
3. Separation from principal buildings. Accessory buildings shall be at least six (6) feet
from the principal building situated on the same parcel.
4. Accessory buildings in front yards limited.
a. No accessory building shall be permitted nearer to the front parcel line than the
minimum allowed setback from the front parcel line in the subject zoning district for
the principal buildings or the average setback of the principal buildings on parcels
immediately adjoining the parcel on the same side of the street, whichever is less.
b. Parcels that are in the FD Future Development, R-E Residential Estate, LI Light
Industrial and HI Heavy Industrial, and are a minimum of five (5) acres may locate
an accessory building nearer the front parcel line than the principal building, but not
nearer the minimum required setback from the front parcel line for a principal
building.
5. Accessory building interior side and rear setbacks. Accessory buildings shall not be
located less than three (3) feet from the interior side or rear parcel lines. Where a vehicle
entrance to an accessory building faces an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall
not be located less than ten (10) feet from the parcel line abutting the alley.
6. Accessory building setback on corner parcels. No accessory building shall be permitted
nearer to the corner street side parcel line than the minimum allowed setback from the
corner street side parcel line in the subject zoning district for principal buildings, or the
average setback of the four (4) or less nearest principal buildings and accessory garages
along the same side of the street, whichever is less. In no case shall an accessory building
be located within the required vision triangle as specified in Section 6.1: General
Standards.
7. Accessory building height. No accessory building shall exceed twenty feet (20) feet in
height, unless issued a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit. Accessory building height shall be measured in accordance with Section 6.1 C.:
Building Height.
8. Accessory building attached to principal building. When an accessory building is
structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all
regulations of this Ordinance applicable to principal buildings.
9. Conversion of accessory building to dwellings limited. The conversion of any accessory
building into a dwelling or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an
increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a district in
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
which a new building for a similar occupancy would be permitted under this Ordinance,
and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such district, with respect to minimum parcel area, parcel area per dwelling
unit, percentage of parcel coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and offstreet
parking.
10. Accessory buildings without a principal building. No accessory building shall be
erected or constructed prior to the erection or construction of the principal building, except:
Personal storage building. A personal storage bu a. ilding may be constructed as a
principal building pursuant to Section 5.6, H.: Personal Storage Building as a
Principal Building.
b. Recreation accessory buildings. An accessory building may be constructed on public
lands or at a commercial recreation facility, including campgrounds and outdoor
shooting ranges, when the land or facility is issued a permit for, or approved by, the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, as a principal use.
c. Conditional use permit. An accessory building may be constructed prior to a
principal structure on a parcel with the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant
to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and with the following standards and
conditions.
(1) The accessory building shall be located on a parcel contiguous to a parcel of
the same ownership on which a conforming principal use is established. If this
condition is no longer met after the accessory building is established, a
principal building shall be established on the same parcel as the Conditional
Use Permit – approved accessory building within twenty four (24) months.
The foregoing use restrictions shall be recorded by the applicant on both
parcels affected by the Conditional Use Permit, and proof of recording shall be
provided to the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. In the
event that the terms of this use restriction are violated, the Conditional Use
Permit shall be revoked and the accessory building shall be removed upon
issuance of a written order from the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
(2) The location of the accessory building shall ensure ample room for the
establishment of a principal building in a location that substantially conforms
to the terms of this ordinance and that is compatible with established uses in
the vicinity, including but not limited to: setbacks, maximum parcel coverage,
and minimum parcel size.
(3) On parcels zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and MHC, no accessory building
constructed prior to a principal building shall exceed one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet in area.
(4) The Plan Commission may place such other conditions on the construction of
the accessory building and related parcel improvements as it deems necessary
to protect the use, character, safety and value of the property and other
properties in the area.
11. Appearance. The architectural appearance of accessory buildings should be visually
compatible with the principal building relative to color, materials, and form.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-3
12. Accessory buildings in the FD Future Development District. Accessory buildings over
twelve hundred (1,200) square feet or twenty (20) feet in height in the FD Future
Development District shall comply with Section 4.37, D.: Design Standards and
Guidelines for Agricultural Buildings and Other Accessory Buildings.
B. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures, not elsewhere defined or regulated, shall comply with the following
conditions:
1. Size of accessory structures on residential parcels.
An accessory structure on a residential parcel a. may not occupy more than twenty-five
(25) percent of a required rear yard or thirty-five (35) percent of any non-required
rear yard. In no instance shall the accessory structure exceed the ground floor area of
the principal building.
2. Measurement of setbacks. Measurement of setbacks for accessory structures shall be
consistent with Section 6.1 B., 1.: Measurement of Setbacks.
3. Accessory structure height. No accessory structures shall not exceed twenty feet (20) in
height, unless issued a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit. Accessory structure height shall be measured in accordance with Section 6.1 C:
Building Height.
4. Storage Canopy. Storage canopies as defined shall comply with the following
conditions.
a. Storage canopies shall be located in an interior side yard or rear yard;
b. Shall be limited to one (1) storage canopy per parcel;
c. Shall be located no closer than three (3) feet from any parcel line and shall
maintain a six (6) foot separation from any principal or accessory building;
d. Shall not be located on a vacant parcel; and
e. Shall be maintained in a reasonable state of repair to prevent them from
becoming a public nuisance.
f. Shall be securely anchored and stabilized so as not to shift in the wind or
present a public safety hazard.
5. Accessory structures without a principal building. An accessory structure may be
constructed on public lands or at a commercial recreation facility, including campgrounds
and outdoor shooting ranges, when the land or facility is issued a permit for, or approved
by, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, as a principal use. All other
accessory structures not elsewhere defined or regulated may be permitted through a
Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and with the
standards and conditions applicable to an accessory building under Section 5.6 A., 10., c.
6. Other standards. Accessory structures shall meet all other applicable standards pursuant
to Section 6.1 B Setbacks, Section 6.1 D: Impervious Coverage, Section 6.1 H: Vision
Triangle, Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting and all other applicable standards identified with
the approval or permit.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
C. Animals: Keeping of
The regulations of this Subsection are established to permit the keeping of domestic and family
farm animals and honey bees to promote the goals and benefits of urban homesteading, including
productive use of private property, personal food choice, family subsistence, community food
security, sustainability, and animal welfare, in a manner that prevents nuisances to occupants of
nearby properties and prevents conditions that are unsanitary or unsafe. Also refer to Chapter
951 of the Wisconsin State Statutes for state regulations.
1. Domestic animals. In any residential district, or in conjunction with any existing
residential uses in any other district, there may be kept a total of not more than four (4)
domestic animals, excluding any dogs or cats less than twelve (12)weeks in age, or rabbits
or chickens pursuant to the specific requirements of this Ordinance. No part of any
enclosure or pen for domestic animals shall be located less than ten (10) feet from the
parcel line. Keeping dogs for the purpose of breeding or sale shall require a license
pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 351.
2. Family farm animals. The raising of family farm animals shall occur only in those
districts where allowed by this Ordinance and only if the subject parcel has a minimum area
of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
Small. Ten (10) small family farm a. animals shall be allowed for each twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of parcel area. No part of any enclosure or pen for
family farm animals shall be located less than ten (10) feet from the parcel line.
b. Large. Two (2) large family farm animals shall be allowed for every five (5) acres of
parcel area. No part of any enclosure or pen for family farm animals shall be located
less than ten (10) feet from the parcel line, except parcels in the FD district.
c. Future Development (FD) District parcels. An enclosure or pen for family farm
animals may be located on the parcel line for all properties five (5) acres or more and
pursuant to Chapter 90 of the Wisconsin State Statutes.
3. Beekeeping.
a. Intent. The intent is to establish certain requirements of sound beekeeping practices,
which are intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the
keeping of honey bees in populated areas.
b. Beekeeping allowed. Beekeeping shall be allowed in all districts allowing the raising
of family farm animals. In addition, beekeeping may be allowable in any zoning
district that does not allow the raising of family farm animals pursuant to the
conditions stated in subparagraph d. Colony densities.
c. Permit required. Beekeepers are required to obtain a permit from the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent for all apiaries, identifying the
locations of hives and number of colonies prior to establishment pursuant to Section
3.46: Keeping of Animals Permit. Once a permit is applied for, all neighboring
property owners whose parcel line is within one-hundred (100) feet of any hive shall
be provided written notification by the Department of Planning and Development.
Neighboring property owners shall be allowed fourteen (14) days from the date the
notification was mailed to contact the Planning and Development office with an
objection to the permit issuance if one or more person residing at the property is
allergic to honeybees. If such an objection is made, the permit may be denied. If no
objections are made, and the permit is issued, the City reserves the right to revoke the
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-5
permit should a neighboring property owner discover a person residing on the
property has an allergic reaction to honeybees at a later date.
Densities. A maximum of two (2) hives shall d. be allowed on parcels measuring one
(1) acre or less in size. Parcels exceeding one (1) acre in size shall be allowed one
(1) additional hive for every additional one-half (1/2) acre of land within the parcel.
Parcels exceeding five (5) acres in size shall not require a Keeping of Animals Permit
and shall have no maximum number of beehives on the parcel provided that all
beehives are located a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet from the parcel line.
e. Hive type and maintenance. All honey bee colonies shall be kept in inspectable type
hives with removable combs, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
Beekeepers shall ensure that no bee comb or other equipment is left on the grounds of
an apiary site. Upon removal from the hive, all supplies should be promptly disposed
of or placed in a sealed container or within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
f. Setbacks. All hives shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from all property
lines, with the back of the hive facing the nearest adjoining property.
g. Fencing of flyways. In each instance in which any colony is situated within twenty
five (25) feet of a parcel line of the parcel upon which the apiary is situated, as
measured from the nearest point on the hive to the parcel line, the beekeeper shall
establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six (6) feet in height consisting of a
solid wall/fence, dense vegetation, or combination thereof that is parallel to the parcel
line and extending ten (10) feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees
are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six(6) feet above ground level over the
property lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
h. Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at
all times to the bees so as to keep the bees from congregating at swimming pools, pet
water bowls, bibcocks, birdbaths, or other water sources where they may cause
human, or domestic pet contact. The water shall be maintained so as to not become
stagnant.
i. Behavior and swarming. Adequate space shall be maintained in the hive to prevent
overcrowding and swarming. Colonies shall be re-queened following any swarming
or aggressive behavior. One (1) additional temporary hive is allowed for hive
separation or new swarm establishment purposes. Such temporary hive shall be
removed from the property within two (2) weeks.
j. Prohibited. The keeping by any person of bee colonies in the city not in strict
compliance with this section is prohibited, including the keeping of diseased, infected
or Africanized species of bees. Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure
intended for beekeeping, any swarm of bees that poses an immediate risk to the
safety of humans, or any colony residing in a standard or homemade hive which, by
virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper, is unlawful
and may be summarily destroyed or removed by a Designated Authorized Agent of
the City.
k. Notice. Every parcel containing an apiary thereon shall conspicuously post signage
warning the presence of hives and beekeeping.
4. Chickens. Chickens (excluding roosters) may be raised in any zoning district that allows
the raising of farm animals pursuant to Section 5.6 C.2.: Family Farm Animals. In
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
addition, chickens may be raised in any zoning district that does not allow the raising of
family farm animals, but that does allow the keeping of domestic animals, pursuant to the
following conditions:
No parcel five (5) acres or less shall be allowed m a. ore than six (6) female chickens.
Parcels exceeding five (5) acres in size shall be allowed a maximum of one-hundred
(100) chickens, provided that the coop is located at least one-hundred (100) feet from
any parcel line and all other provisions of this Ordinance are met.
b. A permit for the raising of chickens shall be obtained from and approved by the
Office of the Zoning Administrator and Animal Control Officer pursuant to Section
3.46: Keeping of Animals Permit. A permit fee, as designated in the City of
Ashland’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit
and shall be good for three (3) consecutive years. Applicants must obtain consent
from all on-site residents. Once a permit is issued, the Department of Planning and
Development shall send notifications to the owners of all abutting parcels, if said
parcels contain an occupied principal building within one hundred (100) feet of the
applicant’s parcel.
c. Chickens shall be given access to a secure and clean outdoor enclosure, and provided
with a covered, predator-proof chicken house that is thoroughly ventilated, of
sufficient size to admit free movement of the chickens, designed to be easily
accessed, cleaned and maintained by the owners and be at least two (2) square feet
per chicken in size.
d. No chicken house or pen shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any
residential structure other than the owner’s, nor closer than ten (10) feet from any
parcel line. The chicken house may require a building permit pursuant to Section 5.6
A.: Accessory Building, as determined by the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent.
e. Chickens shall be provided a constant supply of water and food replenished at least
once daily.
5. Rabbits. Rabbits may be raised in any zoning district that allows the raising of farm
animals pursuant to Section 5.6 C.2.: Family Farm Animals. In addition, rabbits may be
raised in zoning districts that do not allow the raising of farm animals but allow the keeping
of domestic animals, pursuant to the following conditions:
a. No parcel shall be allowed more than five (5) rabbits over the age of three (3)
months.
b. Approval shall be required for the keeping of three (3) or more rabbits. Approval
shall be obtained from and approved by the Office of the Zoning Administrator and
Animal Control Officer pursuant to Section 3.46: Keeping of Animals Permit.
c. Rabbits shall be provided with a secure and covered, predator-proof hutch that is
thoroughly ventilated, of sufficient size to admit free movement of the rabbits,
designed to be easily accessed, cleaned and maintained by the owners, and be at least
three (3) feet off the ground.
d. Hutches shall be cleaned and a constant supply of water and food shall be provided
and replenished at least once daily; and
e. Bedding shall be provided when the low temperature for the day is below forty (40)
degrees Fahrenheit.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-7
6. General maintenance and care of animals. All pens or enclosures housing any animal
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as to be free of offensive odors and
other nuisance features at all times. All animals shall be confined to pens or enclosures,
leashed or attended at all times. Animal pens or enclosures may require a fence permit
pursuant to Section 6.5: Fences.
7. Harvesting (slaughtering). The harvesting (slaughtering) of animals for personal use shall
occur in a humane and sanitary manner and not open to view from any public right-of-way
or adjacent parcel.
8. Commercial. All keeping of animals for commercial or public purposes (including the
sale of animals and/or their by-products) shall be regulated as a permitted or conditional
use in those districts allowing such use. Such uses include, animal boarding, grooming and
training, commercial kennels, farms, livestock, slaughter and research facilities, retail pet
stores, wildlife reserves and zoos. Pet shops shall refer to City of Ashland Ordinance 351
for additional regulations.
D. Day Care: Family Home
1. The operator of the family home day care shall reside in the dwelling unit in which the day
care is located. If this standard is not met, the day care is classified as a commercial day
care and must meet the requirements of that use.
2. A family home day care shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 AM and 6:00 AM
3. The family home day care shall be operated in compliance with applicable laws including
those specified in Department of Children and Families Chapter 250 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
E. Outdoor Mechanical Equipment
To the maximum extent practical, outdoor mechanical equipment, such as air conditioner
condensers and similar mechanical units, shall be located in the rear yard. Where this is not
feasible, outdoor mechanical equipment may be located in the side yard. In no case shall outdoor
mechanical equipment be located closer than three (3) feet to a parcel line. All outdoor
mechanical equipment (including rooftop mechanical units) shall be screened from public view to
the extent practical.
F. Outdoor/Indoor Temporary Sales and Auctions
1. General requirements. Outdoor/Indoor sales and auctions not requiring a permit,
including but not limited to, personal property sale items, garage, yard, or estate sales and
auctions shall be consistent with the following requirements:
Garage, yard, or estate sales shall not exceed t a. hree (3) days during any six (6) month
period;
b. Sale of personal property items on display or within view from a public right-of-way,
including but not limited to, vehicles, boats, trailers, and accessory buildings shall not
exceed one year; and
c. Real estate and estate auctions shall not exceed three (3) days.
2. Sign requirements. All signs for outdoor/indoor temporary sales and auctions shall follow
requirements pursuant to Section 6.6, C., 18.: Temporary signs: on-premise.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
3. Conditional Use Permit. All other temporary sales exceeding the above requirements may
be permitted upon review and approval of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit.
G. Patio, Deck, Terrace, and Similar Uses.
1. Patio. A patio shall be at least five (5) feet to any parcel line.
2. Deck and/or Terrace. Decks and terraces shall comply with the minimum required
setback of the principal building from the front, corner street side, and side parcel lines.
Decks and terraces shall comply with the required setback of the principal building from
the rear parcel line, but in no case shall a deck or terrace be required to be more than
twenty-five (25) feet from the rear parcel line.
3. Porch. A porch shall meet the required setback of the principal building.
H. Personal Storage Building as a Principal Building
A personal storage building may be used as a principal building (as opposed to an accessory
building) if it complies with all of the following conditions:
1. The building shall be permitted only in the FD Future Development District and only on a
parcel that has a minimum area of five (5) acres.
2. The building shall be used for personal storage use only. In no case shall it be used for
commercial use or any other use for which a fee is charged.
3. At no time shall the building be used as a temporary or permanent dwelling unless it is
converted to such a use pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance and all other
applicable codes.
4. The building shall meet the required setbacks of a principal building in the FD Future
Development District.
5. Buildings over twelve hundred (1,200) square feet shall comply with the design standards
and guidelines specified in Section 4.37, D.: Design Standards and Guidelines for
Agricultural Buildings and Other Accessory Buildings.
I. Public Art
The Intent of this subsection is to regulate public art, as defined by this ordinance, in the City of
Ashland and to ensure that the public art being installed contributes to the City’s visual character,
enhances the area in which it is proposed to be located and creates a unique sense of place.
1. Private visual works of art. Any visual work of art not defined as Public Art may be
regulated as an accessory structure pursuant to Section 5.6 B.: Accessory Structure.
2. Murals.
a. Intent. The intent of this Paragraph is to regulate the location, design, and
maintenance of murals in the City of Ashland.
b. Application and permits. Due to the large size of murals and the importance that
murals have on the overall image of the community, no mural shall be painted or
affixed to a building until the building owner has first received a permit for the
proposed mural pursuant to Section 3.25: Public Art Permit. A mural, if proposed to
be located on a structure designated as historic, may require the approval and
issuance a historic preservation certificate of appropriateness pursuant to City of
Ashland Ordinance 826.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-9
c. Ashland Mural Walk. All murals approved by, funded through and installed in
accordance with the regulations and standards set forth by the Ashland Mural Walk
Project, shall be also be required to adhere to the following design, installation and
maintenance standards.
d. Design, installation, and maintenance standards. All murals shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Prior to painting or affixing a mural to the building, the surface of the building
must be fully repaired and/or deemed suitable for the proposed mural. The
City Building Inspector or other Authorized Agent shall check the surface of
the structure for general suitability. However, the City and/or its Designated
Authorized Agents shall not be responsible for any potential future failures
associated with the structure or the mural.
(2) A sealer shall be applied to the surface of the mural to extend the life of the
mural and to make it easier to clean and maintain.
(3) The placement or erection of ladders, scaffolding, lifts, or other construction
equipment as part of the mural project must be done in compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations.
(4) Work performed within, or that which may pose a hazard to, the public rightof-
way shall be approved through a Right-of-Way Permit by the Public Works
Director or Designated Authorized Agent to ensure adequate measures are
taken to protect pedestrians, the public infrastructure, and to address parking
impacts.
(5) Murals shall meet all applicable standards pursuant to Section 6.7: Exterior
Lighting and all other applicable standards identified with the approval or
permit.
(6) Evidence of adequate liability insurance shall be provided and the City of
Ashland shall be named as an additional insured party during the period of
work.
(7) A mural shall be considered a property improvement and the property owner
shall be responsible for ongoing maintenance and cleaning of the mural. The
property owner may contract with the mural artist, the Ashland Mural Walk
Project, or others for basic maintenance.
3. Sculptures and other public art.
Intent. The intent of this Paragraph is a. to regulate the location, design, and
maintenance of sculptures, fountains and other public art in the City of Ashland.
b. Exemptions. This subsection shall not apply to those sculptures, fountains, or other
public art which do not exceed a height of four (4) feet in a front or side corner yard,
a height of six (6) feet in a rear or side yard, and do not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet in area.
c. Application, review and permits. Due to the potentially large size of sculptures,
fountains and other public art, no piece of public art shall be installed until the
property owner has first received approval from the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent and a permit pursuant to Section 3.25: Public Art
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Permit. A sculpture, fountain, or other public art proposed to be located at or on a
site or structure designated as historic, may require the approval and issuance a
historic preservation certificate of appropriateness pursuant to City of Ashland
Ordinance 826.
Design, installation, and maintenance standards. All d. sculptures, fountains, or other
public art shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Sculptures or other public art may be functional, interactive, educational,
symbolic, or commemorative and may incorporate landscape elements.
(2) Fountain basins one-hundred and fifteen (115) square feet in surface area or
greater, shall not exceed a water depth equal to or greater than twenty-four (24)
inches.
(3) Sculptures, fountains, or other public art shall not exceed a height of thirty-five
(35) feet, except that a sculpture, fountain, or other public art may exceed a
height of thirty-five (35) feet with the issuance of a conditional use permit
pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
(4) Sculptures, fountains, or other public art shall meet all other applicable
standards pursuant to Section 6.1B Setbacks, Section 6.1 D: Impervious
Coverage, Section 6.1 H: Vision Triangle, Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting and
all other applicable standards identified with the approval or permit.
(5) The placement or erection of ladders, scaffolding, lifts, or other construction
equipment as part of the public art project must be done in compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations.
(6) Work on or adjacent to the public right-of-way shall be reviewed and approved
by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent to ensure
adequate measures are taken to protect pedestrians, public infrastructure, and to
address parking impacts.
(7) Evidence of adequate liability insurance shall be provided and the City of
Ashland shall be named as an additional insured party during the period of
work.
(8) A sculpture, fountain, or other public art shall be considered a property
improvement and the property owner shall be responsible for ongoing
maintenance and cleaning of the sculpture, fountain, or other public art. The
property owner may contract with the artist or others for basic maintenance.
4. Conditional Use Permit.
Proposed public art exceeding standards set forth in Subsection 5.6 I. 3. d. (2) and (3) may
apply for a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
J. Solar Equipment and Solar Rights
1. Solar equipment shall be consistent with the setback and height requirements of the
principal or accessory building, whichever is applicable. Solar equipment that is not
consistent with the setback and height requirements may be considered pursuant to
conditional use procedures as specified in Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
2. No person in control of property shall allow a tree or shrub to be placed or grow as to cast a
shadow between the hours of 9:00 AM and 3:00 PM upon a solar collector energy system
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-11
capable of generating more than one million (1,000,000) British thermal units (BTUs) per
year, and that supplies a part of the energy requirements for improvements on the property
where the solar energy system is permanently located.
K. Sport Court, Play Equipment, and Similar Uses
Sport courts, play equipment, and similar uses shall meet the same setbacks required for an
accessory building. However, sport courts, play equipment, and similar uses shall not count
towards the maximum allowable number or maximum allowable area of accessory buildings on a
site.
L. Swimming Pool
1. Intent. The intent of this Subsection is to ensure that swimming pools, as defined by this
Ordinance, are constructed and maintained in a manner that protects the health, safety, and
welfare of the intended users of the swimming pool. It is also the intent of this Subsection
to ensure swimming pools have adequate barriers to deter children and other unauthorized
persons from gaining unsupervised access to the swimming pool.
2. Required permits. All swimming pools as defined by this Ordinance shall be consistent
with the swimming pool barrier requirements of this Ordinance. In addition, any
swimming pool with a capacity of over three thousand (3,000) gallons or with a depth of
over three (3) feet of water shall require the issuance of a building permit.
3. Required plans. An application for a building permit shall include the following
information:
a. The type and size of pool; and
b. A site plan indicating:
(1) the location of the pool;
(2) the location of the dwelling and/or other buildings on the subject parcel;
(3) other improvements on the parcel;
(4) location of the filter unit, pump heating unit, and wiring indicating the type of
such units (if applicable);
(5) location of back flush and drainage outlets;
(6) grading and/or surface drainage plan;
(7) location of existing overhead or underground utilities;
(8) drainage and utility easements; and
(9) any other existing features as may be necessary to determine whether the
proposed pool is consistent with this Ordinance.
4. Setbacks. The setback shall be measured at the edge of the waterline. Swimming pools
shall comply with the following setbacks:
a. Swimming pools shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from any side or rear
parcel line.
b. Swimming pools shall not be located with the front yard.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Swimming pools shall not be located less c. than six (6) feet from any principal
structure.
d. Swimming pools shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from any portion of a
septic system or a well.
e. Swimming pools shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from any overhead utility
lines or less than five (5) feet from any underground utility lines.
f. Swimming pools shall not be located within any existing easements.
5. In-ground pools. In the case of in-ground swimming pools, necessary precautions shall be
taken during construction to avoid damage, hazards, or inconvenience to adjacent or nearby
property and to avoid erosion, dust, or other infringements on adjacent property from the
stockpiling of excavated material.
6. Back flush water or pool drainage water. Back flush water or water from pool drainage
may be directed into the street storm water system or onto the owner’s property unless
otherwise authorized by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent.
7. Mechanical equipment. The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other noise making
mechanical equipment shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any adjacent residential
structure and at least five (5) feet from any parcel line.
8. Swimming pool barrier. An outdoor swimming pool shall be provided with a barrier that
shall be installed, inspected, and approved prior to filling the swimming pool with water.
Fencing shall require the issuance of a fence permit pursuant to Section 3.43: Fence Permit.
The barrier shall comply with the following:
a. The barrier shall either surround the swimming pool or the property and shall be
sufficient to make the swimming pool inaccessible to unsupervised children.
b. The barrier, including gates therein, shall not be less than six (6) feet above the
underlying ground. All gates shall be self-latching with latches placed four (4) feet
above the underlying ground and otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to
small children. Fencing shall be a minimum of four (4) feet at all points from the
existing walls of swimming pools.
c. All gates shall be secured when the swimming pool is unattended. Ladders for
swimming pools shall be removed when not in use and steps to decks abutting
swimming pools shall be locked with gates when unattended.
d. A natural barrier, hedge, pool cover, or other protective device approved by the
Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent may be used provided that the
protection afforded by the substituted devices or structures is not less than the
protection afforded by the enclosure, gate, and latch described herein.
M. Outdoor Merchandise Sales
1. General Requirements. Outdoor merchandise sales shall be allowed as defined by this
Ordinance, or after the issuance of a permit to temporarily place items on a sidewalk
pursuant to Section 3.44: Permit to Temporarily Place Items on Sidewalks. Outdoor
storage, as defined by this Ordinance, shall be consistent with the standards as set forth in
section 6.4 D: Screening of Equipment, Vehicles, Outdoor Storage, and Similar Uses.
Outdoor merchandise sales shall be consistent with the following standards:
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-13
a. Merchandise display shall not create a hazard to pedestrians or encroach on a required
building exit.
b. Driveways and required onsite parking spaces shall not be used for outdoor
merchandise sales or storage.
PART 6
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
Part 6: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 6.1 General Standards ................................................................................................................. 15
A. Parcels ...................................................................................................................................... 15
B. Setbacks ................................................................................................................................... 15
C. Building Height ........................................................................................................................ 16
D. Impervious Coverage ............................................................................................................... 16
E. Location and Number of Principal Buildings on a Parcel ....................................................... 17
F. Building Identification Numbering System ............................................................................. 17
G. Driveways ................................................................................................................................ 17
H. Vision Triangle ........................................................................................................................ 18
I. Grading, Filling, and/or Excavation......................................................................................... 18
J. Demolition and Moving of a Building or Structure ................................................................. 19
Section 6.2 General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines ............................................ 21
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 21
B. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 21
C. Design Standards and Guidelines ............................................................................................ 22
Section 6.3 Parking and Loading ............................................................................................................. 24
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 24
B. Applicability ............................................................................................................................ 25
C. Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required ...................................................................... 25
D. Bicycle Parking ........................................................................................................................ 28
E. Parking Requirement Waivers, Alternatives, and Incentives................................................... 29
Part 6: General Development Standards describes development standards, such as parking and landscaping, which generally
apply to most types of development in the city. Refer to other Parts of this Unified Development Ordinance for additional or more
specific development standards.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-14 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
F. Design Standards for Parking Lots and Parking Spaces .......................................................... 30
Section 6.4 Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening ................................................................................... 32
A. Landscaping ............................................................................................................................. 32
B. District Boundary Buffers ........................................................................................................ 36
C. Buffers or Screening Between Mixed Uses within the Same District ..................................... 37
D. Screening of Equipment, Vehicles, Outdoor Storage, and Similar Uses ................................. 37
Section 6.5 Fences ...................................................................................................................................... 39
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 39
B. Compliance and Required Fence Permit .................................................................................. 39
C. General Design Standards ........................................................................................................ 40
D. Special Provisions and Requirements ...................................................................................... 42
Section 6.6 Signs ........................................................................................................................................ 42
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 42
B. Administration and Sign Permits Required ............................................................................. 43
C. Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit .......................................................................................... 43
D. Prohibited Signs ....................................................................................................................... 47
E. General Provisions, Design, Maintenance, and Removal Standards ....................................... 48
F. General Standards for Specific Types of Signs ....................................................................... 51
G. Allowable Signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, and W-SFR Districts ....................... 59
H. Allowable Signs in the MRC, W-MRC, W-C, and W-CRM Districts .................................... 60
I. Signs in the PRI District .......................................................................................................... 61
J. Signs in the NC District ........................................................................................................... 62
K. Signs in the RC District ........................................................................................................... 62
L. Signs in the CC and W-CC District ......................................................................................... 63
M. Signs in the MCI, LI, HI, and W-I Districts ............................................................................ 65
N. Signs in the PI, PP, AIR, and W-PI Districts ........................................................................... 66
O. Signs in the FD District ........................................................................................................... 67
P. Reserved................................................................................................................................... 67
Q. Signs in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District ................................................................... 67
R. Reserved................................................................................................................................... 67
S. Signs in the PUD Overlay District ........................................................................................... 67
Section 6.7 Exterior Lighting ................................................................................................................... 67
A. Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 67
B. Compliance and Applicability ................................................................................................. 68
C. General Requirements .............................................................................................................. 69
D. Specific Design Requirements ................................................................................................. 70
List of Tables
Table Title Page
6.3.A Required Off-Street Parking Spaces .................................................................................... 6-12
6.3.B Minimum Parking Space and Drive Aisle Dimensions ....................................................... 6-17
6.7.A General Parking and Pedestrian Areas Illuminance Standards for Open Parking Facilities 6-55
6.7 B Driveway Area Illuminance Standards for Open Parking Facilities .................................... 6-55
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-15
Section 6.1 General Standards
A. Parcels
1. Minimum parcel size. Every building and use of land shall have a parcel area and parcel
width of not less than that required for the applicable zoning district. Development may be
allowed on nonconforming parcels of record pursuant to Section 10.3: Nonconforming
Parcels.
2. Modification to parcel size and/or required building setbacks. No parcel, yard,
courtyard, parking areas, or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make
the area or dimension less than the minimum required by this Ordinance.
3. Division of parcels. No parcel improved with a building or buildings shall hereafter be
divided into two (2) or more parcels (and no portion of any parcel that is improved with a
building or buildings shall be sold) unless all parcels resulting from such division or sale
and improved with a building or buildings shall conform with the area and bulk regulations,
and setbacks, of the applicable zoning district.
4. Street frontage required. Except as permitted by other provisions of this Ordinance, no
parcel shall contain any building used in whole, or in part, for residential purposes unless
such parcel abuts for at least thirty-five (35) feet, a public street or approved private road
that is constructed to applicable standards pursuant to Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design
Standards and City of Ashland Ordinance 612.
5. Parcel width on curvilinear streets or cul-de-sacs. In the case of a parcel fronting a
curvilinear street or cul-de-sac, the parcel width shall be defined as the horizontal distance
between the side parcel lines on a line parallel to the front parcel line at the required
building setback.
6. Double frontage or through parcels. Buildings on parcels having frontage on two (2)
non-intersecting streets need not have a rear yard if an equivalent open space is provided on
the parcel in lieu of such required rear yard. However, applicable front yards must be
provided on both streets.
B. Setbacks
1. Measurement of setbacks. Setbacks for buildings and structures shall be measured as the
area between the furthermost projection of the buildings or structures and the parcel lines
on which the buildings or structures are located, except as modified by the standards of this
Section. Setbacks shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as modified by
this Section. Required setbacks for each zoning district are specified in Part 4: Zoning
Districts.
2. Allowable encroachments into required setbacks. Outdoor heating and cooling units
(excluding outdoor wood-fired furnaces) may encroach into the required setback by a
distance of not more than three (3) feet
3. Reduced principal building setback from front parcel line or corner side parcel line.
The required setback of a principal building from a front parcel line or corner side parcel
line may be reduced on any parcel where the average established front setback of principal
buildings on developed parcels located within three hundred (300) feet on each side of such
parcel, is less than the required minimum setback. In such cases, the setback on such a
parcel may be less than the required, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-16 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
on the developed parcels within three hundred (300) feet of each side. In no case shall the
determined average setback be less than fifteen (15) feet.
4. Reduced setback from a side parcel line for an existing single or two-family residence.
The setback of an existing single or two-family residence from a side parcel line may be
maintained on any addition to the residence, but in no instance shall the addition be less
than three (3) feet from the side parcel line.
5. Allowable encroachment for handicap access. Upon proof of a physical disability that
requires the need for a ramp, the owner of a structure shall be allowed to project into the
required yards for the purpose of installing a ramp. However, the ramp shall be set back a
minimum of three (3) feet from the front, side, and rear parcel lines wherever possible,
except that the ramp may be installed with a zero setback, if no other reasonable means
exist that would allow the ramp to be installed with a greater setback, and if approved by
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. Special approval requests shall
expire five (5) years from the date of issuance. Reissuance shall require proof that a
physical disability still exists requiring the need for a ramp that encroaches into the
required yard.
C. Building Height
1. Measurement of building height. Building height is measured as the vertical distance
between the grade level at the front wall of the building and one of the following:
a. The ridgeline of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof;
b. The highest point of a mansard roof; or
c. The highest point of the coping of a flat roof.
2. Height exceptions for certain building appurtenances. The height limitations of this
Ordinance shall not apply to the following conditions:
a. Spires, belfries, cupolas, mechanical penthouses, and domes, not used for human
occupancy; or to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, towers, water tanks, necessary
mechanical appurtenances, solar panels and similar features usually carried above
roof level;
b. Ornamental features that do not extend above the building height limit by more than
five (5) feet. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as is
necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve and subject to all applicable
building codes.
D. Impervious Coverage
1. Measurement of impervious coverage. Impervious coverage is measured as the
percentage of a parcel that is covered by a material that releases as runoff all, or a large
portion, of the precipitation that falls on it. Impervious coverage includes conventional
roofs, driveways, sidewalks, patios, similar hard surfaced materials. Green roofs, lawns,
gardens, and permeable paving are not considered impervious.
2. Impervious coverage exceptions. The maximum allowable impervious coverage
requirements of this Ordinance as specified in Part 4: Zoning Districts may, at the
discretion of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Approval Authority, be increased up
to an additional five (5) percent if the development on the subject parcel incorporates
techniques to help infiltrate or hold runoff on the site. Such techniques may include, but
shall not be limited to, rain barrels and rain gardens.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-17
E. Location and Number of Principal Buildings on a Parcel
Every principal building hereafter erected shall be located on a parcel as specified in this
Ordinance. In no case shall there be no more than one (1) principal building on a parcel except in
the following situations:
1. Planned unit developments (PUDs), which may or may not include conservation
subdivisions or traditional neighborhood design developments;
2. Multi-family buildings or institutional buildings that are developed as a planned group;
3. Nonresidential buildings where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent that any principal building can be
subsequently detached with a parcel and yards conforming the provisions of this
Ordinance;
4. Temporary buildings.
F. Building Identification Numbering System
1. Applicability. For the purpose of general identification and to aid in ascertaining the
location of buildings in the event of an emergency, principal buildings in the City of
Ashland shall be identified with numbers visible from the adjacent street and in accordance
with the provisions of this Subsection.
2. Numbering system. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent shall be
responsible for issuance of a building number and shall keep a chart, which shall be
available to inspection by anyone, showing the proper number of every parcel and/or
principal building in the City of Ashland. The building numbers shall generally comply
with the following criteria:
a. Odd numbers shall be on the west and north sides of the streets. Even numbers shall
be on the south and east sides of the streets;
b. There shall be no more than one hundred (100) numbers to each block, twenty-five
(25) numbers per side.
3. Responsibility to number and type of numbers. Each shall be the duty of the property
owners or the occupants of a principal building to affix, in a place visible from the street,
figures at least three (3) inches high, showing the appropriate number of the building. It is
recommended that numbers placed on a mailbox have a reflective surface.
4. Identification numbers in rural areas. The Fire Chief of the City of Ashland may, in his
or her discretion, require a property owner to post identification numbers for buildings or
improvements within the City of Ashland to aid the Fire Department in ascertaining the
location of buildings or improvements in the event of emergencies. The postings shall be
done with uniform signs at the outer edges of the street or highway right-of-ways at
locations that do not interfere with the use of the streets or highways or adjacent properties.
5. Violations. Any person, firm, or corporation failing to so number any principal building or
other structure occupied, or if after receiving notice to do so from the Building Inspector,
Fire Chief, or Designated Authorized Agent shall continue to not so number such building
or structure, shall be fined one dollar ($1.00) for each day during or on which a failure to so
number continues.
G. Driveways
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-18 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
1. Setbacks. All driveways shall have a minimum three (3) foot maintenance setback from all
interior side parcel lines, except where driveways are shared between two (2) or more
owners. Driveway access (or curb cuts) from a public or private street shall be setback a
minimum of thirty (30) feet from the nearest intersection of a public street or alley. The
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may, at his or her discretion, allow
a lesser setback in zoning districts where reduced or no building setbacks are encouraged
and/or allowed, or where no reasonable use of the parcel could occur without a lesser
setback.
2. Surface. All driveways shall be constructed with a durable, hard surface such as concrete,
asphalt, or a comparable material. All driveway accesses shall be required to meet the
standards adopted under Chapter 612, Ashland City Ordinances.
3. Size. All driveways shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and a minimum of
eighteen (18) feet in length. Refer to City of Ashland Ordinance 611 for additional
requirements.
4. Time of Construction. Driveways shall be constructed prior to occupancy.
H. Vision Triangle
1. Vision triangle at streets. Nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as
to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10)
feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets to a distance such that a clear line
of vision is possible of the intersecting street right-of-way from a distance of fifteen (15)
feet along all City street right-of-ways. All distances from county, state, and U.S. highways
shall be approved by the applicable permitting authority. The Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent may, at his or her discretion, exempt development from this
requirement in zoning districts where reduced or no building setbacks are encouraged
and/or allowed.
2. Vision triangle at alleys and driveways. Nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in
such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2)
feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting street and alley or
driveway such that a clear line of vision is possible at the intersecting street right-of-way
from a distance of ten (10) feet from the alley right-of-way or the edge of driveway surface.
The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may, at his or her discretion,
exempt development from this requirement in zoning districts where reduced or no building
setbacks are encouraged and/or allowed.
I. Grading, Filling, and/or Excavation
1. Applicability. Grading, land filling, and/or excavation (excluding mining) as a separate
activity not associated with any other development approvals (for example, a building
permit or development permit) involving fifty (50) cubic yards or less of material and three
thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet or less of land disturbance shall not require the
issuance of a development permit, but the work shall be consistent with the provisions of
this Ordinance. Grading, land filling, and/or excavation (excluding mining) as a separate
activity not associated with any other development approvals involving more than fifty (50)
cubic yards of material or more than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of
land disturbance shall require the issuance of a development permit pursuant to Section
3.31: Development Permit and may require issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant
to the requirements of the applicable zoning district. Agricultural activities shall be exempt
from the requirements of this Subsection.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-19
2. Plans required. Applicants requesting approval of a development permit or conditional
use permit for grading, filling, and/or excavation shall submit plans indicating the amount,
type, and location of material to be moved, filled, and/or excavated. Depending on the
extent of work, additional plans and approvals may be required, including, but not limited
to approval of an erosion and sediment control plan pursuant to Section 8.2 Construction
Site Erosion Control and approval of a storm water management plan pursuant to Section
8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management.
3. Review costs. Upon inspection of the site, the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent may request that the Building Inspector, the Public Works Director or
other Designated Agent review the proposed grading, filling, and/or excavation and submit
written comments on the proposal. The costs of such review shall be borne by the applicant
in accordance with the City’s fee schedule. The City reserves the right to require an escrow
account of such costs.
4. Permit limitations. If the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent
determines that the proposed grading, filling, and/or excavating would cause flooding or
drainage problems on adjoining properties, the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent may reject, condition, or impose limitations on the proposed work.
J. Demolition and Moving of a Building or Structure
1. Applicability. No building, structure, or part thereof (as determined by the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent), shall be moved, removed, razed or demolished
without prior approval and/or a demolition permit or a permit to move a building or
structure pursuant to Section 3.33: Demolition Permit and/or Section 3.34: Permit to Move
a Building or Structure.
2. Other Permits and/or Authorizations Required.
a. A City Work-in-Right-of-Way permit must be obtained as required by City
Ordinances.
b. If the building, structure or site is listed on a Local, State or National Historical
Registry, or is located in a historic district as determined by the Local, State or
National Historical Registry, a Certificate of Appropriateness may be required
pursuant to Section 3.22 and City of Ashland Ordinance 826. If required, the
Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued prior to the issuance of a demolition
permit or a permit to move a building or structure.
c. The use of explosives shall only be allowed upon prior written authorization and
coordination with the Building Inspector, Director of Public Works, Police Chief and
Fire Chief.
d. The location of sites for the disposal, reuse or recycling of materials shall be supplied
with the demolition permit or permit to move a building or structure applications.
Only local and/or State approved and/or permitted disposal and recycling sites shall
be used.
e. The State of Wisconsin and any other local governmental authority (i.e. a County,
Township, City) or department, may also regulate and require a permit for any
vehicle or trailer used in the process of hauling or moving of a building or structure.
f. A building permit is required for the placement or installation of any building or
structure on a parcel located in the City of Ashland.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
6-20 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
g. Authorization or permits may be required by other local governmental authorities
(i.e. a County, Township, City) for placement or installation of a building or structure
within their boundaries.
3. Standards and Inspections.
a. Utilities.
(1) Capping of water and sewer laterals shall occur at the parcel line by a licensed
plumber. Inspection of the disconnection, capping and abandonment is
required. The owner, contractor, or owner’s agent shall call the Public Works
Department to schedule an inspection at least two (2) business days prior to
performing any utility disconnection, capping or abandonment work.
(2) If a Private Onsite Wastewater Treatment System (P.O.W.T.S.), such as a
holding tank or septic drain field is connected to the building or structure, or is
located on the parcel and not in use, the P.O.W.T.S. shall be properly
abandoned in accordance with Comm. 83.33 of the State Plumbing Code. A
letter stating the P.O.W.T.S. has been abandoned to code by a licensed
plumber, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector and the Public Works
Director.
(3) If a private well is connected to the building or structure, or is located on the
parcel and not in use, the well shall be properly abandoned or capped in
accordance with Department of Natural Resources regulation NR 812.26 and
other related requirements. A copy of an approval letter or permit from the
Department of Natural Resources to maintain the well, or a letter stating the
well has been abandoned to code from a licensed well driller, shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector and the Public Works Director.
b. Dust control.
(1) The owner, contractor, or owner’s agent shall be required to control and
minimize airborn dust so as to not impact adjacent parcels, public rights-ofway
and public infrastructure. It is the responsibility of the owner, contractor,
or owner’s agent to minimize airborne dust through the application of water, or
another approved method, during the demolition and loading process. Other
methods proposed shall be approved by the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent.
c. Stormwater and erosion control.
(1) The owner, contractor, or owner’s agent shall be required to provide
stormwater and erosion control methods for the demolition or moving of a
building or structure.
(2) All stormwater and erosion control practices shall be approved and installed
prior to any up-slope soil disturbing activities and shall be in place until the site
achieves final stabilization.
(3) All stormwater and erosion control measures shall be removed within 30-days
after final site stabilization is achieved or the Director of Public Works or
Designated Authorized Agent determines that the controls are no longer
needed.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.1: General Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-21
(4) A Sediment and Erosion Control Plan and/or a Post-Construction Management
Plan may be required pursuant to Section 8.2 and Section 8.3.
(5) No later than fourteen (14) days following the land disturbing activities, all
disturbed areas shall be restored to the final grade and restored with vegetation
as approved by the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent.
d. Asbestos inspection.
(1) NR 447 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code requires that all commercial
structures and residential structures having more than four (4) dwelling units be
inspected for the presence of asbestos by an asbestos inspector licensed by the
WI Department of Health and Family Services (DHFS). Refer DNR
publication WA-651-07 for more detailed information. A copy of the asbestos
inspection report meeting the requirements of NR 447 must be submitted to the
Building Inspector prior to issuance of a permit.
e. General standards.
(1) All remaining concrete slabs, below grade footings, walls, and floors shall be
completely removed and hauled off site to an approved disposal site. Clean
suitable soil, as determined by the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent shall be utilized to bring the site to level grade (average
grade of site abutting the building or structure prior to demolition or removal).
The affected area shall be graded to eliminate ponding and allow for natural
drainage patterns. Topsoil shall be installed and the site re-seeded to stabilize
the site.
(2) On-site storage – The storage of materials resulting from the demolition or
moving of a building or structure activities shall not remain on-site for more
than thirty (30) days following the demolition or removal.
(3) It is the responsibility of the owner, contractor, or owner’s agent to properly
secure the site for public safety.
Section 6.2 General Building and Site Design Standards and
Guidelines
A. Intent
The intent of this Section is to provide guidance to further the design related goals, objectives,
and policies described in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Ellis Avenue Redevelopment Plan, and
other applicable plans adopted by the City. It is not the intent of this Section to restrict creative,
affordable, or innovative design, but rather to assist in clarifying design principles that are
intended to help strengthen the appearance of the city; promote the public, health, safety, and
welfare; preserve taxable values; and move the City towards sustainability. The word “shall” as
used in this Ordinance refers to a standard that is a mandatory requirement. The word “should”
refers to a guideline that is encouraged and discretionary, but not mandatory.
B. Applicability
This Section applies to all development within the City of Ashland, except as may be specified
otherwise in this Section. Prior to action on a development permit, building permit, site plan
approval, or other applicable approvals associated with a proposed development application, the
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.2: General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines
6-22 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
appropriate review and approval authority (pursuant to Part 2: Review and Approval Authorities)
shall make a determination that the proposed development is consistent with the design standards
and the intent of the design guidelines of this Section when considered as a whole.
C. Design Standards and Guidelines
1. Relationship of a building and related development to its site. To the maximum extent
practical (and in the context of the specific site, its surroundings, and the proposed function
of the building) new buildings or building additions shall be situated on a site in manner
that addresses the following:
a. Building orientation for energy conservation. The orientation of buildings should
consider solar exposure, breezes, topography, and similar design considerations that
can help buildings conserve energy or utilize renewable forms of energy;
b. Protection of significant natural features. Building and site development shall
minimize all adverse impacts of development on significant natural resources. Refer
to Section 8.1: General Protection of Significant Natural Features, as well as other
related sections throughout this Ordinance for specific requirements;
c. Building orientation to the street and pedestrians. Every new building shall have an
entrance door or feature that clearly identifies the front entrance of the building from
the adjacent street. Pedestrian access to the building should be safe and convenient;
d. Pedestrian connections within the site and to surrounding areas. Where appropriate,
each development should be designed to provide pedestrian walkways connecting
outdoor facilities to each other and to the building. The development should provide
connections to existing adjacent public walkways and, where appropriate, to adjacent
development;
e. Minimize view of accessory buildings from the street. Accessory buildings and
attached garages should be setback a minimum of four (4) feet from the front façade
of the principal building. Where this may not be practical, design features that
minimize the prominence of the accessory building (or attached garage) from the
adjacent street should be employed. Such design features may include landscaping
that visually extends the front façade of the principal building beyond the accessory
building (or attached garage). The accessory building may also incorporate design
features, such as facing the overhead doors towards the side yard, installing windows
in overhead garage doors, or incorporating other design details that relate to the
design of the principal building;
f. Landscaping and screening. Landscaping shall be designed to strengthen the
relationship of the building to its site, enhance positive views, and screen
objectionable views. Where appropriate, native landscaping is encouraged. Refer to
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening for more information.
2. Relationship of a building to adjacent sites and buildings. To the maximum extent
practical (and in the context of the specific site, its surroundings, and the proposed function
of the building) new buildings, building additions, or renovations shall relate to adjacent
sites and buildings as follows:
a. Height and bulk. The height and bulk of buildings shall be consistent with the
requirements of the applicable zoning district. In addition, where practical, the height
of a new building, or building addition, should not vary more than twenty-five (25)
percent from the immediately adjacent buildings;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.2: General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-23
b. Setbacks. Buildings shall meet the setback requirements of the zoning district. The
front building setback should be consistent with the prevailing front building setback
in the area. In the CC City Center District and the W-CC Waterfront City Center
District (except properties adjacent to Highway 2), multi-family
apartments/condominiums and nonresidential uses should generally be built to the
back edge of the front sidewalk to promote pedestrian scale and access. In some
cases, the buildings may be setback to allow for landscaping, seating, courtyards and
other amenities;
c. Architectural style. To the extent practical and desirable, the architectural style of a
new building should relate to the architectural style of the surrounding buildings;
d. Preservation of views. The design and placement of new buildings should, to the
extent practical, avoid blocking the views that existing buildings have of Lake
Superior and other desirable views. Also, to the extent practical, the design and
placement of new buildings should consider the effect that the new buildings have on
views from other buildings and other areas of the city.
3. Building design. To the maximum extent practical (and in the
context of the specific site, its surroundings, and the proposed
function of the building) new buildings, building additions, or
renovations should comply with the following:
a. Architectural style or theme. If the City has adopted or
approved a plan that describes an architectural style or
theme for a particular area in the city, new buildings
shall relate to the approved theme. If no such plan has
been adopted or approved by the City, but a particular
area has an established and desirable architectural style
or theme, new buildings, additions, and renovations
should be compatible with the existing style or theme;
b. Materials. Construction shall be of quality finish materials including, but not limited
to, brick, stone, stucco, wood, and architectural concrete. Unfinished concrete
masonry units and corrugated plastic or metal (typically associated with pole barn
construction) shall be prohibited, except in isolated areas where the approval
authority determines such materials will not have an adverse impact on the
surrounding area or the city;
c. Colors. Colors of all façade and roof materials should be established as an integral
part of the building design and should exhibit evidence of coordination and selection
with respect to the overall visual effect of the building. The color of each façade
material should be harmonious with the color of all other façade materials used on
the same building, as well as the color of façade materials used on adjacent buildings.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, harmonious shall be defined as colors that are
complimentary in hue, tone, and intensity. The use of dissonant and/or intense
colored façade materials should be avoided;
d. Human scale detailing. Facades of buildings that face the street should incorporate
human-scale detailing through the use of reveals, belt courses, cornices, expressions
of structural or structural bays, recesses windows or doors, material changes, color
and/or texture differences, or strongly expressed mullions. The length of the ground
floor of a building, especially a building in the CC and W-CC Districts, should
include transparent windows, awnings, or other similar pedestrian-friendly features;
Helpful Note.
For buildings located in the
Waterfront Overlay District
and the Gateway Overlay
District, refer to the provisions
of those districts specified in
Part 4: Zoning Districts, for
additional building design
guidelines.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.2: General Building and Site Design Standards and Guidelines
6-24 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
e. Facades and walls in general. Facades should have a recognizable “base” consisting
of, but not limited to, walls, ledges, sills, integrally textured colored, and patterned
materials, or planters. Facades should also have a recognizable “top” consisting of,
but not limited to, cornice treatments with integrally textured materials, sloping roofs
with overhangs, or stepped parapets. All sides of a building and any accessory
building should use materials and designs consistent with those of the front façade;
f. Long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls. To prevent long, monotonous, uninterrupted
walls, recesses, projections, columns, offsets, or change in building wall plane shall
be required, at a minimum, every seventy-five (75) feet of wall length. No
uninterrupted length of any façade shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet. Projections,
recesses, and decorative columns shall be a minimum of one (1) foot wide and one
(1) foot deep. Structural columns supporting a portico, porch, or overhang, shall
meet this requirement;
g. Long, monotonous, uninterrupted pitched roof planes. To prevent long, monotonous,
uninterrupted pitched roof planes, dormers, gables, or roof offsets shall be required at
a minimum, every seventy-five (75) feet of pitched roof length;
h. Fenestration. Windows, doors, and glazing should be proportional to overall scale of
the building and, where applicable, shall compliment adjacent buildings. Windows
should be vertically proportioned when feasible;
i. Signs. Signs shall be consistent with the standards specified in Section 6.6: Signs.
In addition, buildings shall be designed to incorporate signage as an integral part of
the building design. The location, shape, style, graphics, size, material, illumination,
and color shall relate to the building. Signs shall also relate to their surroundings,
while allowing individual expression and identification.
4. Green building and site design techniques.
a. General. For the purpose of this Ordinance, green building and site design
techniques are techniques that significantly reduce or eliminate the negative impact
of building and site development on the environment and on the building occupants.
Green building and site design and construction practices address sustainable site
planning, protection of water and water efficiency, energy efficiency, conservation of
materials and resources, and indoor environmental quality. All development in the
City of Ashland is strongly encouraged to use green building and site design
techniques.
b. Buildings that receive City funding. All buildings that
receive City funding are strongly encouraged to use the
sustainable principles of Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) to the maximum extent
practical. Each project should be assessed for the
appropriate certification level with the goal of maximizing
long term benefits, such as operating and maintenance
savings, while minimizing up front project costs.
Section 6.3 Parking and Loading
A. Intent
1. General. The intent of this Section is to ensure adequate parking and loading for the
various uses in the City of Ashland by regulating the number, size, and location of parking
Sustainability Tip.
For information on LEED
and green buildings, visit
the U.S. Green Building
Council site:
www.usgbc.org/
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-25
and loading spaces. These provisions are intended to promote the safety and general
welfare of the public by accomplishing the following:
a. Increase the safety and capacity of public streets by requiring off-street parking and
loading facilities as appropriate;
b. Minimize adverse effects of the off-street parking and loading facilities on adjacent
properties through the use of design and maintenance standards; and
c. Lessen congestion and prevent the overtaxing of public streets by regulating the
location and capacity of off-street parking and loading facilities.
2. Sustainable land use. It is also the intent of this Section to strike a balance between the
need to provide parking based on the current and conventional use of motor vehicles in the
city, with the City’s desire to move toward sustainable development practices.
Consequently, this Section is intended to accomplish the following:
a. Promote efficient and cost effective use of land by requiring and allowing no more
parking than necessary;
b. Reduce the adverse impact of parking’s impervious surfaces on the natural
environment;
c. Promote cost effective and healthy alternatives that reduce the need for parking by
allowing parking reductions for public transit, bicycle parking, and pedestrianoriented
design.
B. Applicability
1. All parking and loading space needs generated by development shall be accommodated offstreet,
except as otherwise allowed in this Section. All required parking shall be
maintained for the life of the use.
2. The provisions of this Section apply to all new development, including expansions and
alterations, and to any development or building that undergoes a change in use or intensity.
C. Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
1. Required number of off-street parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces are
applicable in all zoning districts, except for commercial uses in the City Center District that
do not abut USH 2 shall be exempt from the off-street parking requirements. The number
of off-street parking spaces shall not be more in number than the parking and loading space
requirements of Table 6.3-A: Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces, except as
otherwise provided in this Section. The number of off-street parking spaces to be provided
shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
2. Additional spaces required. Additional parking spaces may be required based on specific
use and determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, in
cooperation with the property owner/business.
3. Interpretation by Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. Parking
spaces for permitted or conditional uses not listed in this Section shall be determined by the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent based on the requirements for
comparable uses.
4. Fractional numbers. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
6-26 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
5. Parking requirements based on square footage of use. Where this Ordinance specifies
parking requirements based on the square footage of the use, the square footage shall refer
to the gross floor area (GFA) as defined by this Ordinance, unless stated otherwise.
6. Parking requirements based on seats. Where this Ordinance specifies parking
requirements based on the number of seats associated with the use, such requirements shall
be based on the seating capacity as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent.
7. Mixed occupancies. In the case of two (2) or more uses in the same building, the total
requirements for all off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the
several uses computed separately. Off-street parking for one use shall not be considered as
providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as otherwise provided
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance (see ‘Shared Parking’).
8. Pre-existing parking and loading spaces. Parking and loading spaces that were in
existence on the effective date of the Section or were provided voluntarily after such date
shall not hereafter be reduced in number except to conform to the requirements herein.
9. Use exclusively for parking and loading. Parking and loading spaces shall be used solely
for the intended use and not for the storage of goods, or vehicles that are for lease, or sale,
except for the sale of a vehicle at an owner’s home.
10. Temporary waivers. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may
temporarily suspend parking requirements for major unused portions of buildings for
periods of one (1) year. The temporary waiver shall be renewable for periods of one (1)
year.
11. Use of driveway for required parking. Single and two-family residential uses may use
their driveways as required parking spaces provided that the required parking does not
occur in that portion of the driveway that is in the right-of-way.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-27
Table 6.3-A: Maximum Allowed Off-Street Parking Spaces
Use Base Number of Spaces Required Additional Spaces Required
Family Residential Uses
Bed and breakfast establishment 2 for principal dwelling 1 per room offered for occupancy
Day care: family home 2 for principal dwelling
Dwelling: accessory 2 for principal dwelling 1 per unit
Dwelling combined with other permitted use Same as multi-family dwelling
Dwelling: multi-family 1 per 1 bedroom unit
2. per 2 bedroom unit
2.5 per 3 bedroom unit
Dwelling: single-family attached 2 per dwelling unit
Dwelling: single-family detached 2 per dwelling unit
Dwelling: two-family or duplex 2 per dwelling unit
Home occupation 2 for principal dwelling Dependent on occupation, maximum of 2
Manufactured home community 2.5 per dwelling unit
Tourist home 2 for principal dwelling 1 per unit
Group Residential Uses
Adult family home 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space for every 4 residents
Boarding or rooming house 1 per room offered for occupancy
Community living arrangement 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space for every 4 residents
Convent, rectory, or monastery 0.75 per bed
Dormitory 0.75 per bed
Emergency residential shelter 1 per room offered for occupancy
Fraternity or sorority 0.75 per bed
Rehabilitation center/transitional living 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space for every 4 residents
Commercial Uses
Adult entertainment establishment 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 250 sf GFA if no seats
Animal boarding 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space for every 20 boarding units
Animal grooming or training facility 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space per employee on shift
Artist studio 1 per 500 sf GFA devoted to sales or display
Assembly hall 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 30 sf GFA if no seats
Bank or financial institution 1 per 300 sf GFA
Business service 1 per 300 sf GFA
Car wash 4 stacking spaces per bay 1 per employee at maximum shift
Conference center 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 250 sf GFA if no seats
Currency exchange, payday loan, title loan
facility
1 per 300 sf GFA
Day care center: commercial 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space for every 10 people cared for
Dry cleaning and laundry drop off and pick up
only
1 per employee at maximum shift 3 visitor spaces for every employee on shift
Filling station without service bays or retail 1 per employee at maximum shift 2 stacking spaces per each side of pump
Funeral home 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 30 sf GFA if no seats 1 per employee at maximum shift
Garden supply or landscaping center 1 per 500 sf GFA of building and sales area
Home improvement center 1 per 500 sf GFA of building and sales area
Household maintenance and repair 1 per 500 sf GFA
Kennel and or runs: outdoor commercial 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space per 20 boarding units or runs
Laundromat 1 per 300 sf GFA
Lodging establishment: short or extended stay 1 per room offered for occupancy 1 per employee at maximum shift
Manufactured home dealer 1 per employee 1 per every 300 sf GFA of office
Office 1 per 300 sf GFA
Outdoor merchandise sales 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of outside display
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
6-28 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Personal service 1 per 300 sf GFA
Recreation facility: commercial indoor
4 per bowling lane, 1 per game table, other
uses determined by Zoning Administrator
Recreation facility: commercial outdoor
Golf course: 4 per tee, other uses determined
by Zoning Administrator
Restaurant: drive-in 1 per 50 sf GFA of building
Restaurant: sit-down 1 per 75 sf GFA
Restaurant: fast food or carry out
1 per 75 sf GFA for sit-down, 1 per 50 GFA of
building area for carry-out
Retail establishment 1 per 250 sf GFA
Secondhand store (pawn shop) 1 per 250 sf GFA
Tavern 1 per 75 sf GFA
Theater 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 30 sf GFA if no seats
Tool and equipment rental facility 1 per 500 sf GFA of building and rental area
Vehicle sales and/or rental 1 per 300 sf GFA of building
Vehicle repair and/or service 3 spaces per service bay 1 per employee at maximum shift
Veterinary clinic 5 per doctor on largest shift 1 per employee at maximum shift
Warehouse: self-storage 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 visitor space per employee at max. shift
Industrial Uses
All industrial uses 1 per employee at maximum shift
Visitor parking based on specific use and
determined by Zoning Administrator
Public, Civic, and Institutional
Clinic 5 per primary care provider 1 per employee at maximum shift
Club or association 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 30 sf if no seats
College or vocational school 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 per every 3 students
Government or community service 1 per 300 sf GFA
Hospital 1.5 per bed
Nursing home 1 space per 3 beds
1.5 spaces for every 2 employees on
maximum shift
Public park or festival grounds Determined by Zoning Administrator
Religious institution 1 per 4 seats or 1 per every 8 feet of pews
School: elementary or middle 1 per employee at maximum shift
School: senior high 1 per employee at maximum shift 1 per every five students
School: specialty or special instruction 1 per 300 sf GFA
D. Bicycle Parking
1. Intent. It is the intent of this Subsection to promote opportunities for bicycle transportation
by regulating the number and location of required bicycle parking spaces associated with
uses in the City of Ashland.
2. Required bicycle parking spaces. Unless waived by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Approval Authority, a development or use established, expanded, or altered
after the effective date of this Ordinance shall provide a sufficient amount of bicycle
parking spaces. Only spaces that are associated with a bicycle rack or bicycle storage
container shall be considered bicycle parking spaces.
3. Location. Bicycle parking spaces shall be located so as to be visible from the street or the
building entrance from where bicyclists approach. Bicycle parking spaces shall be located
in safe and convenient locations and in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic. Bicycle parking spaces should be designed as an integral part of the
development.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-29
4. Bicycle racks or storage containers. Bicycle racks shall be designed to support bicycles
in an upright position. Enclosed bicycle storage containers shall be lockable by the user.
All bicycle racks or storage containers shall be securely anchored to prevent them from
being removed from the location.
E. Parking Requirement Waivers, Alternatives, and Incentives
This Subsection specifies a variety of waivers, alternatives, and incentives to allow a reduction in
the amount of parking that would otherwise be required by this Ordinance. Any waiver,
alternative, or incentive shall be approved by the applicable approval authority and shall ensure
adequate parking for the use.
1. Shared parking. In accordance with the intent of this Section to
ensure sufficient parking for the various uses in the city while
encouraging efficient use of land and resources, this Subsection sets
forth provisions that allow users to share off-street parking facilities
when feasible. Developments or uses with different operating hours or
peak business periods may share off-street parking spaces if approved
by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Approval Authority
pursuant to the appropriate application associated with a shared
parking request and if the shared parking complies with all of the
following standards:
a. Shared parking study. Those wishing to use shared parking as a
means of satisfying off-street parking requirements shall submit
a shared parking analysis to the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared
parking. The study shall be provided in a form established by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent and made available to the public. It
shall address, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the
composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated
peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking
spaces;
b. Location. Shared parking must be provided within five hundred (500) feet of the
primary entrance of all uses served, unless remote parking shuttle service is provided;
c. Agreement. A shared parking plan shall be enforced through a properly drawn legal
instrument, executed among all parties participating in the shared parking
arrangement, duly approved as to form and manner of execution by the City
Attorney, and filed with the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
Shared parking privileges shall continue in effect only so long as such an instrument,
binding on all parties, remains in force. If such instrument becomes legally
ineffective, then parking shall be provided as otherwise required in this Section.
2. Off-site parking. Pursuant to the issuance of conditional use permit as specified in Section
3.9: Conditional Use Permit, parking may be provided on a parcel separate from the
permitted principal use in accordance with the following:
a. If the use is residential, a bed and breakfast facility, a tourist home, a lodging
establishment, or similar use, the off-site parking shall be within two hundred (200)
feet of the principal entrance or the entrance for individual occupants for whom
spaces are reserved;
Sustainability Tip.
Development, approval,
and implementation of a
transportation
management plan can
help reduce the need for
off-street parking, thereby
providing economic,
environmental, and social
benefits.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
6-30 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
b. If the use is other than stated above, the off-site spaces shall be within one thousand
(1,000) feet of an entrance to the establishment;
c. Distances indicated above shall be measured along routes generally available to the
pedestrians involved;
d. Off-site parking shall be held in fee simple ownership by the same owner as the use
requiring the off-street parking space, or under lease, rental, or other form of
agreement satisfactory to the City Attorney with respect to assuring continuing
availability for required off-site parking for the use.
F. Design Standards for Parking Lots and Parking Spaces
1. Site Plan. Any application for a building permit and/or development permit shall include a
site plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to
be provided in compliance with this Ordinance, excluding required parking for four (4)
spaces or less. The site plan shall be approved by the applicable approval authority and in
accordance with the applicable application procedures specified in Part 2 and/or Part 3 of
this Ordinance respectively.
2. Size of parking and loading spaces. Parking and loading spaces shall be of adequate size
and shape to accommodate the required vehicles. Except when modified by the applicable
review and approval authority, parking spaces shall meet the dimensional requirements
specified in Table 6.3.B and as illustrated in Figure 6.3-F-4. All parking spaces shall have
a minimum width of nine (9) feet. Parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum length of
twenty-three (23) feet and a minimum width of eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet. Loading
spaces to accommodate automobiles shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square
feet in area, exclusive of access. Loading spaces to accommodate tractors and trailers shall
be a minimum of six hundred fifty (650) square feet in area, exclusive of access.
3. Size and number of handicapped parking spaces. The size and number of handicapped
parking spaces shall be as established by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
4. Pedestrian connections. Safe pedestrian ways and crossings shall be provided from the
parking area to the entrance of the building. Driving aisles may be used as pedestrian
ways.
5. Surfacing and drainage. Parking and loading areas shall be graded and drained to dispose
of all surface water accumulated within the area. The method of discharge of such water
shall be consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and subject to the approval of the
Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent. All required parking and loading
spaces and access drives shall be paved with concrete or bituminous pavement. Properly
designed porous pavement, concrete pavers, permeable pavers, or other materials may be
approved by the applicable approval authority provided that design and materials are
consistent with the intent of this Ordinance.
6. Snow storage and removal. Snow storage areas shall be provided on-site where practical
and sited in a manner that is accessible to snow removal vehicles. Storage areas shall not
be less than twenty five percent (25%) of the improved parking, vehicle and pedestrian
circulation areas and shall be landscaped with vegetation that is salt-tolerant and resilient to
heavy snow. Storage areas shall not impede parking spaces, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, vision triangles, line of site, loading, trash storage/pick-up, or service areas or
utilities. Hauling of snow from high density areas is permissible where other options are
not practical.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-31
7. Lighting. Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties so as not to create a
nuisance to neighboring uses or traffic. Lighting shall be consistent with Section 6.7:
Exterior Lighting.
8. Landscaping. Parking areas shall be landscaped as specified in Section 6.4: Landscaping,
Buffers, and Screening.
9. Location. Parking and loading spaces generated by development shall be located on the
same parcel as the use that they are intended to serve unless otherwise provided pursuant to
the provisions of this Section. On street parking may count towards fulfilling parking
requirements where specifically allowed pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
10. Setbacks.
a. This paragraph does not pertain to single-family detached and two-family residential
uses.
b. To the maximum extent practical, parking is encouraged to be to the side or rear of the
principal building.
c. A minimum five (5) foot setback shall be required between any new or reconstructed
parking lot and any interior side parcel line.
d. In no case shall parking be less than fifteen (15) feet from a public right-of way,
except in situations as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent where an existing parking lot is being reconstructed and
conformance with this section would drastically decrease the number of required
parking spaces or, as may be otherwise allowed by this Ordinance including
Subparagraph e. below.
e. For new parking lots proposed in the City Center (CC) District, the Plan Commission
may on a case by case basis, allow a lesser setback from right-of-way lines, while
considering neighboring uses and public health and safety. In determining the
minimum setback from a street or alley right-of-way, approval shall be based on the
following criteria:
(1) Placement of parking area access locations in comparison to street and/or alley
intersections, pedestrian walkways, existing and proposed parking spaces, and
existing driveways;
(2) Location of existing and proposed parking spaces. To prevent encroachment on
to the public right-of-way;
? The setback from parking spaces abutting a street right-of-way line shall
not be less than three (3) feet. This three (3) foot setback may consist of
curbing and landscaping, or the placement of bumper blocks three (3) feet
from the right-of-way line.
? The boundary between a driving aisle and a street right-of-way line shall
be defined by means of curbing, landscaping, fencing, pedestrian barriers
or bumper blocks.
(3) Angle of existing and proposed parking spaces;
(4) Speed of vehicular traffic along adjacent street/s;
(5) Storm water runoff management plan;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.3: Parking and Loading
6-32 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(6) Consistency with other provisions and conditions of any Site Plan Approval,
Conditional Use Permit, or related permit; and
(7) Any other criteria required by the Plan Commission to approve a lesser setback.
Table 6.3.B: Minimum Parking Space and Drive Aisle Dimensions
Parking Angle
(Degrees)
Parking Space Length (Feet) Driving Aisle Width (Feet)
Car-to-Wall Space Interlocking Space One-Way Two-Way
30 17 13 12 19
45 19 16 12 19
60 20 18 16 20
75 20 19 22 22
90 18 18 25 25
Section 6.4 Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
A. Landscaping
1. Intent. This Subsection is intended to provide minimum landscaping and planting
standards for the purpose of promoting and protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the
public by creating an environment that is aesthetically pleasing and that promotes economic
development through an enhanced quality of life. This Subsection is also intended to
promote proper selection, installation, and maintenance of plant materials that result in the
conservation of natural resources.
2. Applicability. The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to the following types of
development:
a. New development. New development that requires site plan approval or a land
division approval as specified in Part 3: Application, Review, and Approval
Procedures.
b. Expansion of existing building, use or parking lot. When a building, use or parking
lot is expanded, the requirements of this Subsection shall apply on an incremental
basis. This means that landscaping is required in the same proportion that the
expanded building area, use or parking lot has to the existing development.
c. Exemptions. The provisions of this Subsection do not apply to following situations:
(1) Single or two-family dwelling not part of a platted subdivision;
(2) Agricultural uses;
(3) The reconstruction of an existing building of which fifty (50) percent or less of
the floor area was destroyed or ruined by flooding, fire, wind storm, or act of
God. This exemption shall apply only where reconstruction of that building
will not result in an increase in building size or paving area of the parking
facilities to be provided;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-33
(4) Interior finish work or remodeling in a portion of a building unless the work
results in an increase in the paving area of the parking facilities or in an
enlargement in the exterior dimensions of the building;
(5) Any use, building, or structure for which only a change of use is requested and
which requires no structural modifications that increase its volume or scale.
3. Landscape plan required. Applications subject to this Subsection shall include a
landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect or other qualified person in accordance
with the provisions of this Subsection. At a minimum, the landscape plan shall include the
following information:
a. General information. Name and address of the developer/owner; name and address
of the landscape architect or designer; date of preparation; date and description of all
revisions; and name of the project or development;
b. Landscape Plan. A scaled drawing of the site based on a survey of the property
showing the following:
(1) Existing and proposed base conditions: indication of scale and north arrow, the
names and right-of-ways of proposed and existing streets; location of all
existing and proposed easements and right-of-ways; existing and proposed
topography at two (2) foot contour intervals; location of proposed and existing
buildings, utilities (underground and overhead), parking areas, water bodies,
walks, and other site features;
(2) Existing and proposed landscaping: the location, size, and identification of all
existing and proposed trees and shrubs with appropriate planting details; the
delineation of areas to be seeded and/or sodded; the location of all existing and
proposed planting beds with the identification of all plant material used; the
location of all existing and proposed hardscape improvements, including
patios, retaining walls, fences, and similar improvements; and the location and
details of irrigation systems;
(3) Planting schedule: a table showing the common and botanical names, the size
(including maximum growth size), root specifications, quantities, and special
planting conditions, or the proposed plantings.
4. Planting requirements. The planting requirements for development subject to this
Subsection shall be as follows:
a. Planting requirements for single and two-family parcels associated with a new
subdivision. Development of one and two-family parcels in a new subdivision shall
provide a minimum of three (3) trees per single-family parcel and a minimum of five
(5) trees per two-family parcel;
b. Planting requirements for uses on parcels other than single and two-family parcels.
Development or redevelopment of all parcels, except one and two-family parcels,
shall comply with the following standards:
(1) For development on parcels less than five (< 5) acres in area, the minimum
number of trees and shrubs shall be based on the undeveloped area.
? Deciduous trees (under 6.4 A., 5., a. (2)): one (1) tree per twenty-five
hundred (2,500) square feet; OR
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
6-34 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
? Coniferous trees (under 6.4 A., 5., a. (3)): one (1) tree per one thousand
(1,000) square feet; AND
? In addition to trees, one (1) shrub shall be required for every one thousand
(1,000) square feet.
(2) For development on parcels greater than five (> 5) acres in area, the minimum
number of trees and shrubs required shall be based on the developed area.
? Deciduous trees (under 6.4 A., 5., a. (2)): one (1) tree per twenty-five
hundred (2,500) square feet of development; OR
? Coniferous trees (under 6.4 A., 5., a. (3)): one (1) tree per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of development; AND
? In addition to trees, one (1) shrub shall be required for every one thousand
(1,000) square feet of development.
c. Planting requirements for new accessory buildings and structures on parcels with
existing development. New accessory buildings and structures shall provide one (1)
tree and two (2) shrubs for every two thousand (2,000) square feet of land
disturbance. New trees and shrubs shall be in addition to vegetation requirements for
previous development. Credit may be given for trees and shrubs installed during
previous development that exceeds current vegetation requirements. This Paragraph
does not pertain to parcels with existing single and two family dwellings.
d. Planting requirements for the interior of parking lots. Parking areas with twenty (20)
or more parking spaces shall have at least ten (10) percent of the total interior parking
area landscaped with plantings. Parking areas with one-hundred (100) or more
spaces shall have at least twenty-five (25) percent of the required ten (10) percent to
be landscaped as planting islands. Planting islands shall have a minimum width of
three (3) feet and a minimum length of nine (9) feet;
e. Street tree requirements for subdivisions. Street trees shall be required to be planted
in the public right-of-way as in accordance with Part 9: Land Divisions and
Improvements. Street trees provided in the public right-of-way shall not be given
credit for contributing to the planting requirements on the parcel;
f. Credit for preservation of existing trees. Sites containing existing deciduous trees
that have an existing diameter of at least eight (8) caliper inches measured at four and
one-half (4-1/2) feet above the root collar and coniferous trees that have an existing
height of at least six (6) feet shall count towards the number of required trees on the
site provided that the trees are preserved;
g. Exceptions to planting requirements. The planting requirements specified in this
Section may not be applicable to all development or redevelopment in the city. For
example, the compact nature of the CC City Center District may not reasonably allow
for the planting of trees as specified in this Section. Consequently, at the discretion
of the applicable approval authority, the approval authority may waive or alter
(without a variance) the planting requirements of this Section when it is determined
that the requirements cannot be reasonably met due to the unique conditions of the
zoning district, the parcel, or the development.
5. Acceptable plant materials. Plant materials shall comply with the following standards:
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-35
a. Minimize size requirements. Trees shall comply with the following minimum size
requirements:
(1) Deciduous trees for one or two-family parcels: one and one-half (1-1/2) caliper
inches, measured at four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the root collar;
(2) Deciduous trees for all other parcels: two and one-half (2-1/2) caliper inches,
measured at four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the root collar;
(3) Coniferous trees or multi-trunk deciduous trees for all parcels: Six (6) feet tall;
(4) Shrubs for all parcels: no less than twenty-four (24) inches in height.
b. Plant species. Plant species shall relate favorably to the conditions for which they are
intended to be placed. Native plants are recommended where appropriate;
c. Species diversity. No more than fifty (50) percent of the trees planted on a
development shall be of the same species;
d. Prohibited plants. No noxious weeds, nuisance weeds, nor invasive woody plants
shall be planted or allowed to grow, pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750:
Property Maintenance.
6. General planting requirements. All development requiring a landscape plan pursuant to
this Ordinance shall comply with the following standards:
a. Undisturbed areas. Undisturbed areas containing viable vegetation may be left in an
undisturbed state pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 750: Property
Maintenance;
b. Disturbed areas. All disturbed areas that are not devoted to buildings, parking,
circulation, patios, and similar uses shall be seeded, sodded, or landscaped with trees,
shrubs, perennials, annual plantings, or other landscaping materials in accordance
with this Subsection;
c. Required sodding or seeding. Unless specifically waived by the approval authority
due to excessively large areas or other limitations, all newly disturbed areas in the
front and side yards shall be covered with sod, landscape plantings, or other
landscape improvements. Rear yards and areas that are part of an approved natural
landscape plan may be seeded or covered with another appropriate groundcover in
lieu of sod;
d. Slopes and berms. Final slopes greater than a 3:1 ratio (thirty-three (33) percent
slope) shall not be permitted without the written approval of the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent;
e. Placement of plant materials. Placement of plant materials shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) No plantings shall be placed in a manner (or be allowed to be maintained in a
manner) that interferes with the required vision triangle as specified in Section
6.1, H: Vision Triangle;
(2) No trees shall be placed in drainage or utility easements without the written
permission of the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
6-36 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(3) No plantings (other than seed or sod associated with maintained lawns) shall be
placed in the public right-of-way without the written approval of the Public
Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent;
(4) Plant material centers shall be located at least three (3) feet from fences and
parcel lines.
f. Time requirement for installation. The landscaping required by this Section shall be
installed to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent within one (1) growing season of building completion or occupancy,
whichever is first. In the event completion or occupancy occurs after September 15,
installation shall be required by June 1 of the following year;
g. Responsibility. The developer shall be responsible for installation of required plant
materials, unless there is no developer in which case the property owner shall be
responsible. After the plantings are installed, the property owner or their authorized
agent shall be responsible for timely replacement of any dead plant materials required
by this Section;
h. Maintenance. All plant material shall be maintained in an attractive and healthy
growing condition at no cost to the City. Additionally, all plant material shall be
maintained as specified in City of Ashland Ordinance 750: Property Maintenance.
7. Tree preservation and replacement. Tree preservation and replacement shall be as
specified in City of Ashland Ordinance 454: Planting, Maintenance & Removal of Trees &
Shrubs.
B. District Boundary Buffers
1. Intent. District boundary buffers are intended to prevent or minimize the use of a more
intense property in one zoning district from negatively affecting a less intense use of an
immediately adjacent property in another zoning district.
2. Requirements. Development or significant redevelopment of a more intense use in a
zoning district that borders a less intense use in another zoning district shall provide a
buffer along the common parcel lines pursuant to the following:
a. Medium to high-density residential buffers. Medium to high-density residential uses
shall provide a minimum ten (10) foot landscaped buffer (in addition to the required
building setback) between adjacent single or two-family residential uses in another
zoning district;
b. Commercial buffers.
(1) Commercial uses shall provide a minimum ten (10) foot landscaped buffer (in
addition to the required building setback) between adjacent medium to high
density residential uses in another zoning district.
(2) Commercial uses shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer
(in addition to the required building setback) between adjacent low density
residential uses in another zoning district.
c. Industrial buffers.
(1) Industrial uses shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer (in
addition to the required building setback) between adjacent commercial uses in
another zoning district.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-37
(2) Industrial uses shall provide a minimum thirty (30) foot landscaped buffer (in
addition to the required building setback) between adjacent residential uses.
d. Other buffers not specifically defined. Where this Ordinance does not clearly define
the required buffer between adjacent uses in different districts, the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall determine the required buffer.
3. Design of buffer. The width of the required buffer shall be in addition to the required
building setback specified in the applicable zoning district. The buffer shall be adequately
landscaped to provide an effective visual screen between the uses. In addition to plantings,
fences, walls, and berms, which comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, may be used
in the buffer to provide an effective screen.
C. Buffers or Screening Between Mixed Uses within the Same District
4. Intent. The City’s Comprehensive Plan and this Ordinance recognize existing and
proposed mixed use areas in the City. However, even in a mixed use situation, it is
beneficial to provide a buffer or screen between more intense and less intense uses; for
example, between a restaurant and a single-family dwelling in a mixed use district.
Therefore, it is the intent of this Subsection to provide standards for buffers and/or screens
between mixed uses within the same district.
5. Requirements. Where proposed development abuts a permitted and less intense use in the
same district, the proposed use shall provide a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped
buffer (in addition to the required building setback) between the proposed development and
the less intense use. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Approval Authority may
reduce the required buffer width (without processing a variance) provided the subject
development provides a fence or wall (consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance),
which provides an adequate buffer or screen between the uses. Buffers or screening shall
be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, except that commercial parking areas abutting
residential uses shall only require a buffer or screen of four and one-half (4 ½) feet in
height.
D. Screening of Equipment, Vehicles, Outdoor Storage, and Similar Uses
1. Intent. This Subsection is intended to provide standards for the screening of parking lots,
structures, equipment, and similar uses from surrounding properties and right-of-ways.
2. Screening of parking lots. Parking lots with five (5) or more spaces shall be screened
from the street right-of-way and adjacent properties to the extent practical, as determined
by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent as follows:
a. Parking lots shall be screened with a landscaped area, no less than five (5) feet wide,
in which plantings and/or berms no less than three (3) feet in height are located; or
b. Parking lots may be screened with a fence or wall between four (4) and six (6) feet in
height. The fence shall be consistent with Section 6.5: Fences.
c. Parking lots in the City Center (CC) District may be exempt from the provisions of
this Paragraph pursuant to Section 6.3 F., 10. if a lesser setback is approved by the
Plan Commission.
3. Screening of mechanical and electrical equipment. Mechanical and electrical equipment
associated with uses other than single and two-family residential uses shall be screened
from public view as follows:
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
6-38 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
a. Rooftop equipment. Rooftop equipment shall be screened using materials that are
harmonious with the subject building. Screening materials may include metal
screening or louvers that are painted to blend in with the surroundings;
b. Wall mounted or ground equipment. To the maximum extent practical, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, buildings
with wall mounted or ground equipment shall provide equipment screening that is an
integral to the design of the building. Where this is not practical, plantings, wood
fences, or masonry walls may be used to screen the equipment from public view;
c. Utility substations. Utility substations shall be screened with a minimum six (6) foot
high screen.
4. Screening of trash containers. Trash dumpsters and other trash containers associated with
uses other than single and two-family residential uses shall be screened to the maximum
extent practical, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent, as follows:
a. Trash containers shall be screened on all four (4) sides, using an enclosure that is a
minimum of one(1) foot above the container;
b. The trash enclosure shall be constructed of materials that are harmonious with those
of the principal structure;
c. The gate or door of the trash enclosure shall be closed at all times except as needed to
access the trash containers.
5. Screening of loading docks. Loading and service areas shall be screened to the maximum
extent practical, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent, as follows:
a. Loading and service areas shall be located at the rear of buildings and shall be
screened from view of any street or adjacent parcel;
b. Loading and service areas shall be enclosed on three sides by a wall or other
screening device not less than eight (8) feet in height;
c. Screening materials shall be comprised of a wall that is harmonious with the primary
structure.
6. Screening of outdoor storage for commercial and industrial uses. Permitted outdoor
storage and outdoor storage areas associated with commercial or industrial uses shall be
screened as follows:
a. Outdoor storage areas exposed to view from any street adjacent to the parcel on
which the storage is located shall be screened by a six (6) foot high sight-obscuring
fence, wall, landscape berm, or planting strip when approved by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent;
b. Materials covered by buildings with roofs only, but without any sides, shall be
considered outdoor storage and shall be subject to the screening provisions of this
Subsection. This provision shall not apply to the display of new or used agricultural
implements, motor vehicles, trailers, or watercraft where such activities are an
integral part of an automobile, agricultural implement, or watercraft dealership or
storage facility;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.4: Landscaping, Buffers, and Screening
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-39
c. Screening of outdoor salvage yards shall be consistent with Section 5.3, B.:
Recycling Facilities and Indoor and/or Outdoor Salvage Operations.
Section 6.5 Fences
A. Intent
The intent of this Section is to regulate the materials, location, height, and maintenance of fences,
gates, arbors and walls to prevent the creation of nuisances and to protect the safety and general
welfare of the public.
B. Compliance and Required Fence Permit
1. Compliance. It shall be unlawful to construct or cause to be constructed a fence, gate,
arbor, or wall that does not meet the provisions of this Section.
2. Required fence permit. No fence, gate, arbor or wall (except those specifically exempted
by this Section) shall be constructed without first having obtained an approved fence permit
from the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, or Designated Authorized Agent,
pursuant to Section 3.43: Fence Permit.
3. Fences not requiring a fence permit. The following types of fences shall not require the
issuance of a fence permit. However, the fence may not be located in the public right-ofway
and must comply with the provisions of this Paragraph.
a. Temporary snow fences. For the purpose of catching windblown snow, the erection
of temporary snow fences shall not require a fence permit, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) The fence shall not be erected prior to October 30 and shall not remain later
than April 15 of each year; and
(2) At no point shall the fence be a safety concern for pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
b. Temporary construction fences. Fences on construction and excavation sites for
erosion control, the protection of plants, and the protection of the construction site
shall not require a permit, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Fences are approved by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent;
(2) The fence may be standing for no more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days per calendar year, unless approved
by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent; and
(3) The fence material shall comply with general fence
types allowed by this Section, unless approved by
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent.
c. Seasonal garden fences and arbors. Fences made of wire,
plastic, or wood shall be allowed around garden areas
without a permit, provided the following conditions are
met:
(1) The fence shall not exceed seventy-two (72) inches in height; and
Diggers Hotline.
All property owners are
required by Wisconsin
Statute 182.0175 to call
Diggers Hotline prior to
installing a fence. For
more information go to:
www.diggershotline.com
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.5: Fences
6-40 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) The fence shall be removed at the end of the growing season.
C. General Design Standards
1. Type, material and maintenance. All fences and walls shall comply with the following
criteria:
a. Fences and walls should be constructed in a manner and of such materials and colors
that do not adversely affect the appearance of the neighborhood or adjacent property
values;
b. Fences and walls hereafter erected shall be durable, weather resistant, rust proof, and
easily maintained;
c. Fences and walls shall be constructed of new or like new materials;
d. All fences and walls shall be installed in a workmanlike manner, be maintained in
good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in safe and sound condition;
e. All fences shall be protected from the elements and against decay and rust by the
periodic application of weather-coating material, such as paint or other protective
treatment as applicable;
f. The finished appearance of fences and walls shall be constructed with the higher
quality finish directed toward the exterior of the parcel if the visual quality of the
fence or wall is not the same on both sides;
g. Metallic cyclone type or other open grid fences shall not be used as required
screening between uses, except slatted fencing may be used in rear or side yards
abutting a rear or side yard. Metallic cyclone fences shall not be used in front yards,
except for industrial uses in industrial districts. Woven wire fencing is prohibited in
Residential Districts.
h. Front yard fences and walls for residential uses or located in residential districts shall
be fifty percent (50%) open fencing at a minimum.
2. Height. All fence and wall heights shall be measured from the average grade (measured at
a point three (3) feet on each side of the fence or wall) to the top of the fence or wall.
Fence height shall comply with the following standards:
a. Residential uses.
(1) Front yard: Four (4) feet maximum.
(2) Side yards: The maximum height in a side yard adjacent to a street is four (4)
feet. When the side yard does not abut a neighbor’s front yard, the maximum
height is six (6) feet.
(3) Rear yard. The fence or wall shall not be taller than six (6) feet, except when a
rear yard abuts a neighbor’s front yard the maximum height is four (4) feet.
(4) Corner side yard. In a corner side yard, if installed with a minimum setback of
ten (10) feet from the front face of the principal building and a minimum of
fifteen (15) feet from the side corner parcel line, a fence or wall may have a
maximum height of six (6) feet.
b. Commercial and public/institutional uses.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.5: Fences
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-41
(1) Front yard: Four (4) feet maximum, except with the issuance of a conditional
use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit, up to eight (8)
feet may be permitted.
(2) Side yards: The maximum height in a side yard adjacent to a street is four (4)
feet. When the side yard does not abut a neighbor’s front yard, the maximum
height is six (6) feet, except with the issuance of a conditional use permit
pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit, up to eight (8) feet may be
permitted.
(3) Rear yard. The fence or wall shall not be taller than six (6) feet, except when a
rear yard abuts a neighbor’s front yard the maximum height is four (4) feet.
With the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit, up to eight (8) feet may be permitted.
(4) Corner side yard. In a corner side yard, if installed with a minimum setback of
ten (10) feet from the front face of the principal building and a minimum of
fifteen (15) feet from the side corner parcel line, a fence or wall may have a
maximum height of six (6) feet.
c. Industrial uses.
(1) Front yard: Four (4) feet maximum, except with the issuance of a conditional
use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit, up to eight (8)
feet may be permitted.
(2) Side yards: The maximum height in a side yard adjacent to a street is six (6)
feet, unless increased through issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit. When the side yard does not abut a
neighbor’s front yard, the maximum height is eight (8) feet.
(3) Rear yard. The fence or wall shall not be taller than eight (8) feet, except when
a rear yard abuts a neighbor’s front yard the maximum height is four (4) feet.
With the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit, up to eight (8) feet may be permitted.
d. Fences and walls shall be allowed to exceed the height requirements of this Section
with the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional
Use Permit.
e. Arbors, as part of a fence or wall may not exceed a maximum height or width of
eight (8) feet.
3. Location. The location of all fences and walls shall comply with the following:
a. Fences and walls may be located on the parcel line, except where otherwise indicated
in this Section.
b. No fence or wall shall be located within an easement area without first obtaining all
applicable authorizations, including the prior approval of the Building Inspector or
Designated Authorized Agent.
c. No fence or wall shall be located within the public right-of-way and in no case shall a
fence or wall be located closer than five (5) feet to the paved edge of a street (or face
of curb) nor three (3) feet to the edge of an alley right-of-way.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.5: Fences
6-42 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
d. No wall or fence shall be permitted that materially impedes the required vision
triangle as specified in Section 6.1, H.: Vision Triangle.
e. All fences and walls shall be located at least thirty five (35) feet from the ordinary
high water mark of lakes, and navigable rivers, creeks, and streams, and at least ten
(10) feet from wetlands, except those fences constructed pursuant to Chapter 90 of
the Wisconsin State Statutes.
f. The framing and posts of wood, chain link, picket, stockade, and decorative metal
fences shall face the inside of the parcel area fenced.
D. Special Provisions and Requirements
1. Fence or wall intended to serve as a swimming pool barrier. A fence or wall may serve
as a swimming pool barrier provided that is complies with all applicable provisions for a
swimming pool barrier as specified in Section 5.6, L., 8.: Swimming Pool Barrier.
2. Barbed wire and security fences. Barbed wire and security fences shall be permitted by
conditional use permit only, except that barbed wire fences shall be permitted for the
purpose of fencing livestock on a parcel with an area of five (5) acres or more.
3. Electric fences. No electric fencing is permitted without demonstration of need for the
fencing. Electrified fencing shall be allowed in any District, excluding the R-1, R-2, R-3
and R-4 Districts, only if approved in writing by the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent. Visible signage shall be required along the electrical fencing giving
warning to the public.
4. Nonconforming fence or wall. A nonconforming fence or wall, excluding seasonal
electric fences, may continue pursuant to Section 10.5, B.: Nonconforming Site Features.
Section 6.6 Signs
This section shall be applied and interpreted so as to eliminate any regulation or differential
treatment based on content, except where required to protect public health and safety and where
essential to provide directional or locational information. No provision of this section which
purports to regulate or differentially treat signage based on content, except as provided in the
foregoing sentence, shall be enforced.
A. Intent
This Section is intended to accomplish the following:
1. Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the City while
preserving the rights of free speech under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution;
2. Permit signage that is designed, constructed, installed, and maintained in an aesthetically
pleasing manner;
3. Encourage a positive business atmosphere;
4. Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Ashland and preserve or
enhance property values;
5. Eliminate excessive and confusing signs that create potential hazards to motorists,
pedestrians, and property;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-43
6. Effectively regulate issues pertaining to the location, size, height, and lighting of signs in an
effort to assure compatibility with adjoining land uses, architecture, and landscape; and
7. Provide for consistent and fair application and enforcement of regulations pertaining to
signs.
B. Administration and Sign Permits Required
1. Administration. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall be
responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this Section. The Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall examine all sign permit applications,
issue permits and denials, authorize the continued use of signs that conform with the
requirements of this Ordinance, record and file all applications for permits with any
accompanying plans and documents, make inspections of signs in the City of Ashland, and
make such reports as the City may require.
2. Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, relocate,
or structurally modify a sign or cause the same to be done in the City of Ashland without
first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the City of Ashland as specified in
Section 3.36: Sign Permit. Signs not requiring a permit, as specified in Section 6.6, C.
below, shall be exempt from this requirement.
3. Sign permit appeal. In the event the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent denies a sign permit application, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Zoning
Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 3.11: Appeal of and Administrative Decision.
4. Violations. Any person, firm, association, or corporation found in violation of this section
may be subject to a monetary penalty or other remedy pursuant to Part 11: Violations and
Remedies.
C. Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit
Sign permits shall not be required for a change of copy on any sign, nor for the re-painting,
cleaning, and other normal maintenance and repair of the sign and sign structure. In addition,
sign permits shall not be required for the following signs provided the signs comply with the
standards under Section 6.6 E: General Provisions, Design, Maintenance, and Removal
Standards, 1.-9., and the following standards:
1. Awning and canopy signs. Signage that does not exceed one line of copy on the valance
(or apron) of an awning or canopy shall not require a sign permit provided the individual
letters or graphics do not exceed nine (9) inches in height and it is not illuminated.
Awnings and canopies shall comply with the dimensional standards specified in Section
6.6, F., 1: Awning and Canopy Signs.
2. City banners installed on City-owned poles. City banners installed on City-owned poles
shall not require a sign permit.
3. Construction signs. Construction signs shall not require a sign permit provided that no
more than two (2) construction signs shall be allowed per construction site, that no sign
shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet of sign and graphic area each, and such signs
shall not be illuminated. The signs shall be confined to the construction site and shall be
removed within thirty (30) days after completion of construction or prior to occupancy,
whichever is sooner.
4. Informational signs. Informational signs shall not require a sign permit provided they
comply with the following standards:
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-44 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
a. Informational signs shall be located entirely on the parcel to which they pertain, shall
be located no closer than five (5) feet to any parcel line, and shall not be located
within the required vision triangle specified in Section 6.1, H.: Vision Triangle;
b. Signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per entrance;
c. Signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet each in area;
d. Informational signs intended to designate parking-only or no-parking areas, where
the sign is attached to the building façade or a post not to exceed a height of six (6)
feet from the ground or top of curb, should be visible only from the parking area,
shall be limited to one (1) sign per 4 parking spaces, and shall not exceed two (2)
square feet in area each;
e. Freestanding informational signs shall not exceed a height of two and one-half (2-
1/2) feet from the ground or top of curb (whichever provides greater visibility) to the
top of the sign;
f. Informational signs shall not in any way advertise a business or list goods or services
for sale.
5. Governmental flags. Flags of the United States, State of Wisconsin, City of Ashland, and
any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent
jurisdiction are permitted in all zoning districts without a sign permit provided they comply
with the following standards. Flags that exceed the following standards may be considered
pursuant to the conditional use permit process.
a. There shall be no more than three (3) flagpoles per parcel;
b. Flagpoles shall not exceed the allowable building height in the district in which the
flagpole is located, but in no case shall the height of the flagpole exceed a height of
thirty-five (35) feet;
c. The total area of all flags combined shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet;
d. Lighting of flags compliant with this sub-section shall be exempt from lighting
standards pursuant to Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting;
e. Property owners are encouraged to lower all flags at sunset and during inclement
weather.
6. Government/Public/Institutional signs. Government signs erected for control of traffic
and other regulatory purposes, directional signs, railroad crossing signs, signs of public
utilities indicating danger, and aids to service or safety, which are erected by or on the
order of a public officer in the performance of his or her duty. Public signs as specifically
authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute, or ordinance. Institutional signs erected
to display educational facility/campus locations, building identification, transportation
routes, or similar institutional uses not visible or intended to be visible from public street
rights-of-way or adjacent non-institutional parcels.
7. Home occupation signs. Home occupation signs shall not require a sign permit provided
that they are non-illuminated wall or ground signs that do not exceed six (6) square feet in
area, and advertise an allowable or permitted home occupation pursuant to Section 5.1, F:
Home Occupations. No more than one (1) home occupation sign shall be allowed per
residential property.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-45
8. House or building numbers and name plates. House numbers and name plates not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area shall be allowed for each building without the
issuance of a sign permit.
9. Interior signs. Interior signs shall not require a sign permit provided that they are located
within the interior of the building or structure. This does not, however, exempt such signs
from the structural, electrical, or material specifications of this Ordinance.
10. Memorial signs, plaques, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection. Memorial
signs, plaques, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection that are cut into a masonry
surface or inlaid so as to be part of a building or when constructed of bronze or other
noncombustible material not more than four (4) square feet of area shall be allowed for any
building, without the issuance of a sign permit.
11. No trespassing or no dumping signs. No trespassing or no dumping signs shall be
allowed without the issuance of a sign permit provided that they do not exceed two (2)
square feet in area per sign.
12. Political and campaign signs. Political and campaign signs on behalf of candidates for
public office or measures on election ballots shall be allowed without a sign permit
pursuant to Section 12.04 of the Wisconsin Statutes and as follows. If a conflict exists
between provisions of this Ordinance and Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Statutes shall take
precedence.
a. Said signs may be erected no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the primary election
and shall be removed within fifteen (15) days following said election;
b. Signs shall be placed on private property with the consent of the property owner,
shall not be located within public rights-of-way; and
c. Each sign, except billboards as permitted by this Ordinance, shall not exceed eight
(8) square feet associated with residential properties or sixteen (16) square feet
associated with non-residential properties.
13. Public notices. Public notices posted by Designated Authorized Agents of the City or
other official Governmental Agencies shall not require a sign permit.
14. Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be allowed on any parcel, without the issuance of
a sign permit, subject to the following provisions:
a. A real estate sign shall not be illuminated;
b. No more than one (1) real estate sign shall be allowed per parcel, except where a
parcel has frontage on two or more public streets, said parcel shall be allowed
placement of real estate signs on each frontage;
c. A real estate sign shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the sale, rental, or
lease has been accomplished;
d. For residential uses, a real estate sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and
six (6) feet in height;
e. For non-residential uses, a real estate sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
in area and twelve (12) feet in height;
f. A real estate sign shall be located outside of the public right-of-way.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-46 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
15. Symbols or insignia on premise. Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of
recognized historic agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders or historic
agencies shall be allowed without the issuance of a sign permit provided that they do not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
16. Temporary promotional banners. Temporary promotional banners may be installed in
any district without the issuance of a sign permit pursuant to the following standards,
except that if the standards listed under 17.b. or 17.c. are exceeded, a temporary sign permit
shall be obtained pursuant to Section 3.36: Sign Permit:
a. No temporary promotional banner shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area;
b. No temporary promotional banner shall be allowed to be displayed more than seven
(7) consecutive days per calendar year;
c. No use shall have more than one (1) promotional banner per building side, except
that if a parcel contains more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of linear frontage, two
(2) promotional banners may be allowed on one (1) side;
d. Temporary promotional banners shall be constructed of durable weather resistant
fabric, be non-illuminated and shall be securely attached to the building structure;
e. Where a building structure does not exist, the temporary promotional banner may be
erected on a parcel using posts, as approved by the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent.
17. Temporary signs: on-premise. On-premise temporary signs may be installed in any
district without the issuance of a sign permit pursuant to the following standards, except
that if the standards listed under 18.a., 18.c. or 18.d. are exceeded, a temporary sign permit
shall be obtained pursuant to Section 3.36: Sign Permit:
a. No use shall have more than one (1) on-premise temporary sign per parcel side;
b. No on-premise temporary sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and
shall be made of durable and weather resistant materials;
c. No on-premise temporary sign shall be allowed to be displayed more than three (3)
consecutive days per calendar year;
d. Temporary personal property sale signs pertaining to the sale of personal property,
such as, but not limited to, a vehicle, boat, or storage building, shall only be
displayed on such item until sold, but not exceeding one (1) year, and shall not
exceed four (4) square feet in area;
e. Display of temporary garage or yard sale signs shall not exceed the length of the sale
and must be placed outside of the public right-of-way.
18. Temporary signs: off-premise pertaining to civic events.
a. Non-City-owned parcels. Signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area each,
shall not be located in a vision triangle and shall be posted no more than three (3)
days prior to and one (1) day following the event, unless otherwise approved by the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
b. City-owned parcels (excluding City-owned parks or rights-of-way). Signs proposed
to be located on a City-owned parcel shall require approval from the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. Signs shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet in area each, shall not be located in a vision triangle and shall be posted
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-47
no more than three (3) days prior to and one (1) day following the event, unless
otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
c. Public rights-of-way. Signs proposed to be located in public rights-of-way
(excluding Sidewalk Signs permitted under Section 3.45) may be allowed upon
issuance of a Right-of-Way Permit by the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent and pursuant to any regulations and standards in City of Ashland
Ordinance 508.
19. Temporary signs: City-owned park. Temporary signs proposed to be located in a Cityowned
park may be allowed upon approval of the Parks and Recreation Committee or
Designated Authorized Agent.
20. Vehicular signs. Trucks, buses, trailers, or other vehicles while operating in the normal
course of business, which is not primarily the display of signs, shall not require a sign
permit.
21. Window signs.
a. Permanent window signs. Permanent window signs shall not require a sign permit
provided that they are not illuminated and do not cover more than twenty-five (25)
percent of the window area on each elevation of a building. All window signs shall
be placed on the interior surface of the glass.
b. Temporary window signs. Temporary window signs, such as community
announcements and special events posters, posted for no more than thirty (30) days,
shall not require a permit. Temporary window signs may not impede on door
windows or other windows that need to be clear for pedestrian safety.
D. Prohibited Signs
The following signs shall be prohibited in the City of Ashland. Existing nonconforming signs,
excluding abandoned signs, may continue pursuant to the nonconforming provisions specified in
Section 10.6: Nonconforming Signs.
1. Abandoned signs. Abandoned signs that advertise an activity, business, product, or
service no longer available, shall be prohibited.
2. Painted signs on the face of a structure. Painting a sign directly on the face of a
structure, boulder, or similar feature shall be prohibited, except that painted murals may be
approved pursuant to Section 5.6, I.: Public Art.
3. Portable signs and portable reader boards. Portable signs (including, but not limited to,
signs placed or installed on a trailer or vehicle not operating in the normal course of
business) and portable reader boards shall be prohibited except when allowed as a
temporary sign pursuant to Section 6.6, C.: Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit or a
sidewalk sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Sign.
4. Roof signs. Roof signs, including signs mounted on a roof surface or projecting above the
roof line of a structure if either attached to the structure (or cantilevered over the structure)
shall be prohibited, except with the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section
3.9: Conditional Use Permit.
5. Signs with flashing, blinking, or traveling lights. Signs with flashing, blinking, or
traveling lights, or erratic or other moving parts.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-48 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
6. Signs affixed to trees, lamp posts, or utility poles. Signs affixed to trees, lamp posts,
utility poles, or similar features located in public rights-of-way shall be prohibited.
7. Signs affixed to satellite dishes, wind energy facilities or telecommunication towers.
Graphic designs or advertising, excluding communication call letters or frequencies,
affixed to satellite dishes, wind energy facilities, telecommunication towers or other similar
features shall be prohibited pursuant to Section 5.4, A., 1., d. Satellite dishes between three
(3) feet and twelve (12) feet in diameter, Section 5.4, D., 3., i. Design Standards and
Section 5.4, A., 2., i. (11) Wireless telecommunication facilities.
8. Signs within the public right-of-way. No sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way,
except as expressly permitted by this Section. Any sign placed in the ROW and not
removed in a timely manner by the owner of the adjacent property after written notification
from the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent may be removed by the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. Signs that have been removed by
City Staff will be held at the Ashland City Hall for at least two (2) weeks before proper
disposal, and may be claimed by the business owner during that time.
9. Any sign not expressly permitted. Any sign not expressly permitted by this Section shall
be prohibited.
E. General Provisions, Design, Maintenance, and Removal Standards
1. Compatibility. To the maximum extent practical, signs shall be compatible and
complimentary to their surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting.
Buildings and sites shall be designed so that the signs are an integral part of the building
and/or site. Signs shall not visually detract from other conforming signs.
2. Protection of First Amendment rights. Any sign under this Ordinance may contain, in
lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct
attention to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location.
3. Sign measurements. Sign area and sign height measurements shall be calculated as
follows:
a. Sign copy and graphic area. The sign copy and graphic area shall be calculated by
means of the smallest four-sided figure (such as a rectangle) that encompasses the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or
used to differentiate the sign and copy graphic area from the structure;
b. Sign structure area. Where a maximum allowable sign structure is specified in this
section, the sign structure area shall include the sign copy and graphic area as well as
the structure on which the sign copy and graphic are placed. The sign structure area
generally applies to freestanding signs;
c. Sign structure height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the
average grade (measured at a point three (3) feet on each side of the sign) to the top
of the sign structure. Where a freestanding sign is located adjacent to a street that is
above the ground elevation of the proposed freestanding sign, the height of the
freestanding sign shall be measured from the elevation of the road centerline
immediately adjacent to the sign, rather than the elevation at the base of the sign;
d. Double sided signs. The sign copy and graphic area of a double sided sign with
identical sign copy and graphics on both sides shall be calculated based on the sign
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-49
and copy graphic area of one side of the sign provided that the angle between the two
sign faces does not exceed forty-five (45) degrees.
4. Buildings with a secondary public entrance at the rear or side of the building. In
addition to the allowable signage associated with a use in a particular district, commercial,
public, and institutional uses that have a secondary entrance for the public that does not
front a public right-of-way, may have, at the secondary entrance, one (1) sign not to exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet.
5. Placement of signs. The placement of signs shall comply with the following standards.
a. Minimum required distance from parcel lines. All signs shall be placed at least five
(5) feet from all parcel lines.
b. Outside the required vision triangle. No sign shall obstruct the required vision
triangle as specified in Section 6.1, H.: Vision Triangle.
c. Outside the drainage and utility easements. No sign shall be placed in a drainage,
utility, or other easement without first obtaining all applicable authorizations.
6. Design and construction standards. All signs shall comply with the following
construction standards:
a. All signs shall be designed by a sign contractor or individual/firm with demonstrated
experience in designing business signs and working knowledge of building codes,
electrical codes, and construction standards applicable to sign design and
construction;
b. All signs shall comply with all applicable building and electrical codes;
c. All signs shall be constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials;
d. All freestanding signs shall be self-supporting structures and permanently attached to
sufficient foundations;
e. Electrical service to signs shall comply with the applicable electrical codes. No sign
shall have exposed electrical wires. Electrical service to signs shall be concealed
wherever possible to preserve aesthetic values;
f. All signs, except those attached flat against the wall of a building, shall be
constructed to withstand wind loads pursuant to the requirements of the applicable
building codes;
g. Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design. Angle irons, chains,
or wires used for supports or braces shall be hidden from public view to the extent
technically feasible;
h. All signs shall be marked with the manufacturer’s name and all other information as
required by the applicable building and electrical codes;
i. The use of unshielded lighting, including exposed light bulbs hung or strung on
poles, wires, or any other support intended to illuminate a sign or other advertising
device, is prohibited;
j. All sign lighting shall be so designed, located, shielded, or hooded to prevent the
casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent roadways, surrounding properties or into
the sky. All property/business owners are encouraged to turn off all unnecessary
lighting after hours;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-50 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
k. Neon window signs or other exterior neon displays may be permitted in cases where
they are custom designed to be compatible with the architectural character of the
building and where their color has been selected to harmonize with the exterior colors
of the building;
l. Any sign that is accessible to vehicles shall have a minimum vertical clearance of
sixteen (16) feet.
m. Signs containing manual changeable copy or electronic reader boards shall have less
than thirty (30) percent of the entire sign area dedicated to changeable copy or reader
boards. Fuel price displays shall not be included in changeable copy calculation.
7. Installation and maintenance. All signs shall be installed and maintained as follows:
a. Safety. All signs shall be installed and maintained in a workmanlike manner using
equipment that is adequate and safe for the task. Electric signs shall be installed in
accordance with the applicable electrical code;
b. Indemnification for sign installation and maintenance. All persons engaged in the
business of installing or maintaining signs that involves in whole or in part, the
erection, alteration, relocation, or maintenance of a sign or other sign work in, over,
or immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way or public property that is used or
encroached upon by the sign contractor, shall hold the City of Ashland harmless and
indemnify the City of Ashland, its officers, agents, and employees from any and all
claims for bodily injury or property damage resulting from the erection, alteration,
relocation, or maintenance of signs or any other sign work;
8. Maintenance and repair. All signs for which a permit is required, shall be maintained in
good repair in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall be properly anchored
so as to be kept in safe and sound condition. All signs shall be protected from the elements
and against decay and rust by the periodic application of weather-coating material, such as
paint or other protective treatment as applicable;
9. Removal of signs. Signs shall be removed as follows:
a. Deteriorated, dilapidated, or abandoned signs. The Zoning Administrator, Building
Inspector, or Designated Authorized Agent shall cause to be removed any
deteriorated, dilapidated, or abandoned sign as defined by this Ordinance or the
applicable building code;
b. Unsafe signs. When any sign becomes unsecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise
unsafe, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation
of any provisions of this Ordinance, the owner thereof, or the person or firm
maintaining same, shall, upon notice of the Zoning Administrator, Building
Inspector, or Designated Authorized Agent, in a reasonable time frame, make such
sign conform with the provisions of this Ordinance or shall remove it. If the order is
not complied with, the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or Designated
Authorized Agent may remove such sign at the expense of the owner of lessee
thereof;
c. Removal of signs. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall
cause to be removed any abandoned sign including all supporting sign structures by
the owner of record of the property.
10. Nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign may continue pursuant to Section 10.6:
Nonconforming Signs.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-51
F. General Standards for Specific Types of Signs
This Subsection specifies general standards for specific types of signs. Refer to Section 6.6, E.:
General Provisions, Design, Maintenance, and Removal Standards for additional requirements.
1. Awning and canopy signs. All awning or canopy signs that exceed one line of copy
and/or contain letters or graphics over nine (9) inches in height shall require the issuance of
a sign permit. Where a sign permit is required, the area of the sign shall count toward the
total allowable area for wall signs in the applicable zoning district. In addition, all awnings
and canopies shall comply with the following standards:
a. Illumination. Illuminated awning and canopy signs shall not have the light source
visible when viewing the sign;
b. Clearance above grade. The bottom of an awning shall be at least one hundred (100)
inches above grade. The bottom of a canopy shall be at least ten (10) feet above
grade;
c. Required distance from street or parking lot curb. Awning and canopy signs shall not
extend closer than five (5) feet to the vertical plane of the face of a street curb, or if
no curb exists, closer than six (6) feet to the edge of the street, street right-of-way, or
parking lot as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent.
2. Electrically or mechanically energized animated sign. All electrically or mechanically
energized animated signs, also referred to as Electronic Message Centers or EMCs, as
defined, shall comply with the following standards:
a. Applicability. EMCs shall be allowed pursuant to the specifications of this
section except that no EMC shall be allowed within the boundaries of the
West 2nd Street Historic District as listed in the National or State Registers
Record.
b. Application and review. Application for such sign shall be submitted pursuant to
Section 3.36: Sign Permit.
c. Decision criteria. The Zoning Administrator or authorized agent shall consider all
relevant criteria specified in Section 6.6 E.: General Provisions, Design, Maintenance,
and Removal Standards and other sections of this ordinance. In addition the following
decision criteria and regulations shall be used in reviewing the application:
(1) Dimmable technology shall be installed and utilized to adjust the light output of
the EMC based on the ambient light such that it dims automatically when it is
less bright outside.
(2) EMC signage for all parcels must be turned off between the hours of 8 p.m. and 7
a.m. If a business is staffed and open before or after that time period, the EMC
signage must be turned off no later than sixty (60) minutes after the close of
business for the day and turned back on no earlier than sixty (60) minutes before
the business opens for the day.
(3) Signage on parcels abutting residential properties or separated by a Right-of-Way
shall be designed and located in such a manner that does not create an adverse
residential nuisance, taking into account brightness, direction, location, or other
factors.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-52 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(4) The sign shall be located and designed so that it does not significantly alter or
obstruct Lake Superior vistas of adjacent property owners and for major view
corridors.
(5) The time change of copy, messages or graphics on an animated sign shall not
change more than once every eight (8) seconds, except that all signs within view
of vehicular or pedestrian safety lighting (such as stop lights) shall not change
more than once every one (1) minute.
(6) Within view of safety lighting, colors or shapes shall not be used that could be
confused for safety lighting.
3. Freestanding sign. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a monument sign, multiple pole
sign, or single pole sign shall be considered a freestanding sign. Monument signs are the
preferred freestanding signs in the city. Unless specified otherwise in this Section, all
freestanding signs shall comply with the following standards:
a. Allowable sign area and sign height. The allowable sign area and sign height shall be
as specified in the applicable zoning district;
b. Monument sign base. In the case of a freestanding monument sign, the width of the
base of the sign shall be at least sixty (60) percent of the width of the sign;
c. Materials. Freestanding signs shall be constructed of durable and quality materials
that are compatible with surrounding development. In the case of a monument sign,
the base and exposed foundation shall be covered with a finished material such as
brick, stone, metal, or wood;
d. Landscaping. Freestanding signs shall provide an attractive landscaped area around
the entire base of the sign to complement the sign. The property owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the landscaping;
e. Single or double-faced. A freestanding sign may be single or double faced. The
allowable sign copy and graphic area shall be calculated on only one side of a
double-faced sign provided that the angle between the two sign faces does not exceed
forty-five (45) degrees;
f. Allowable number. There shall be a maximum of one (1) freestanding sign per
interior parcel, except where specifically allowed otherwise in this Section. Through
parcels and multiple frontage parcels may have one (1) additional freestanding sign.
4. Joint / Area identification signs.
a. Applicability. Notwithstanding all other provisions of this ordinance related to signs,
the following shall apply.
(1) Existing developments. Owners of contiguous or nearly-contiguous parcels are
eligible to co-apply for a Joint Sign to be reviewed by the Plan Commission in
accordance with Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit and sub-paragraph b.
below.
(2) New development or redevelopment. Pursuant to sub-paragraph c. below, the
Plan Commission may require Joint Signage as part of any proposals for new
development or redevelopment requiring Site Plan Approval pursuant to
Section 3.20: Site Plan Approval, a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Section
3.9: Conditional Use Permit, or a related action by the Plan Commission.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-53
b. Existing development – voluntary joint sign applications.
(1) Joint sign application. The joint sign application shall denote all the parcels to
be included, and all owners thereof shall be party to said application.
(2) Joint sign determination. As part of the approval of any application for a joint
sign, the Plan Commission shall issue a joint sign determination in accordance
with sub-paragraph d. below.
c. New development or redevelopment – joint sign determinations. A joint sign
determination in accordance with sub-paragraph d. below shall be required for new
development or redevelopment when the following applies:
(1) Consolidation of multiple freestanding signs would protect and promote the
public interest and be consistent with the intents of this ordinance and the
Comprehensive Plan; AND
(2) The joint sign will identify two (2) or more parcels, any one of which has no
frontage on an arterial street or has less than three hundred (300) feet of
frontage on an arterial street; OR
(3) One (1) or more freestanding signs identify, or are proposed to identify, two (2)
or more business or organizations on a parcel, and the total area of all existing
or proposed signs exceeds, or is proposed to exceed, the allowable sign area for
the district in which it is located.
d. Joint sign determination. Where a joint sign determination is required by the Plan
Commission, the following shall apply.
(1) Parcels to be included. The joint sign determination shall identify all parcels to
be included in the joint sign. Parcels subject to a joint sign determination shall
obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use
Permit and a joint sign permit pursuant to Section 3.36: Sign Permit. After the
date of the joint sign determination, all current and future owners and/or
occupants of said parcels shall comply with the terms of the joint sign
determination and sign permit.
(2) Existing freestanding signs. Where businesses or parcels are required to utilize
a joint sign, any existing freestanding sign(s) for those businesses/parcels shall
be reviewed by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall determine
as nonconforming any freestanding sign that advertises said businesses/parcels,
except that freestanding directional signs may be excluded from the
determination of this sub-paragraph at the discretion of the Plan Commission.
Signs determined as nonconforming signs shall be brought into conformity by
incorporation into a joint sign in accordance with the conditions of the
determination. The Plan Commission in consultation with the property
owner/s and, if applicable, the developer/s shall determine a date by which the
nonconforming freestanding sign (and support structure) will be brought into
compliance and removed from the site.
(3) New freestanding signs. All parcels affected by a joint sign determination of
the Plan Commission shall, after the date of said determination, be ineligible
for permits for freestanding signs as provided by Section 6.6, F., 3.:
Freestanding Signs, and shall only be eligible for sign permits for inclusion in
the joint sign as a joint sign subunit.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-54 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(4) Other signs. For businesses affected by a joint sign determination, wallmounted,
projecting, or other signs may be permissible pursuant to Section 6.6:
Signs.
(5) Administration. The Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
shall enforce all conditions of the joint sign determination and joint sign permit
until such time as they are repealed or modified by the Plan Commission. The
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall maintain a
permanent record of joint sign determinations and affected parcels. All owners
of affected parcels shall record the joint sign determination and conditions of
permit approval with the Register of Deeds.
e. Joint sign permit. Approval of designs for a joint sign or area identification sign
required.
(1) The Plan Commission shall review permit applications for a joint sign or area
identification sign, which the Plan Commission may approve pursuant to
review criteria of Section 3.20, C: Site Plan, Approval Criteria and this subparagraph,
and thereafter the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent may issue a sign permit for said sign.
(2) Joint signs and area identification signs shall comply with both general and
district-specific sign requirements for construction, setbacks, and height.
Approval of the joint sign area and design shall be based on the following
criteria.
? The number and type of parcels, organizations, and structures served by
the sign,
? Consistency with other provisions and conditions of any Site Plan
Approval, Conditional Use Permit or related permit,
? Compatibility with adjacent development, including but not limited to
the size and design of Freestanding Signs in the vicinity,
? Consistency with the intent of the sign provisions of this ordinance,
including district-specific sign regulations, and
? Compliance with other applicable laws.
? The Plan Commission may, if for public betterment, hear and
decide special exceptions to setback requirements for both general
and district-specific sign requirements.
(3) After the initial approval of a joint sign structure, each subsequent joint sign
subunit to be included in the joint sign shall obtain a sign permit directly from
the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent. After initial
construction of the joint sign structure and joint sign subunits, any alterations
to the structure of said signs shall require a sign permit from the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
f. Sign easements and agreements.
(1) Easements. A sign easement or other instrument acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent shall be required for all joint
signs approved by Plan Commission. Such instruments shall reflect the right of
all affected parcels to access and maintain signage.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-55
(2) Sign use and maintenance agreements. Parcels affected by a joint sign
determination shall—in addition to the easement requirements of clause (1)
above—be party to a sign-usage-and-maintenance agreement for the Joint Sign.
Said agreement shall, at a minimum, establish terms for shared maintenance
and landscaping of the overall sign structure and sign subunits; delimit each
parcel’s share of area in the joint sign; set any requirements for the temporary
disposition of sign subunits in the event of business vacancies; and any other
limitations on sign design, appearance, or refurbishment. Said agreement shall
be subject to prior review and approval by the Plan Commission.
(3) Recordation. All easements and agreements described in clause (1) and (2)
above shall be recorded with the Ashland County Register of Deeds.
g. Off-Premise Signs. In no case may an area identification sign or joint sign be located
off premise from at least one of the parcels affected by the Joint Sign Determination.
5. Menu board sign. Menu board signs where allowed pursuant to this Section shall be
subject to the following conditions:
a. Number allowed. A maximum of one menu board shall be permitted on a parcel of
land in any district with a permitted or conditional use providing drive-through
window service.
b. Allowable sign copy and graphic area. The menu board shall have a maximum sign
and copy graphic area of fifty (50) square feet.
c. Orientation. The menu board shall be single-sided and oriented in such a manner so
that the signs provide information to the patrons using the drive-through facility only,
and does not provide supplemental advertising to passing traffic.
6. Off-premise sign.
a. Intent. The City of Ashland recognizes that many existing off-premise signs in the
city (including signs commonly referred to as billboards) are intended to help
promote Ashland’s businesses. However, the City also recognizes that excessive and
uncontrolled off-premise signs endanger the City’s unique character and scenic
quality. Therefore, it is the intent of this Paragraph to accomplish the following:
(1) Encourage the use of alternative means to promote Ashland businesses
including, but not limited to, standardized logo signs provided by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation, on-premise signs, and other media;
and
(2) Encourage the orderly removal of all nonconforming off-premise signs by
providing an option to replace nonconforming off-premise signs with
conforming off-premise signs that effectively communicate while respecting
the unique character and scenic quality of the city.
b. Existing nonconforming off-premise signs. Existing nonconforming off-premise
signs shall be allowed to continue pursuant to Section 10.6: Nonconforming Signs.
c. Maximum allowed number of billboard sign structures in the city. One (1) billboard
sign structure meeting the provisions of this Ordinance may be approved for every
three (3) nonconforming billboard signs removed in the city.
d. Location and placement of billboard signs.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-56 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(1) All billboard signs shall be placed outside the public right-of-way, at least five
(5) feet from all parcel lines and only on parcels fronting U.S. Highway 2
(Lake Shore Drive) or State Highway 13 (Ellis Avenue), unless specified
otherwise in this Section.
(2) No billboard sign shall obstruct the required vision triangle as specified in
Section 6.1, H.: Vision Triangle.
(3) No billboard sign shall be placed in a drainage, utility, or other easement
without written authorization from the holder of the easement.
(4) Billboard signs shall only be located in the zoning districts where they are
allowed pursuant to this Section and shall be located no closer than onehundred
(100) feet from the boundary of another district that prohibits billboard
signs.
(5) Billboard signs should generally be located at least five hundred (500) feet of
another billboard sign. However, in no case shall a billboard sign be located
closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet of another billboard sign.
e. Design standards for billboards. The following design standards apply to all
billboard signs:
(1) The maximum height of a billboard sign structure shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) feet;
(2) The maximum width of a billboard sign structure shall not exceed twelve (12)
feet;
(3) A billboard sign structure may display multiple individual sign copy and
graphics. However, no individual sign copy and graphic area shall exceed fifty
(50) square feet;
(4) Sign copy and graphics located on a billboard sign may be designed for
permanent copy or changeable copy;
(5) Internally illuminated and animated signs are prohibited.
f. Applications, permits, and licenses. Due to the potential concerns of inappropriate
off-premise signs (including billboards), as described in the intent of this Paragraph,
off-premise signs shall comply with the following standards relating to applications,
permits, and licenses:
(1) No billboard sign shall be erected until the owner has first received a
conditional use permit for the proposed billboard sign pursuant to Section 3.9:
Conditional Use Permit and has been issued a sign permit pursuant to Section
3.36 Sign Permit;
(2) All billboard signs shall be subject to an annual license renewable prior to
January 1 of each calendar year, regardless of the date of the original issuance;
(3) A billboard sign owner shall annually pay a license fee as identified in the City
Fee Schedule for each billboard sign that the owner has in the city. Renewal
fees shall be doubled if the license is not renewed prior to January 1 of each
year;
(4) Every company that provides advertising on billboard signs and every sign
contractor or owner of the parcel on which the sign is to be erected shall carry
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-57
insurance limits of a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
per occurrence and a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) aggregate. The City of
Ashland shall also be identified as a certificate holder on the insurance policy.
In the event that the company’s insurance policy expires, the City’s annual
license shall be revoked ten (10) days after the policy’s expiration date. If a
new insurance policy is not in place within sixty (60) days of the policy’s
expiration, the billboard sign shall be considered abandoned and subject to the
removal and disposition provisions of this Ordinance;
(5) Any billboard sign owner maintaining a billboard sign without a license shall
be found in violation of this Ordinance and shall be penalized as established by
this Ordinance. Sixty (60) days after a license expires, the City shall consider
the off-premise sign abandoned and it shall be removed pursuant to removal
and disposition provisions of this Ordinance.
g. Abandoned signs. Abandoned signs that advertise an activity, business, product, or
service no longer available shall be prohibited.
7. Projecting sign. Unless specified otherwise in this Section, all projecting signs shall
comply with the following standards:
a. Spacing. Projecting signs shall be located no closer than twenty five (25) feet from
the nearest projecting sign;
b. Clearance above grade. Projecting sign shall maintain a minimum ten (10) foot
vertical distance between the bottom of the sign and the grade immediately below the
sign;
c. Allowable extension from building. Projecting signs shall not extend further than
eight (8) feet from the building to which they are attached;
d. Required distance from street or parking lot curb. Projecting signs shall not extend
closer than five (5) feet to the vertical plane of the face of a street curb, or if no curb
exists, closer than six (6) feet to the edge of the street, street right-of-way, or parking
lot as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent;
e. Allowable sign and graphic area. The allowable sign and graphic area shall not
exceed twelve (12) square feet;
f. Allowable area of the sign structure. The maximum allowable area of the entire sign
structure shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet;
g. Allowable number of projecting signs per use. Each distinct and unrelated service
shall be allowed no more than one (1) projecting sign.
8. Sidewalk sign.
a. Intent. The intent of this Paragraph is to regulate the design and location of sidewalk
signs in the City of Ashland in order to allow for a positive business atmosphere and
effective communication while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the
public.
b. Design standards. All sidewalk signs shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Each distinct and unrelated service for which a sidewalk sign is permitted by
this Ordinance shall be allowed one (1) sidewalk sign;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-58 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) A sidewalk sign shall have a small, but legible label identifying the business
that owns the sign, a contact name, address, and phone number.
(3) A sidewalk sign shall have a professionally designed appearance and shall be
constructed in a workmanlike manner that is consistent with all applicable
codes;
(4) A sidewalk sign may not exceed twenty-seven (27) inches in width and fortyfive
(45) inches in height. The base shall not exceed a width of thirty-six (36)
inches. The required dimensions shall include the support structure and shall
be measured along the widest or highest section of the sign;
(5) A sidewalk sign shall be constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials and
finish, including aluminum, steel, wood and other similar materials.
Cardboard, paper, fabric, non-rigid material, and other similar materials are
prohibited;
(6) A sidewalk sign must be securely weighted and stabilized so as to not shift in
the wind or present public safety hazards;
(7) A sidewalk sign shall have no moving parts, except for two stabilized wheels
for moving sign to and from display location;
(8) The material, graphics and finish of a sidewalk sign shall be of a unified design
and shall be compatible and complementary to its surroundings in terms of
shape, color and texture. Lettering shall be legible and consistent;
(9) A sidewalk sign shall not be electric or illuminated;
(10) A sidewalk sign shall be maintained in a clean and original appearance.
c. Permitted locations. Sidewalk signs shall only be allowed in those zoning districts
and for those uses as specified in this Section. More specifically, sidewalk signs
shall comply with the following standards:
(1) A sidewalk sign shall only be placed at the location specified on the approved
sign permit;
(2) A sidewalk sign may be located on or immediately adjacent to the subject
parcel in a manner that does not present a pedestrian safety or vehicular hazard.
Under no circumstances shall a sidewalk sign obstruct vehicular/bus stops,
benches, fire hydrants, or other features located legally in the right-of-way;
(3) A sidewalk sign may not be located in a road or alley right-of-way except that
it may be placed on a sidewalk in the public right-of-way with permission from
the Zoning Administrator and Public Works Director or Designated Authorized
Agent and the Police Department;
(4) A minimum of seven (7) feet of unobstructed sidewalk must remain between
the sidewalk sign and adjacent buildings. In situations where seven (7) feet is
not feasible because of a smaller sidewalk width, unique building locations, or
other similar situations, the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized
Agent may determine the minimum amount of unobstructed sidewalk allowed.
A sidewalk sign shall be located near the curb, rather than the building face;
(5) A sidewalk sign shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to an adjacent
parcel line;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-59
(6) A sidewalk sign shall not be located in the required vision triangle as specified
in Section 6.1, H.: Vision Triangle.
d. Permitted display hours. A sidewalk sign may be displayed between the hours of
6:00 AM and 9:00 PM or during the hours that the business is open.
e. Application and permit requirements. All sidewalk signs shall require the issuance of
a sign permit pursuant to Section 3.36: Sign Permit.
9. Wall sign.
a. Allowable sign area. The allowable sign area is specified in the applicable zoning
districts. The allowable sign area for each use in a multi-tenant building shall be
based on the percentage of the individual use to the entire building.
b. Allowable number of signs. There shall be no more than one (1) wall sign per
distinct and unrelated service associated with the use per façade abutting a public
right-of way, unless authorized by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent. Buildings with a secondary public entrance may have an
additional wall sign pursuant to Section 6.6, E., 4.: Buildings with a Secondary
Public Entrance at the Rear or Side of the Building.
c. Placement. Where feasible, wall signs shall be placed in the traditional sign band
above the entrance to the building. In no case shall a sign be placed higher than the
cornice.
d. Attachment to the building. Wall signs shall be securely fastened to the face of
building and shall not extend out from the face of the building more than twelve (12)
inches.
e. Conditional use permit. For businesses requiring more than one (1) wall sign per
distinct and unrelated service, a conditional use permit may be applied for pursuant to
Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit. The total sign area for all signs on a single
façade must comply with the maximum square foot area allowable in the district.
G. Allowable Signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, and W-SFR Districts
1. Intent. The R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, and W-SFR Districts accommodate primarily
residential uses and a limited amount of other compatible nonresidential uses. The signage
in these districts is intended to relate to the predominantly residential character of the
districts.
2. Allowable signs. The following are the only types of signs allowed:
a. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall comply with the standards specified in
Section 6.6, F., 3.: Freestanding Signs. In addition, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary entrance of subdivisions
containing at least six (6) single-family residential parcels or at least twelve
(12) two-family dwelling units in the subdivision;
(2) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary entrance of a multifamily
development that has six (6) or more dwelling units;
(3) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary entrance of a nonresidential
use approved as a permitted use or a conditional use in the district.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-60 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
However, the freestanding sign provisions for a conditional use may be
modified pursuant to the conditions of approval for the use.
(4) The maximum sign copy and graphic area shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet at any primary entrance;
(5) The maximum height of the sign structure shall not exceed six (6) feet;
(6) The maximum total area of the sign structure shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
square feet;
(7) A second sign may be allowed at the primary entrance provided that the total
copy and graphic area of the two (2) signs combined does not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet;
(8) The sign shall not be internally illuminated.
b. Wall sign, awning sign, or canopy sign. In lieu of a freestanding sign, one (1) wall
sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 9.: Wall Sign or one (1) awning sign or canopy sign
pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 1.: Awning and Canopy Signs per building wall fronting
a public road shall be allowed for a multi-family use or a nonresidential use that is a
permitted use or conditional use in the district, pursuant to the following standards:
(1) The sign letters not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height;
(2) The sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet or one (1) square foot
per lineal foot of building wall on which the sign is attached, whichever is less;
(3) The sign shall not be internally illuminated.
c. Sidewalk sign. One (1) sidewalk sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional
nonresidential uses, pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
3. Signs in the W-SFR District. In addition to the standards of this Subsection, signs in the
W-SFR District shall comply with the design guidelines specified in Section 4.46, D., 10.:
W-O Waterfront Overlay District, Design Standards and Guidelines, Signs.
H. Allowable Signs in the MRC, W-MRC, W-C, and W-CRM Districts
1. Intent. The MRC, W-MRC, W-C, and W-CRM Districts are mostly mixed use districts.
Signs for nonresidential uses are intended primarily for vehicular traffic, but the signs are
also intended to relate to the surrounding or nearby neighborhoods.
2. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional residential uses. Residential uses in the
MRC District shall comply with the sign requirements specified in Section 6.6, G:
Allowable Signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, W-SFR Districts.
3. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional nonresidential uses. The following are
the only types of signs permitted in the MRC District for non-residential uses:
a. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall comply with the standards specified in
Section 6.6, F., 3.: Freestanding Signs. In addition, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary vehicular entrance of a
nonresidential use approved as a permitted use or a conditional use in the
district. However, the freestanding sign provisions for a conditional use may
be modified pursuant to the conditions of approval for the use;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-61
(2) The maximum sign copy and graphic area shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
square feet at any primary vehicular entrance;
(3) The maximum height of the sign structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet;
(4) A second sign may be allowed at the primary vehicular entrance provided that
the total copy and graphic area of the two (2) signs combined does not exceed
seventy-five (75) square feet;
(5) A proposed electrically or mechanically energized animated sign may be
permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 F., 2.: Electrically or mechanically energized
animated signs.
b. Wall sign, awning sign, or canopy sign. Permitted and conditional non-residential
uses shall be allowed one (1) wall sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 9.: Wall Signs or
one (1) awning or canopy sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 1.: Awning and Canopy
Signs per side of building that faces a street. The sign shall not exceed one (1) square
foot per lineal foot of building wall on which the sign is attached.
c. Projecting sign. One (1) projecting sign shall be allowed for permitted and conditional
nonresidential uses pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 7.: Projecting Sign.
d. Sidewalk sign. One (1) sidewalk sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional
nonresidential uses, pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
e. Off-premise sign. Off–premise signs shall be allowed pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 6.:
Off-Premise Signs.
f. Menu board sign. One (1) menu board sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 4.: Menu
Board Sign may be allowed.
4. Signs in the W-MRC, W-C, and W-CRM Districts. In addition to the standards of this
Subsection, signs in the W-MRC, W-C, and W-CRM District shall comply with the design
guidelines specified in Section 4.46, D., 10.: W-O Waterfront Overlay District, Design
Standards and Guidelines, Signs.
I. Signs in the PRI District
1. Intent. The PRI Planned Residential/Institutional District is intended to develop through
the planned unit development (PUD) process at a neighborhood or block scale.
Consequently, signs in this district are intended to be approved through the PUD process
and are intended to have a unified theme. The signs should be consistent with the
allowable signs in the underlying districts of the proposed PUD, and with existing
architecture of the neighborhood.
2. Allowable signs. The following signs are the only signs allowed in the PRI District:
a. Signs not associated with a planned unit development (PUD). Signs not associated
with a planned unit development (PUD) shall be consistent with the standards for
signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC and W-SFR District.
b. Signs associated with a planned unit development (PUD). Signs associated with an
approved planned unit development (PUD) shall be consistent with the PUD
ordinance associated with the project. As part of the review and approval process
associated with a PUD, the applicant shall submit a comprehensive sign plan that
specifies sign standards for the development. No sign permit shall be issued unless
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-62 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
the sign complies with the City approved comprehensive sign plan for the
development and is consistent with all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
J. Signs in the NC District
1. Intent. The NC Neighborhood Convenience District accommodates limited commercial
uses that are intended to serve the surrounding residential neighborhoods. The provisions
of this Subsection are intended to ensure that signs in the district respect and relate to the
scale and character of the surrounding residential neighborhoods while still allowing
permitted and conditional uses to adequately identify themselves.
2. Allowable signs. The following are the only types of signs permitted in the NC
Neighborhood Convenience District:
a. Wall signs and awning or canopy signs. One (1) wall sign pursuant to Section 6.6,
F., 9.: Wall Signs or one (1) awning or canopy sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 1.:
Awning and Canopy Signs per side of building that faces a street. In addition, the
sign shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of building wall on
which the sign is attached;
(2) No single use shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of signage per principal
building façade facing a public street;
(3) The sign letters shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height.
(4) Internally illuminated wall signs are discouraged.
b. Projecting sign. In lieu of a wall sign, awning sign, or canopy sign, a permitted or
conditional use shall be allowed one (1) projecting sign per side of principal building
that faces a street pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 7.: Projecting Sign.
c. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall comply with the standards specified in
Section 6.6, F., 3.: Freestanding Signs. In addition, freestanding signs shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) The sign and graphic area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet per side
of the sign;
(2) The sign structure shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area or six (6) feet
in height.
d. Sidewalk sign. One (1) sidewalk sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional
nonresidential uses, pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
K. Signs in the RC District
1. Intent. The RC Regional Commercial District accommodates commercial uses along
major streets and highways in the city for the convenience of residents and visitors.
Consequently, signs in this district are primarily intended for vehicular traffic moving at
speeds ranging from twenty five (25) to forty five (45) miles per hour.
2. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional residential uses. Residential uses in the
RC District shall comply with the sign requirements specified in Section 6.6, G: Allowable
Signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, and W-SFR Districts.
3. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional nonresidential uses. The following are
the only types of signs permitted in the RC District for nonresidential uses:
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-63
a. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall comply with the general standards
specified in Section 6.6, F., 3.: Freestanding Signs. In addition, freestanding signs
in the RC District shall comply with the following:
(1) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary vehicular entrance into
the development;
(2) The sign copy and graphic area shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet at
any primary vehicular entrance;
(3) A proposed electrically or mechanically energized animated sign may be
permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 F., 2.: Electrically or mechanically energized
animated signs.
(4) The sign structure shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet
b. Wall signs and awning or canopy signs. One (1) wall sign pursuant to Section 6.6,
F., 9.: Wall Signs or one (1) awning or canopy sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 1.:
Awning and Canopy Signs per side of building that faces a street. In addition, the
sign shall not exceed two (2) square foot per lineal foot of building wall on which the
sign is attached. A proposed electrically or mechanically energized animated sign
may be permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 F., 2.: Electrically or mechanically
energized animated signs.
c. Projecting sign. A permitted or conditional use shall be allowed one (1) projecting
sign per side of principal building that faces a street and pursuant to Section 6.6, F.,
7.: Projecting Sign.
d. Sidewalk sign. One (1) sidewalk sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional
nonresidential uses, pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
e. Off-premise sign. Off–premise signs shall be allowed pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 6.:
Off-Premise Signs and shall only be allowed on parcels fronting U.S. Highway 2;
f. Menu board sign. One (1) menu board sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 4.: Menu
Board Sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional use with a drive-through
facility.
L. Signs in the CC and W-CC District
1. Intent. Signs in the CC and W-CC Districts are intended to complement the “main street”
character of the city center as described in the City’s Comprehensive Plan and other related
planning documents. In addition, signs in these districts are intended to relate to
pedestrians and slow moving traffic.
2. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional residential uses. Residential uses in the
CC and W-CC Districts shall comply with the sign requirements specified in Section 6.6,
G: Allowable Signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, and W-SFR Districts.
3. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional nonresidential uses. The following are
the only types of signs permitted in the CC and W-CC Districts for nonresidential uses.
a. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall comply with the general standards
specified in Section 6.6, F., 3.: Freestanding Signs. In addition, freestanding signs
in the CC District shall comply with the following:
(1) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary vehicular entrance into
the development;
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-64 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) Freestanding signs located in the City Center District shall have a zero (0) foot
setback. Freestanding signs on parcels abutting Lake Shore Drive (US Hwy 2)
shall be required to maintain the required six (6) foot setback;
(3) The maximum sign copy and graphic area shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet at any vehicular entrance; signs on parcels abutting Lake Shore
Drive (US Hwy 2) shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet at any
vehicular entrance;
(4) The maximum height of the sign structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet;
(5) The maximum total area of the sign structure shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
square feet;
(6) The maximum allowable area and height may be increased with the issuance of
a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit;
(7) A proposed electrically or mechanically energized animated sign may be
permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 F., 2.: Electrically or mechanically energized
animated signs.
b. Wall signs and awning or canopy signs. One (1) wall sign pursuant to Section 6.6,
F., 9.: Wall Signs or one (1) awning or canopy sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 1.:
Awning and Canopy Signs per side of building that faces a street. In addition, the
sign shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of building wall on
which the sign is attached. For parcels abutting Lake Shore Drive (US Hwy 2)
or Ellis Avenue, upon authorization by the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent, sign area may be increased to two (2) square feet per lineal
foot of building wall on which the sign is attached;
(2) No sign shall be placed above the first story of a building without the issuance
of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 3.9: Conditional Use Permit;
(3) Externally illuminated signs are preferred;
(4) Plastic box, back lit signs are prohibited. However, individual channel letters
that are internally illuminated shall be allowed;
(5) A proposed electrically or mechanically energized animated sign may be
permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 F., 2.: Electrically or mechanically energized
animated signs.
c. Projecting sign. A permitted or conditional use shall be allowed one (1) projecting
sign per side of principal building that faces a street and pursuant to Section 6.6, F.,
7.: Projecting Sign.
d. Sidewalk sign. One (1) sidewalk sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional
nonresidential uses, pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
e. Off-premise sign. Off –premise signs shall be allowed pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 6.:
Off-Premise Signs and shall only be allowed on parcels fronting U.S. Highway 2.
f. Menu board sign. One (1) menu board sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 4.: Menu
Board Sign may be allowed. Two (2) menu board signs pursuant to Section 6.6, F.,
4.: Menu Board Sign b. & c. maybe allowed in the City Center (CC) District that are
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-65
adjacent to U.S. Highway 2 (Lake Shore Drive) upon authorization by the Zoning
Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
4. Historical properties. Properties in the CC District that are a designated Local, State or
National Historic Structure, Site or District, shall comply with the standards specified in the
City of Ashland Ordinance 826 and may require a Certificate of Appropriateness.
5. Signs in the W-CC District. In addition to the standards of this Subsection, signs in the
W-CC District shall comply with the design guidelines specified in Section 4.46, D., 10.:
W-O Waterfront Overlay District, Design Standards and Guidelines, Signs.
M. Signs in the MCI, LI, HI, and W-I Districts
1. Intent. The MCI, LI, HI, and W-I Districts primarily accommodate industrial uses along
major streets and highways. Consequently, signs in these districts are primarily intended
for vehicular traffic moving at speeds ranging from twenty five (25) to forty five (45) miles
per hour.
2. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional residential uses. Residential uses shall
comply with the sign requirements specified in Section 6.6, G: Allowable Signs in the R-E,
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, and W-SFR Districts.
3. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional nonresidential uses. The following are
the only types of signs permitted for nonresidential uses:
a. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall comply with the general standards
specified in Section 6.6, F., 3.: Freestanding Signs. In addition, freestanding signs
in the RC District shall comply with the following:
(1) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary vehicular entrance into
the development;
(2) The sign copy and graphic area shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet at
any primary vehicular entrance;
(3) The sign structure shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet;
(4) A proposed electrically or mechanically energized animated sign may be
permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 F., 2.: Electrically or mechanically energized
animated signs.
b. Wall signs and awning or canopy signs. One (1) wall sign pursuant to Section 6.6,
F., 9.: Wall Signs or one (1) awning or canopy sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 1.:
Awning and Canopy Signs per side of building that faces a street. In addition, the
sign shall not exceed two (2) square foot per lineal foot of building wall on which the
sign is attached.
c. Projecting sign. In lieu of a wall sign, awning sign, or canopy sign, a permitted or
conditional use shall be allowed one (1) projecting sign per side of principal building
that faces a street and pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 7.: Projecting Sign.
d. Sidewalk sign. One (1) sidewalk sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional
nonresidential uses, pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
e. Off-premise sign. Off–premise signs shall be allowed pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 6.:
Off-Premise Signs and shall only be allowed on parcels fronting U.S. Highway 2.
Due to the unique character of the Ashland Industrial Park, freestanding off-premise
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
6-66 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
signs, installed by the City and associated with the Ashland Industrial Park, shall be
exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance.
f. Menu board sign. One (1) menu board sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 4.: Menu
Board Sign may be allowed.
4. Signs in the W-I District. In addition to the standards of this Subsection, signs in the W-I
District shall comply with the design guidelines specified in Section 4.46, D., 10.: W-O
Waterfront Overlay District, Design Standards and Guidelines, Signs.
N. Signs in the PI, PP, AIR, and W-PI Districts
1. Intent. Signs in PI, PP, AIR and W-PI Districts are intended for public and semi-public
use. These districts accommodate a variety of uses including colleges, schools, hospitals,
cemeteries, parks, and the airport. Most signs in these districts are intended for vehicular
traffic. However, where a particular use may be more pedestrian-oriented (for example, a
small public park in the City Center area), it is intended that the scale of the signs be
adjusted to a pedestrian scale, rather than a vehicular scale.
2. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional residential uses. Residential uses shall
comply with the sign requirements specified in Section 6.6, G: Allowable Signs in the R-E,
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MHC, and W-SFR Districts.
3. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional nonresidential uses. The following are
the only types of signs permitted for nonresidential uses:
a. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall comply with the general standards
specified in Section 6.6, F., 3.: Freestanding Signs. In addition, freestanding signs
shall comply with the following:
(1) One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per primary vehicular entrance into
the development;
(2) The sign copy and graphic area shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet at
any primary vehicular entrance;
(3) The sign structure shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet;
(4) A proposed electrically or mechanically energized animated sign may be
permitted pursuant to Section 6.6 F., 2.: Electrically or mechanically energized
animated signs.
b. Wall signs and awning or canopy signs. One (1) wall sign pursuant to Section 6.6,
F., 9.: Wall Signs or one (1) awning or canopy sign pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 1.:
Awning and Canopy Signs per side of building that faces a street. In addition, the
sign shall not exceed two (2) square foot per lineal foot of building wall on which the
sign is attached.
c. Projecting sign. In lieu of a wall sign, awning sign, or canopy sign, a permitted or
conditional use shall be allowed one (1) projecting sign per side of principal building
that faces a street and pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 7.: Projecting Sign.
d. Sidewalk sign. One (1) sidewalk sign shall be allowed for a permitted or conditional
nonresidential uses, pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 8.: Sidewalk Signs.
e. Off-premise sign. Off–premise signs shall be allowed pursuant to Section 6.6, F., 6.:
Off-Premise Signs and shall only be allowed on parcels fronting U.S. Highway 2.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.6: Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-67
4. Signs in the W-PI District. In addition to the standards of this Subsection, signs in the WPI
District shall comply with the design guidelines specified in Section 4.46, D., 10.: W-O
Waterfront Overlay District, Design Standards and Guidelines, Signs.
O. Signs in the FD District
1. Intent. Signage in the FD Future Development District shall relate to the rural character of
the district until such time it is rezoned in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
Consequently, the signage should relate to low-density residential uses, such as the R-E
Residential Estate District.
2. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional residential uses. Residential uses in the
FD District shall comply with the sign requirements specified in Section 6.6, G.: Allowable
Signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and MHC Districts.
3. Allowable signs for permitted and conditional nonresidential uses. Non-residential
uses in the FD District shall comply with the sign requirements for nonresidential uses
specified in Section 6.6, G.: Allowable Signs in the R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and MHC
Districts.
P. Reserved
Q. Signs in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District
Signs in the GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District shall meet the standards of the underlying
zoning district in which the signs are located. In addition, the signs shall comply with the design
guidelines specified in Section 4.47, D., 6.: GTWY-O Gateway Overlay District, Design
Standards and Guidelines, Signs.
R. Reserved
S. Signs in the PUD Overlay District
1. Intent. Signs in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District are intended to
have a unified appearance that is an integral component of the PUD design concept. Signs
in the PUD overlay district should generally comply with the sign standards associated with
underlying districts or uses that most reflect the proposed uses in the PUD, but may deviate
from those standards pursuant to the approved PUD ordinance.
2. Comprehensive sign plan. As part of the review and approval process associated with a
PUD, the applicant shall submit a comprehensive sign plan that specifies sign standards for
the development. No sign permit shall be issued unless the sign complies with the City
approved comprehensive sign plan for the development and is consistent with all other
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 6.7 Exterior Lighting
A. Intent
This Section is intended to specify practical and effective standards by which the obtrusive
aspects of excessive and/or careless exterior light usage can be minimized, while preserving
safety, security, and the nighttime use and enjoyment of property. These standards are intended
to curtail the degradation of the night time visual environment by encouraging lighting practices
that direct appropriate amounts of light where and when it is needed, increasing the use of
energy-efficient sources, and decreasing the wastage of light, sky glow, and glare resulting from
over-lighting and poorly shielded or inappropriately directed lighting fixtures.
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting
6-68 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
B. Compliance and Applicability
1. Compliance. All exterior illuminating devices shall be installed in compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and all applicable building and electrical codes.
2. General applicability. All proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, structures,
and/or additions and site modifications that require a development permit and/or building
permit, as well as all proposed lighting fixtures for existing development, uses, or
structures, shall comply with the provisions of this Section for all new exterior lighting.
Where practical (as determined by the Designated Approval Authority), existing lighting
associated with such development shall comply with the provisions of this Section.
3. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section. However,
to the extent practical, compliance with the intent of this Section is encouraged.
a. Existing lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures installed prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance shall be exempt from this Section except that if any modification,
construction, or change to an existing outdoor lighting fixture system is proposed to
fifty (50) percent or more of the total number of fixtures, then all fixtures shall
comply with the provisions of this Section.
b. Street and highway lighting. Street and highway lighting shall comply with the
standards set forth by the applicable jurisdiction relating to required street and
highway lighting.
c. State and federal facilities. Compliance with the intent of this Section at all state and
federal facilities in the City of Ashland is encouraged, but not mandatory.
d. Emergency lighting. Emergency lighting, used by police, firefighters, medical
personnel, public works, and others is exempt from this Section as it pertains to the
emergency situation.
e. Swimming pool and fountain lighting. Underwater lighting used for the illumination
of swimming pools and fountains is exempt from the lamp type and shielding
standards of this Section.
f. Low-Output Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting fixtures are exempted from this
ordinance where the lights are:
(1) Top-shielded or located below an eave; and
(2) Rated less than one thousand (1,000) lumens; and
(3) Individually and collectively in conformance with light trespass provisions of
Section 6.7, C., 1., a: Light trespass.
g. Flood, area, or security lighting. Flood lights or other area lights shall be exempt
from the provisions of this ordinance only where:
(1) Lights are rated less than two thousand (2,000) lumens;
(2) Lights are directed so as to limit direct glare onto adjacent occupied premises;
(3) Light switching is automated, for example by motion sensor, so as to limit
sustained light bursts to tem minutes or less and to limit the total ratio of
unlighted-to-lighted time per night to no less than eight to one (8:1);
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-69
(4) When activated, the illumination level at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet
shall not exceed one-half (1/2) foot candles;
(5) Light fixtures two thousand (2,000) lumens and over are not exempt. Exterior
light fixtures above the eaves or attached to buildings or poles separate from
the principal building are not exempt;
(6) Examples of lamp types of less than two thousand (2,000) lumens include a
100 watt standard incandescent, a fifteen (15) watt cool fluorescent, a fifteen
(15) watt compact fluorescent, or a eighteen (18) watt low pressure sodium
lamp.
h. Lighted flags. Flags of the United States, State of Wisconsin, City of Ashland and
any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent
jurisdiction are exempt from the provisions of this Section. All other outdoor lighted
flags, including, but not limited to, decorative and commercial flags shall comply
with this Section. Property owners are encouraged to lower all flags at sunset and
during inclement weather.
i. Holiday lighting. Holiday lighting, as defined, is exempt from the provisions of this
Section.
j. Search and spot lights. Approved search and spot lights for temporary use, shall be
exempt from the lamp type and shielding provisions of this Section.
k. Towers. Legally required safety lighting for towers shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Section.
l. Airports. Airport related lighting shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section
where the lighting is used for air safety reasons.
C. General Requirements
1. General. All exterior lighting fixtures (except those specifically exempted in this Section)
installed and thereafter maintained shall comply with the following:
a. Light trespass. The maximum allowable light trespass shall be one-half (1/2)
footcandle four (4) feet above the ground. The point of measurement of this
offending light shall be any point at the outer wall of an adjacent building occupied
for residential or public use, or at any point greater than ten (10) feet from the
adjacent parcel line. This measurement shall not include any ambient, natural light.
b. Cutoff or shields. All fixtures greater than one thousand (1,000) initial lumens
(equivalent to 70 watts incandescent) shall be full cutoff, or shall be shielded or
installed so that there is not a direct line of sight between the light source or its
reflection and a point five (5) feet or higher above the ground at the parcel line. The
light source shall not be of such intensity so as to cause discomfort or annoyance.
c. Lamp types. Any exterior lighting fixture installed on a parking lot, parking
structure, or outdoor merchandise sales area shall use high pressure sodium, low
pressure sodium, metal halide, LED, fluorescent lamps, or other type approved by the
Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent.
d. Commercial business hours of lighting. The lighting system shall be extinguished or
reduced to fifty (50) percent no later than thirty (30) minutes after the close of
business for the day or after the end of normal office hours for the majority of
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting
6-70 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
employees. All property owners are encouraged to turn off all unnecessary exterior
lighting.
e. Freestanding light fixtures. Freestanding light fixtures are considered accessory
structures and shall comply with Section 5.6 B: Accessory Structures.
2. Maintenance. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be maintained according to approved
plans.
3. Trees and shrubs. Trees and shrubs shall not be located where they significantly reduce
or block the lighting, intended for safety, of parking facilities or streets.
4. Allowable uses. Exterior lighting fixtures may be used to illuminate buildings and
structures; recreational areas, sports fields and courts; parking lots; parking structures,
garages, or ramps; landscape areas; outdoor merchandise sales; building overheads and
open canopies. Exterior lighting fixtures may be installed to provide building and parking
lot security.
D. Specific Design Requirements
1. Non-residential open parking facilities. Horizontal illuminance for open parking
facilities shall comply with the standards specified in Table 6.7.A and Table 6.7.B. The
illumination requirements of an open parking facility depend on the amount of usage the
facility receives. The following levels of activity are herein to reflect both vehicular traffic
and pedestrian activity:
a. High activity. Facilities for major or league athletic events or major cultural or civic
events or similar activities.
b. Moderate activity. Shopping centers, retail parking areas, hospital and clinic parking,
or similar activities.
c. Low activity. Employee parking, office parks, religious institutions, or similar
activities.
Table 6.7.A General Parking and Pedestrian Areas Illuminance Standards for Open Parking Facilities
Level of
Activity
Minimum Footcandles
on Pavement
Maximum Average
Footcandles on Pavement
Maximum Uniformity
Ratio (Avg:Min)
Watts per Square Foot
Lighting Load
High 0.6 footcandle 3.75 footcandle 5:1 0.12
Moderate 0.4 footcandle 2.5 footcandle 5:1 0.10
Low 0.2 footcandle 1.5 footcandle 5:1 0.08
Table 6.7.B Driveway Area Illuminance Standards for Open Parking Facilities
Level of
Activity
Minimum Footcandles on
Pavement
Maximum Average Footcandles on
Pavement
Maximum Uniformity Ratio
(Avg:Min)
High 0.67 footcandle 2.5 footcandle 5:1
Moderate 0.33 footcandle 1.5 footcandle 5:1
Low 0.125 footcandle 1.0 footcandle 5:1
2. Commercial residential open parking facilities. A parking facility for more than three
(3) cars on a residential site should be lighted to provide at least 0.25 footcandles on any
surface with an average illumination level of at least 0.75 footcandles. Exterior light
fixtures shall be designed and installed to minimize light trespass. In addition, the
Part 6: General Development Standards
Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 6-71
uniformity ratio between the average illumination and minimum illumination shall be no
greater than 4:1.
3. Building and structure illumination. An exterior lighting system for illuminating
buildings and structures shall have a maximum connected lighting load of five (5) watts per
lineal foot. Watts shall mean lamp wattage and ballast consumption. Such lighting shall be
shielded or installed so as to illuminate the building and not the sky.
4. Outdoor merchandise sales. For an outdoor merchandise sales area and outdoor vehicle
sales, the maximum initial illumination level in seventy-five (75) percent of the parcel shall
not exceed twenty (20) footcandles. A contiguous area not to exceed twenty-five (25)
percent of the parcel may be illuminated to a level that shall not exceed forty (40)
footcandles.
5. Outdoor canopy. The maximum initial illumination level under an outdoor canopy shall
not exceed fifty (50) footcandles at any point.
6. LED light bands. Dimmable technology shall be installed and utilized to adjust the light
output of permitted LED light bands based on the ambient light such that the light band
dims automatically when it is less bright outside.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 7-1
Part 7 of this Unified Development Ordinance specifies general performance standards that apply to all uses in Ashland. Related
standards are specified in other parts of this Ordinance.
PART 7
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Part 7: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 7.1 Performance Standards ........................................................................................................... 2
A. Applicability .............................................................................................................................. 2
B. Administration and Enforcement ............................................................................................... 2
C. Noise .......................................................................................................................................... 3
D. Fire and Explosion Hazards ....................................................................................................... 3
E. Radioactivity or Electric Disturbances ...................................................................................... 3
F. Vibration .................................................................................................................................... 3
G. Odors .......................................................................................................................................... 4
H. Smoke ........................................................................................................................................ 4
I. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, and Other Forms of Air Pollution ................................ 4
J. Exterior Lighting, Glare, and Heat ............................................................................................ 4
K. Liquid and Solid Waste .............................................................................................................. 5
Part 7: List of Tables
Table Name Page
7.1.A Maximum Vibration Levels ................................................................................................... 7-4
Part 7: Performance Standards
Section 7.1: Performance Standards
7-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
Section 7.1 Performance Standards
A. Applicability
No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in a manner so as to create any
dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazard; noise or
vibration; smoke, dust, odor, or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness; electrical or
other substance, condition, or element in such a manner, or in such amount, as to adversely affect
the surrounding area or adjoining premise.
B. Administration and Enforcement
1. Measurement. The determination of the existence of any objectionable elements shall be
made at the location of the use creating the same and at any points where the existence of
such elements may be more apparent; provided, however, that the measurements necessary
for enforcement of performance standards set forth in this Section shall be taken at the
parcel lines.
2. Notification. The Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director,
Police Chief, or other Authorized Agent shall give written notice, by registered mail or
other means insuring a signed receipt for such notice, to the person or persons responsible
for the alleged violation. The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged violation
and the reasons why the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director,
Police Chief, or other Authorized Agent believes there is a violation in fact, and shall
require an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director, Police Chief, or other
Authorized Agent within a time limit set by such agent. The notice shall state, and it is
hereby declared, that failure to reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director, Police Chief, or
other Authorized Agent within the time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the
terms of this Ordinance.
3. Cost of determination. The notice specified in Subparagraph 2 above shall further state
that upon request of those to whom it is directed, technical determinations as described in
this Ordinance will be made, and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of such
determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in addition to
such other penalties as may be appropriate.
4. Violation corrections. If there is no reply to the notice specified in Subparagraph 2 above
within the time limit set, but the alleged violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director, Police Chief, or other
Authorized Agent, he or she shall note “violation corrected” on his or her copy of the
notice, and shall retain it among his or her official records, taking such other action as may
be warranted.
5. Enforcement. If there is no reply to the notice specified in Subparagraph 2 above within
the time limit set (thus establishing admission of the violations) and the alleged violation is
not corrected to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public
Works Director, Police Chief, or other Authorized Agent within the time limit set, he or she
shall proceed to take or cause to be taken such action as is warranted by continuation of a
violation after notice to cease.
Part 7: Performance Standards
Section 7.1: Performance Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 7-3
6. Extensions. If reply to the notice specified in Subparagraph 2 above is received within the
time limit set indicating the alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director, Police Chief, or other
Authorized Agent, but requesting additional time, said agent may grant an extension if he
or she deems it warranted in the circumstances of the case and if the extension will not, in
his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
7. Expert findings. If reply to the notice specified in Subparagraph 2 above is received in the
time limit set requesting technical determination as provided in this Section, and if the
alleged violation continues, the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works
Director, Police Chief, or other Authorized Agent may call in properly qualified experts to
make determinations. If the expert findings indicate violation of the performance
standards, the costs of the determinations shall be assessed against the properties or persons
responsible for the violation, in addition to such other penalties as may be appropriate
under the provisions of this Ordinance.
8. Additional enforcement provisions. Even though compliance with the performance
standards procedures in obtaining a development permit is not
required for a particular use, initial and continued compliance with
performance standards is required of every use, and provisions for
enforcement of continued compliance shall be invoked by the
Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director,
Police Chief, or other Authorized Agent against any use if there are
reasonable grounds to believe that performance standards are being
violated by such use.
9. State of Wisconsin regulations. The Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources, Division of Environmental Protection, pollution
control standards shall take precedence over the above regulations
except where the provisions of this Ordinance are higher.
C. Noise
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made, any loud,
unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace of any neighborhood or which causes
discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area
pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 202.
D. Fire and Explosion Hazards
All activities involving and all storage of inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided
at any point with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate
firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry. Burning of
waste materials in open fires shall be prohibited at any point. Fire and explosion hazards shall be
further subject to the applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
E. Radioactivity or Electric Disturbances
No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radiation. Radioactive emissions shall be
further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
F. Vibration
Helpful Note.
For information on the
Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources
Environmental Protection
Regulations, visit the
following website:
www.dnr.state.wi.us/environ
mentprotect/
Part 7: Performance Standards
Section 7.1: Performance Standards
7-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
1. In all zoning districts except the MCI, LI, HI, and W-I Districts, no vibration, except during
temporary construction activity, shall be permitted that is discernible without instruments
beyond the parcel line of the source.
2. In the MCI, LI, HI, and W-I Districts, there shall be no operation or activity that would
cause ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Table 7.1.B:
Maximum Vibration Levels at the boundary of this district under any conditions, nor
beyond the parcel line if it would adversely affect any other use within the district.
Vibrations shall be further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.
Table 7.1.A: Maximum Vibration Levels
Frequency Cycles per Second
Maximum Permitted Displacement at
Industrial District Boundaries in Inches
0 to 10 0.0008
10 to 20 0.0005
20 to 30 0.0002
30 to 40 0.0002
40 and Over 0.0001
G. Noxious Odors
No emission of noxious odorous gases or other noxious odorous matter in such quantities as to be
readily detectable should be permitted beyond the parcel lines of the source. Any process that
may involve the creation or emission of any noxious odors shall be provided with a secondary
safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary
safeguard system should fail. Noxious odors shall be further subject to
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
H. Smoke
No emission shall be emitted of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or
darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann chart, except that visible gray
smoke of a shade to No. 3 of such chart may be emitted four (4) minutes
in any thirty (30) minutes. These provisions applicable to visible gray
smoke shall also apply to visible smoke of a different color, but with an apparently equivalent
capacity. Smoke shall be further subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations.
I. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, and Other Forms of Air Pollution
No emission shall be permitted that can cause any damage to health, animals, vegetation, or other
forms of property, or any excessive soiling, at any point. No sulfur dioxide at the parcel line or
beyond in excess of 1.0 part per million in a twenty (20) minute period of any hour or average
exposure in excess of 0.1 part per million in any eight (8) hour period, nor shall any gas be
emitted that contains sulfur dioxide in excess of two thousand (2,000) parts per million. Fly ash,
dust, fumes, vapors, gases, and other forms of air pollution shall be further subject to applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
J. Exterior Lighting, Glare, and Heat
All lighting shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residences. No direct
or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as
Helpful Note.
For information on the
Ringelmann chart, visit the
following website:
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/mi
ning/pubs/pdfs/ic8333.pdf
Part 7: Performance Standards
Section 7.1: Performance Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 7-5
combustion or welding or otherwise so as to be visible at the parcel line of the source shall be
permitted. Exterior lighting, glare, and heat shall be further subject to applicable federal, state,
and local laws and regulations including, but not limited to, Section 6.7: Exterior Lighting.
K. Liquid and Solid Waste
No waste shall be discharged in the public sewer system that is dangerous to the public health and
safety. No waste shall be discharged into a storm sewer or roadside ditch or drainage area except
clear and unpolluted water. Liquid and solid waste shall be further subject to applicable federal,
state, and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to, City of Ashland Ordinance 711
and Ordinance 712.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-1
Part 8: Environmental Protection specifies general requirements for protection of natural features, erosion and sediment control,
storm water management, and tree preservation. The erosion and sediment control and the storm water management provisions are
based on model ordinances prepared by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. Additional environmental protection
provisions are provided in other parts of this Ordinance; for example, wetland protection and floodplain provisions are specified in
Part 4: Zoning Districts.
PART 8
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
Part 8: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 8.1 General Protection of Natural Features ................................................................................ 3
A. General Provisions ..................................................................................................................... 3
B. Restricted Areas ......................................................................................................................... 3
C. Preservation Areas ..................................................................................................................... 3
D. Areas of Significant Concern ..................................................................................................... 4
E. Mitigation................................................................................................................................... 5
Section 8.2 Construction Site Erosion Control ......................................................................................... 5
A. General Provisions ..................................................................................................................... 5
B. Technical Standards ................................................................................................................... 6
C. Performance Standards .............................................................................................................. 7
D. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and Permitting Requirements ........................................... 7
E. Implementation and Maintenance relating to an Approved Erosion and Sediment Control
Plan. ......................................................................................................................................... 10
F. Inspection and Enforcement .................................................................................................... 11
Section 8.3 Post-Construction Storm Water Management.................................................................... 12
A. General Provisions ................................................................................................................... 12
B. Technical Standards ................................................................................................................. 14
C. Performance Standards ............................................................................................................ 14
D. Storm Water Management Plan and Permitting Requirements ............................................... 16
E. Maintenance Agreement .......................................................................................................... 18
F. Financial Guarantee ................................................................................................................. 19
G. Enforcement ............................................................................................................................. 20
Section 8.4 Invasive Species Management .............................................................................................. 21
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.1: General Protection of Natural Features
8-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
A. Purpose and Intent ................................................................................................................... 21
B. General Guidelines .................................................................................................................. 21
C. Land Disturbing Construction Activities ................................................................................. 21
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.1: General Protection of Natural Features
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-3
Section 8.1 General Protection of Natural Features
A. General Provisions
All developments shall, to the maximum extent practical, be located so as to preserve the natural
features of a site, to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity, to minimize the creation of
impervious surface area, and to minimize negative impacts on the alteration of the natural
environment.
B. Restricted Areas
The following natural features when present within a parcel constitute
unbuildable areas. No development, grading or filling, alteration of the
natural character of the land, or construction of buildings, structures or
parking shall occur in the following areas, except as otherwise provided in
this Ordinance:
1. Floodways. Floodways, as defined by this Ordinance.
2. Navigable waters. Navigable waters, as defined by this ordinance.
3. Wetlands. Wetlands, as defined by this Ordinance.
4. Steep slopes.
a. Slopes of twenty (20) percent or greater. Slopes greater than
twenty (20) percent may be used for construction if
engineering solutions by a professional engineer and the
Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent are
employed.
b. Slopes between twelve (12) and twenty (20) percent. To the maximum extent
practical, development on slopes between twelve (12) and twenty (20) percent shall
be avoided. Where this unpractical, development shall comply with the following:
(1) The foundation and underlying material of any structure shall be adequate for
the slope condition and soil type.
(2) The proposed development will not result in soil erosion, flooding, severe
scarring, reduced water quality, inadequate drainage control, or other problems.
(3) The proposed development will not cause erosion or slope instability to
neighboring property or cause structural damage to neighboring structures.
(4) The proposed development will preserve significant natural features by
minimizing disturbance to existing topographical forms.
(5) The applicable approval authority may require that the property be rezoned and
developed as a planned unit development, conservation subdivision, or
traditional neighborhood design to use flexible development standards to
preserve steep slopes.
C. Preservation Areas
The following areas shall be preserved as undeveloped open space to the extent consistent with
reasonable use of land and in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations:
Sustainability Tip.
A sustainable community
reduces its encroachment
on nature. To the maximum
extent practical,
development should be
located so as to preserve
the natural features of a
site. This not only benefits
the health of the ecosystem,
but it can also yield
economic and social
benefits for the
development and the
community.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.1: General Protection of Natural Features
8-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
1. Significant vegetated areas. Significant tree or plant communities, including remnant
stands of native trees or plant communities that are rare or of particular landscape
significance, including those with species identified on State or Federal listings.
2. Significant wildlife habitat. Habitats of threatened or endangered wildlife as identified on
federal or state listings, including, but not limited to, the federal Endangered Species Act
and the Natural Heritage Inventory.
D. Areas of Significant Concern
The following areas shall be protected to the extent consistent with reasonable use of land and in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations, and pursuant to those
applicable sections within this ordinance.
1. Protective areas.
Protective areas, as defined by this Ordinance, shall include the area around water bodies as
follows:
a. Outstanding resource waters and exceptional waters as defined by this Ordinance,
and for wetlands in special natural resource interest as specified in Chapter NR
103.04 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code, shall have a seventy-five (75) foot
protective area.
b. Perennial and intermittent streams identified on a United States Geological Survey
7.5 minute series topographic map, or a county soil survey map, whichever is more
current, shall have a fifty (50) foot protective area.
c. Lakes shall have a fifty (50) foot protective area.
d. Highly susceptible wetlands, as defined by this Ordinance, shall have a protective
area of fifty (50) feet. Wetland boundary delineations shall be made in accordance
with Chapter NR 103.08 (1m) of the Wisconsin Administrative Code. The protective
area does not apply to wetlands that have been completely filled in accordance with
applicable state and federal regulations. The protective area for wetlands that have
been partially filled in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations
shall be measured from the wetland boundary delineation after fill has been placed.
e. Less susceptible wetlands, as defined by this Ordinance, shall have a protective area
of the average wetland width, but no less than ten (10) feet nor more than thirty (30)
feet.
f. The determination of the extent of the protective area adjacent to wetlands shall be
made on the basis of sensitivity and runoff susceptibility of the wetland in accordance
with the standards and criteria in Chapter NR 103.03 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
g. Concentrated flow channels with drainage areas greater than one hundred thirty (130)
acres shall have a protective area of ten (10) feet.
2. Shoreland/Wetland areas. Encompasses all land within the boundaries of shoreland and
wetland areas, as defined by this ordinance. Refer to Section 4.46 W-O Waterfront
Overlay, Section 4.49 BCC-O Bay City Creek Overlay and Section 4.51 WET-O Wetland
Overlay for additional regulations.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.1: General Protection of Natural Features
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-5
3. Floodplain areas. Encompasses all land within the boundaries of the floodplain, as
defined by this ordinance. Refer to Section 4.50 F-O Floodplain Overlay for additional
regulations.
E. Mitigation
Where preservation is not consistent with the reasonable use of land, the applicable approval
authority may require mitigation through replacement of the resource or similar resource on the
site, restoration of the former natural amenities to the site, or other reasonable measures to protect
or enhance the natural features of the land.
Section 8.2 Construction Site Erosion Control
A. General Provisions
1. Findings of fact. The Common Council finds that runoff from land
disturbing construction activity carries a significant amount of sediment
and other pollutants to Lake Superior, Bay City Creek, and other waters
of the City of Ashland and the State of Wisconsin.
2. Intent. It is the intent of this Section to accomplish the following:
a. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
b. Prevent and control water pollution;
c. Protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life;
d. Control building sites, placement of structures and land uses;
e. Preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and
f. Promote sound economic growth by minimizing the amount of sediment and other
pollutants carried by runoff or discharged from land disturbing construction activities
to the waters in and around the City of Ashland.
3. Authority.
a. This Section is adopted under the authority granted by Section 62.234 of the
Wisconsin Statutes and supersedes any previous ordinances relating to construction
site erosion control that may have been adopted under Section 62.23 of the Wisconsin
Statutes. Except as otherwise specified, Section 62.234 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
Section 62.23 of the Wisconsin Statutes applies to this Section and to any amendment
of this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of this Section are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory
powers of the City of Ashland.
c. The Common Council hereby designates the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent to administer and enforce the provisions of this Section.
d. The requirements of this Section do not pre-empt more stringent erosion and
sediment control requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits, or
approvals including those authorized under Section 281.16 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and or other applicable laws.
Sustainability Tip.
Erosion and sediment
control measures help
protect the health of the
waters of Ashland and
the State of Wisconsin.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.2: Construction Site Erosion Control
8-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(2) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources in Chapter NR 151.004 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
4. Applicability.
a. When this Section applies. This Section applies to the following land disturbing
activities:
(1) Construction activity that disturbs ten thousand (10,000) square feet to one (1)
acre of land; or
(2) Any development activity that disturbs ten-thousand (10,000) square feet or
more on a single parcel within five (5) years or less; or
(3) Any construction site of any size that, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director or Designated Authorized Agent, is likely to result in runoff that
exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of
water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by
scouring or the transportation of particulate matter, or that endangers property
or public safety.
b. When this Section does not apply. This Section does not apply to the following land
disturbing activities:
(1) Land disturbing construction activity that includes the construction of a
building and is otherwise regulated by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and
Professional Services under Chapter SPS 321.125 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, or The Department of Natural Resources Chapter NR 216
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code;
(2) A construction project that is exempted by federal statutes or regulations from
the requirement to have a national pollutant discharge elimination system
permit issued under Chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 122, for
land disturbing construction activity;
(3) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and
practices;
(4) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities;
(5) Routine maintenance for project sites under five (5)
acres of land disturbance if performed to maintain
the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the facility; or
(6) Activities constructed by a state agency, as defined
under Section 227.01(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes,
but also including the office of district attorney,
which is subject to the state plan promulgated or a
memorandum of understanding entered into under
Section 281.33(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Technical Standards
1. Design criteria, standards, and specifications. All best
management practices required to comply with this Section
Helpful Note.
The USLE and its successors
RULSE and RULSE2, use an
R factor that has been
developed to estimate annual
soil erosion, average over
extended time periods. The R
factor can be modified to
estimate monthly and singlestorm
erosion. A design storm
can be statistically calculated
to provide an equivalent R
factor as an average
calculation. See
http://dsps.wi.gov/sb/SBSoilErosionControlProgram.
ht
ml for more information
regarding USLE.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.2: Construction Site Erosion Control
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-7
shall meet the design criteria, standards, and specifications based on any of the following:
a. Technical Standard identified and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources in accordance with Chapter NR 151 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
b. Other design guidance and technical standards identified and approved by the City of
Ashland.
c. For this Ordinance, average annual basis is calculated using the appropriate annual
rainfall or runoff factor, also referred to as the R factor, or an equivalent design storm
using a type II distribution, with consideration given to the geographic location of the
site and the period of disturbance.
2. Other standards. Other technical standards not identified or developed in Paragraph 1.
above may be used provided that the methods have been approved by the Public Works
Director or other Authorized Agent.
C. Performance Standards
1. Responsible party. The property owner or the owner’s agent shall implement an erosion
and sediment control plan, developed in accordance with that required by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources.
2. Plan. A written plan shall follow the requirements set forth in Chapter NR 216.46 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, and be implemented for each construction site.
3. Location. The best management practices used to comply with
this Subsection shall be located prior to runoff entering the
waters of the state.
4. Alternate requirements. The Public Works Director or other
Authorized Agent may establish storm water management
requirements more stringent than those set forth in this Section if
the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent
determines that an added level of protection is needed for
sensitive resources.
D. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and Permitting
Requirements
1. Permit required. No person shall commence a land disturbing
construction activity subject to this Ordinance without receiving
prior approval of an erosion and sediment control plan pursuant
to Section 3.40: Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and all
other necessary approvals and permits.
2. Erosion and sediment control plan. The property owner or the
owner’s agent shall prepare an erosion and sediment control plan
that meets the performance standards of this Section, and
addresses pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation
during construction and up to final stabilization of the site. The erosion and sediment
control plan shall include, at a minimum, the following:
a. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner or owner’s agent, developer of the site, and
of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the
applicant’s principal contact at such firm. The plan shall also include start and end
dates for construction;
Helpful Note.
The requirements for the
erosion and sediment control
plan will meet the erosion
control plan requirements of
Chapter NR 216.46 of the
Wisconsin Administrative
Code, when prepared in
accordance with good
engineering practices and the
design criteria, standards, and
specifications outlined in the
Wisconsin Construction Site
Best Management Practice
Handbook (Wisconsin
Department of Natural
Resources, Publication WR-
222, November 1993
Revision.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.2: Construction Site Erosion Control
8-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
b. A description of the site and the nature of the construction activity, including
representation of the limits of land disturbance on a United States Geological Service
7.5 minute series topographic or comparable map;
c. A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing;
rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final
grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which
clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of
clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and
establishment of permanent vegetation;
d. Estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site expected to be
disturbed by construction activities;
e. Estimates, including calculations, if any, of the runoff coefficient of the site before
and after construction activities are completed;
f. Calculations to show the expected percent reduction in the average annual sediment
load carried in runoff as compared to no sediment or erosion controls;
g. Existing data describing the surface soil as well as subsoil;
h. Depth to groundwater, as indicated by Natural Resources Conservation Service soil
information where available, or other reliable sources;
i. Name of the immediate named receiving water from the United States Geological
Service 7.5 minute series topographic or comparable map;
j. A site map, at a scale not greater than one hundred (100) feet per inch and at contour
intervals not to exceed five (5) feet, that includes the following:
(1) Existing topography, vegetative cover, natural and engineered drainage
systems, roads, and surface waters. Lakes, streams, wetlands (as defined by
delineation), channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately
adjacent to the site shall be shown. Any identified one hundred (100) year
floodplains, floodfringe and floodways shall be shown;
(2) Boundaries of the construction site;
(3) Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading
activities;
(4) Areas of soil disturbance;
(5) Location of the major structural and non-structural controls identified in the
plan;
(6) Location of areas where stabilization practices will be employed;
(7) Areas that will be vegetated following construction;
(8) Extent of wetland acreage on the site (as defined by delineation) and locations
where storm water is discharged to a surface water or wetland;
(9) Locations of all surface waters and wetlands within one (1) mile of the
construction site; and
(10) An alphanumeric or equivalent grid overlying the entire construction site map.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.2: Construction Site Erosion Control
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-9
k. A copy of any reports or data obtained through wetland delineation on the site, and if
applicable, a written statement by a wetland professional or WI DNR staff stating
that wetlands do not exist on the property.
l. A description of appropriate controls and measures that will be performed at the site
to prevent pollutants from reaching waters of the state. The plan shall clearly
describe the appropriate control measure for each major activity and the timing
during the construction process that will be implemented. The description of the
erosion control shall include, when appropriate, the following minimum
requirements:
(1) A description of interim and permanent stabilization practices, including a
practice implementation schedule. Site plans shall ensure that existing
vegetation is preserved where attainable and that disturbed portions of the site
are stabilized. Vegetative cover used for stabilization shall comply with those
requirements pursuant to Section 8.4 Invasive Species Management and City of
Ashland Ordinance 750: Property Maintenance;
(2) A description of structural practices to divert flow away from exposed soils, to
store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the
site. Unless otherwise specifically approved in writing by the Public Works
Director or other Authorized Agent, structural measures shall be installed on
upland soils;
(3) Management of overland flows at all sites, unless otherwise controlled by
outfall controls;
(4) Trapping of sediment in channelized flows;
(5) Staging construction to limit bare areas subject to erosion;
(6) Protection of down slope drainage inlets where they occur;
(7) Minimization of tracking at all sites;
(8) Clean-up of all off-site sediment deposits;
(9) Proper disposal of building and waste materials at all sites;
(10) Stabilization of drainage ways;
(11) Control of soil erosion form dirt stockpiles;
(12) Installation of permanent stabilization practices as soon as practical after the
final grading; and
(13) Minimization of dust to the maximum extent practical.
m. The plan shall require that velocity dissipation devices be placed at discharge
locations and along the length of any outfall channel, as necessary, to provide a nonerosive
flow from the structure to a water course so that the natural, physical, and
biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected.
3. Erosion and sediment control plan statement. An erosion and sediment control plan
statement shall be prepared for each construction site that the Public Works Director or
Designated Authorized Agent has determined is likely to result in runoff that exceeds the
safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of water, will likely cause
undue channel erosion, will likely increase water pollution by scouring or the transportation
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.2: Construction Site Erosion Control
8-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
of particulate matter, and/or will likely endanger property or public safety. The statement
shall briefly describe the site and include a site map depicting locations of proposed erosion
and sediment control practices. Further, it shall include the best management practices that
will be used to meet the requirements of this Section, including the site development
schedule.
4. Erosion and sediment control plan amendments. The applicant shall amend the erosion
and sediment control plan if any of the following occurs:
a. There is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the site that
has the reasonable potential for discharge of pollutants to waters of the state and that
has not been otherwise addressed in the plan;
b. The actions required by the plan fail to reduce the impacts of pollutants carried by
construction site runoff; and
c. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent notifies the applicant of
changes needed in the plan.
5. Exemptions. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent may exempt
some of the requirements of this Subsection for land disturbing activities under one (1) acre
in area.
E. Implementation and Maintenance relating to an Approved Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan.
All permits shall require the responsible party to do the following:
1. Notify the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent within forty-eight (48)
hours of commencing any land disturbing construction activity;
2. Notify the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent of completion of best
management practices within fourteen (14) days after their installations;
3. Obtain permission in writing from the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized
Agent prior to any modification to the approved sequencing of construction of the site;
4. Install all best management practices identified in the approved erosion and sediment
control plan;
5. Maintain all road drainage systems, storm water drainage systems, best management
practices, and other facilities identified in the erosion and sediment control plan;
6. Repair any siltation or erosion damage to adjoining surfaces and drainage ways resulting
from land disturbing construction activities and document repairs in a site erosion control
log;
7. Inspect the best management practices within twenty-four (24) hours after each rain of 0.5
inches or more and least once each week make needed repairs and document the findings of
the inspections in a site erosion control log with the date of inspection, the name of the
person conducting the inspection, and a description of the present phase of the construction
at the site;
8. Allow the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent to enter the site for
purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion and sediment control plan or for
performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the control plan.
Keep a copy of the erosion and sediment control plan at the construction site, and allow the
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.2: Construction Site Erosion Control
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-11
Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent access to all inspection logs for
best management practices;
9. Throughout the duration of the construction activity, maintain all best management
practices necessary to meet the requirements of this Ordinance until the site has undergone
final stabilization.
F. Inspection and Enforcement
1. If land disturbing construction activities are being carried out without an approved erosion
and sediment control plan and all other required permits and approval required by this
Ordinance, the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent may enter the site
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 66.0119(1), (2), and (3) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
2. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent may post a stop work order if
any of the following occurs:
a. Any land disturbing construction activity regulated under this Ordinance is being
undertaken without the required permits;
b. The erosion and sediment control plan is not being implemented in a good faith
manner; or
c. The conditions of the permit are not being met.
3. If the responsible party does not cease the activity as required in the stop work order posted
under this Section or fails to comply with the approved erosion and sediment control plan
or permit conditions, the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent may
revoke the permit.
4. If the responsible party, where no permit has been issued, does not cease the activity after
being notified by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent, or if the
responsible party violates a stop work order, the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent may request that the City Attorney obtain a cease and desist order in any
court with jurisdiction.
5. The Public Works Director, Designated Authorized Agent, or Board of Appeals may retract
a stop work order or the permit revocation.
6. After posting a stop work order, the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized
Agent may issue a notice of intent to the responsible party of its intent to perform work
necessary to comply with this Ordinance. The Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent may go on the land and commence the work after issuing the notice of
intent. The costs of the work performed under this Section by the Public Works Director or
Designated Authorized Agent shall be billed to the responsible party. In the event the
responsible part fails to pay the amount due, the City Clerk or Designated Authorized
Agent shall enter the amount due on the tax rolls and collect as special assessment against
the property pursuant to Subchapter VII of Chapter 66 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
7. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture
of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the
costs of prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists, shall constitute a
separate offense.
8. Compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in
any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary, to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease
and desist order, before resorting to injunction proceedings.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
8-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Section 8.3 Post-Construction Storm Water Management
A. General Provisions
1. Findings of fact. The Common Council finds that the uncontrolled, post-construction
runoff has a significant impact upon water resources and the health, safety, and general
welfare of the community and diminishes the public enjoyment and use of natural
resources. More specifically, the Common Council finds that uncontrolled, postconstruction
runoff can do the following:
a. Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing,
streambed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows,
and increasing stream temperature;
b. Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational,
and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loading of sediment, suspended solids,
nutrients, heavy metals, bacteria, pathogens, and other urban
pollutants;
c. Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology
and by increasing pollutant loading;
d. Reduce the quality of groundwater by increasing pollutant
loading;
e. Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare
by overtaxing storm sewers, drainage ways, and other minor
drainage facilities; and
f. Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the
incidence and levels of flooding.
g. Increases the public’s cost to maintain and repair infrastructure due to overtaxing of
the storm sewer system.
2. Purpose and Intent.
a. Purpose. The general purpose of this Section is to establish long term, postconstruction
runoff management requirements that will diminish the threats to public
health, safety, general welfare, and the aquatic environment. Specific purposes are as
follows:
(1) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Prevent and control the adverse effects of storm water; prevent and control soil
erosion; prevent and control water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish,
and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of structures, and land uses;
preserve ground cover and scenic beauty; and promote sound economic
growth; and
(3) Control exceedance of the safe capacity of existing drainage facilities and
receiving water bodies; prevent undue channel erosion; control increases in the
scouring and transportation of particulate matter; and prevent conditions that
endanger downstream property.
b. Intent. It is the intent of the Common Council that this Section regulates postconstruction
storm water discharges to waters of the state. This Section may be
Sustainability Tip.
Storm water management
measures help protect
the waters of Ashland
and the State of
Wisconsin. They also
help protect the health,
safety, and general
welfare of the public.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-13
applied on a site-by-site basis. The Common Council recognizes, however, that the
preferred method of achieving the storm water performance standards set forth in this
Section is through the preparation and implementation of comprehensive, systemslevel
storm water management plans that cover hydrologic units, such as watersheds,
on a municipal and regional scale. Such plans may prescribe regional storm water
devices, practices, or systems, any of which may be designed to treat runoff from
more than one site prior to discharge to waters of the state. Where such plans are in
conformance with the performance standards developed under Section 281.16 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, for regional storm water management measures and have been
approved by the Common Council, it is the intent of this Section that the approved
plan be used to identify post-construction management measures acceptable for the
community.
3. Authority.
a. This Section is adopted by the Common Council under the authority granted by
Section 62.234 of the Wisconsin Statutes. This Section supersedes all provisions of
any previous ordinance that may have been adopted under Section 62.23 of the
Wisconsin Statutes that relate to storm water management regulations. Except as
otherwise specified in Section 62.234 of Wisconsin Statutes, Section 62.23 of
Wisconsin Statutes applies to this Section and to any amendments to this Section.
b. The provisions of this Section are deemed not to limit any other lawful regulatory
powers of the City of Ashland.
c. The Common Council hereby designates the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent to administer and enforce the provisions of this Section.
d. The requirements of this Section do not preempt more stringent storm water
management requirements that may be imposed by any of the following:
(1) Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources administrative rules, permits, or
approvals including those authorized under Section 281.16 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and Section 283.33 of the Wisconsin Statutes; and
(2) Targeted non-agricultural performance standards promulgated in rules by the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources under Chapter NR 151.004,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
4. Applicability.
a. When this Section applies. When otherwise not limited by law, this Section applies
after final stabilization to the following:
(1) A post-construction development site that had ten thousand (10,000) square
feet to one (1) acre of land disturbing construction activity; or
(2) Any development activity that disturbs ten-thousand (10,000) square feet or
more on a single parcel within five (5) years or less; or
(3) Any post-construction site of any size that, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director or Designated Authorized Agent, is likely to result in runoff that
exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities or receiving body of
water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases water pollution by
scouring or the transportation of particulate matter, or that endangers property
or public safety.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
8-14 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
b. When this Section does not apply. This Section does not apply to the following:
(1) A redevelopment post-construction site with no increase in exposed parking
lots or roads;
(2) A post-construction site with less than ten (10) percent connected
imperviousness based on completed development of the post-construction site,
provided the cumulative area of all parking lots and rooftops is less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet;
(3) Nonpoint discharges from agricultural facilities and practices;
(4) Nonpoint discharges from silviculture activities;
(5) Routine maintenance for project sites under five (5) acres of land disturbance if
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the facility;
(6) Underground utility construction such as water, sewer, and fiber optic lines.
This exemption does not apply to the construction of any above ground
structures associated with utility construction; or
(7) This section is not applicable to activities conducted by a state agency, as
defined under Section 227.01(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes, but also including
the office of the district attorney, which is subject to the state plan promulgated
or a memorandum of understanding entered into under Section 281.33 (2) of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
B. Technical Standards
The following methods shall be used in designing the water quality, peak flow shaving, and
infiltration components of storm water practices need to meet the water quality standards of this
Section:
1. Technical Standards identified and approved by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources in accordance with Chapter
NR 151.03 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
2. Where technical standard have not been identified or developed
by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, other
technical standards identified and approved by the City of
Ashland may be used.
3. In this Section, the average annual rainfall is based on figures
for the City of Duluth, 1975 (March 24 through November 19).
C. Performance Standards
1. Responsible party. The responsible party shall implement a post-construction storm water
management plan that incorporates the requirements of this section.
2. Plan. A written storm water management plan shall follow the requirements set forth in
Chapter NR 216.47 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code and shall be developed and
implemented for each post-construction site.
3. General considerations for onsite and off-site management measures. The following
considerations shall be observed in managing runoff:
Helpful Note.
Pollutant loading models such
as SLAMM, P8, or equivalent
methodology may be used to
evaluate the efficiency of the
design in reducing total
suspended solids.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-15
a. Natural topography and land cover features such as natural swales, natural
depressions, native soil infiltrating capacity, and natural groundwater recharge areas
shall be preserved and used, to the maximum extent practical, to meet the
requirement of this Section.
b. Emergency overlay flow for all storm water facilities shall be provided to prevent
exceeding the safe capacity of downstream drainage facilities and prevent
endangerment of downstream property or public safety.
4. Location and regional treatment option.
a. The best management practices may be located onsite or off-site with written
permission from the property owner as part of a regional storm water device, practice
or system.
b. Post-construction runoff within non-navigable surface water that flows into a best
management practice, such as a wet detention pond, is not required to meet the
performance standards of this Section. Post-construction best management practices
may be located in non-navigable surface waters.
c. Except as allowed otherwise in this Section, post-construction runoff from new
development shall meet the post-construction performance standards prior to entering
navigable surface water.
d. Post-construction from any development within a navigable surface water that flows
into a best management practice is not required to meet the performance standards of
this Section provided all the following conditions are met:
(1) The best management practice was constructed prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance and the best management practice either received a permit
issued under Chapter 30 of the Wisconsin Statutes, or the best management
practice did not required a permit under Chapter 30 of the Wisconsin Statutes;
and
(2) The best management practice is designed to provide runoff treatment from
future upland development.
e. Runoff from existing development, re-development, and infill areas shall meet the
post-construction performance standards in accordance with this Section.
(1) To the maximum extent practical, best management practices shall be located
to treat runoff prior to discharge to navigable water surfaces.
(2) Post-construction best management practices may be located in navigable
surface water if allowable under all other applicable federal, state, and local
regulations, such as Chapter NR 103 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
and Chapter 30 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
f. The discharge of runoff from a best management practice, such as a wet detention
pond, or after a series of such best management practices, is subject to this Section.
g. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent may approve off-site
management measures provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent determines that
the post-construction runoff site is covered by a storm water management
system plan that is approved by the City of Ashland and that it contains
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
8-16 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
management requirements consistent with the purpose and intent of this
Section; and
(2) The off-site facility meets all of the following conditions:
? The facility is in place;
? The facility is designed and adequately sized to provide a level of storm
water control equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by
onsite practices meeting the performance standards of this Section; and
? The facility has a legally obligated entity responsible for its long term
operation and maintenance, as required by Section 8.3 E: Maintenance
Agreement.
h. Where a regional treatment option exists such that the Public Works Director or
Designated Authorized Agent exempts the applicant from all or part of the minimum
onsite storm water management requirements, the applicant shall be required to pay a
fee as established by the City’s fee schedule. The fee for post-construction runoff
shall be determined through establishing an equitable distribution of the cost for land,
engineering design, construction, and maintenance of the regional treatment option.
5. Alternate requirements. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent
may establish alternate storm water management requirements more stringent than those set
forth in this Section if the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent
determines that an added level of protection is needed to protect sensitive resources.
D. Storm Water Management Plan and Permitting Requirements
1. Permit required. No person shall commence a land disturbing construction activity
subject to this Ordinance without receiving prior approval of a storm water management
plan pursuant to Section 3.41: Storm Water Management Plan and all other necessary
approvals and permits.
2. Storm water management plan. The property owner or owner’s agent shall prepare a
storm water management plan that complies with the performance standards of this Section
and that, at a minimum, includes the following information:
a. Name, address, telephone number for the following or their designees: property
owner; developer; project engineer for practice design and certification; person(s)
responsible for installation of storm water management practices; and person(s)
responsible for maintenance of storm water practices prior to the transfer, if any, of
maintenance responsibility to another part.
b. A proper legal description of the property proposed to be developed, referenced to
the United States Public Land Survey system or to block and lot numbers within a
recorded land subdivision plat.
c. Pre-development site conditions, including the following:
(1) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred
(100) feet. The site maps shall show the following:
? Site location and legal property description;
? Predominant soil types and hydrologic soil groups;
? Existing cover type and condition;
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-17
? Topographic contours of the site at a contour interval not to exceed two
(2) feet;
? Topography and drainage network including enough of the contiguous
properties to show runoff patterns onto, through and from the site;
? Watercourses that may affect or be affected by runoff from the site;
? Flow path and direction for all storm water conveyance sections;
? Watershed boundaries used in hydrology determinations to show
compliance with the required performance standards;
? Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on
and immediately adjacent to the site;
? Limits of the 100-year floodplain;
? Locations of wells and wellhead protection areas covering the project
area, and delineated pursuant to Chapter NR 811.16 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code.
(2) Hydrology and pollutant load computations as needed to show compliance with
performance standards. All major assumptions used in developing input
parameters shall be clearly stated. The geographic areas used in making the
calculations shall be clearly cross referenced to the required map(s).
d. Post-development site conditions, including the following:
(1) Explanation of the provisions to preserve and use natural topography and
land cover features to minimize changes in peak flow runoff rates and
volumes to surface waters and wetlands.
(2) Explanation of any restrictions on storm water management measures in the
development area imposed by wellhead protection plans and ordinances.
(3) One or more site maps at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred
(100) feet showing the following:
? Post-construction pervious areas including vegetative cover type and
condition;
? Impervious surfaces including all buildings, structures, and pavement;
? Post-construction topographic contours of the site at a contour interval
not to exceed two (2) feet;
? Post-construction drainage network including enough of the contiguous
property to show runoff patterns onto, through and from the site;
? Locations and dimensions of drainage easements;
? Location of maintenance easements specified in the maintenance
agreement;
? Flow path and direction for all storm water management conveyance
and treatment practices, including the onsite and off-site tributary
drainage area;
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
8-18 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
? Location and type of conveyance system that will carry runoff from the
drainage and treatment practices to the nearest adequate outlet, such as
a curbed street, storm drain, or natural drainage way;
? Watershed boundaries used in hydrology and pollutant loading
calculations and any changes to lakes, streams, wetlands, channels,
ditches, and other watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the
site.
(4) Hydrology and pollutant loading computations as needed to show
compliance with performance standards. The computations shall be made for
each discharge point in the development, and the geographic areas used in
making the calculations shall be clearly cross referenced to the required
map(s).
(5) Results of the investigations of soils and groundwater required for the
placement and design of storm water management measures. Detailed
drawings including cross sections and profiles of all permanent storm water
conveyance and treatment practices.
e. A description and installation schedule for the storm water practices needed to meet
the performance standards of this Section.
f. A maintenance plan developed for the life of each storm water management practice
including the required maintenance activities and maintenance activity schedule.
g. Cost estimates for construction, operation, and maintenance of each storm water
management practice.
h. Other information requested in writing by the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent to determine compliance of the proposed storm water management
measures with the provisions of this Ordinance.
i. All site investigations, plans, designs, computations, and drawings shall be certified
by a professional engineer and prepared in accordance with accepted engineering
practice and requirements of this Section.
3. Alternate requirements and exemptions. The Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent may prescribe alternative submittal requirements for applicants seeking
an exemption to onsite storm water management performance standards pursuant to this
Section. In addition, the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent may
exempt some of the requirements of this Subsection for land disturbing activities under one
(1) acre in area.
E. Maintenance Agreement
1. Maintenance agreement required. The maintenance agreement required by this Section
for storm water management practices shall be an agreement between the City of Ashland
and the property owner(s) to provide for maintenance of storm water practices beyond the
duration period of this permit. The maintenance agreement shall be filed with the Ashland
County Register of Deeds as a property deed restriction so that it is binding upon all
subsequent owners of the land served by the storm water management practices.
2. Agreement provisions. The maintenance agreement shall contain the following
information and provisions, and be consistent with the maintenance plan required by this
Section:
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-19
a. Identification of the storm water facilities and designation of the drainage area served
by the facilities.
b. A schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the storm water management
system consistent with the storm water management plan required by this Section.
c. Identification of the property owner(s) or the City of Ashland's responsibility for long
term maintenance of the storm water management practices identified in the required
storm water management plan.
d. Requirement that the property owner(s) or the City of Ashland shall maintain storm
water management practices in accordance with the required schedule.
e. Authorization for the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent to
access the property to conduct inspections of storm water management practices as
necessary to ascertain that the practices are being maintained and operated in
accordance with the agreement.
f. A requirement on the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent to
maintain public records of the results of site inspections, to inform the property
owner(s) of the inspection results, and to specifically indicate any corrective actions
required to bring the storm water management practice into proper working
condition.
g. Agreement that the property owner(s) responsible for long term maintenance of the
storm water management practices shall be notified by the Public Works Director or
Designated Authorized Agent of maintenance problems that required correction. The
specified corrective actions shall be undertaken within a reasonable timeframe as set
by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent.
h. Authorization of the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent to
perform the corrected actions identified in the inspection report if the responsible
party designated by this Section does not make the required corrections in the
specified time period. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent
shall have entered the amount due on the tax rolls and collect the money as a special
charge against the property pursuant to Subchapter VII of Chapter 66 of the
Wisconsin Statutes.
F. Financial Guarantee
1. Establishment of the guarantee. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized
Agent may require the submittal of a financial guarantee, the form and type of which shall
be acceptable to the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent. The financial
guarantee shall be in the amount determined by the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent to be the estimated cost of construction and the estimated cost of the
maintenance of the storm water management practices during the period which the
designated party in the maintenance agreement has maintenance responsibility. The
financial guarantee shall give the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent
the authorization to use the funds to complete the storm water management practice if the
responsible party defaults or does not properly implement the approved storm water
management plan, upon written notice to the responsible party by the administering
authority that the requirements of this Section have not been met.
2. Conditions for release. Conditions for the release of the financial guarantee are as
follows:
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
8-20 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
a. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall release the portion
of the financial guarantee established under this Section, less any costs incurred by
the City of Ashland to complete installation of practices, upon submission of as-built
plans by a professional engineer. The Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent may make provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the financial
guarantee based on the completion of the various development stages.
b. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall release the portion
of the financial guarantee established under this Section to assure maintenance of
storm water practices, less any costs incurred by the City of Ashland, at such time
that the responsibility for practice maintenance is passed on to another entity via an
approved maintenance agreement.
G. Enforcement
1. Any land disturbing construction activity or post-construction runoff initiated after the
effective date of this Ordinance by any person, firm, association, or corporation subject to
the provisions of this Section shall be deemed a violation unless conducted in accordance
with this Section.
2. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall notify the responsible
party by certified mail of any non-complying land disturbing construction activity or postconstruction
runoff. The notice shall describe the nature of the violation, remedial actions
needed, a schedule for remedial action, and additional enforcement action that may be
taken.
3. Upon receipt of written notification from the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent, the responsible party shall correct work that does not comply with the
approved storm water management plan or other provisions of the approved permits. The
responsible party shall make corrections as necessary to meet the specifications and
schedule set forth by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent in the
notice.
4. If a violation to a permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance is likely to result in damage to
properties, public facilities, or waters of the state, the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent may enter the land and take emergency actions necessary to prevent such
damage. The costs incurred by the City of Ashland plus interest and legal costs shall be
billed to the responsible party.
5. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent is authorized to post a stop
work order on all land disturbing construction activity that is in violation of this Ordinance,
or to request the City Attorney obtain a cease and desist order in any court with jurisdiction.
6. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent may revoke a permit issued
under this Ordinance for non-compliance with Ordinance provisions.
7. Any permit, revocation, stop work order, or cease and desist order shall remain in effect
unless retracted by the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent or by a
court with jurisdiction.
8. The Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent is authorized to refer any
violation of this Ordinance, stop work order, or cease and desist order issued pursuant to
this Ordinance to the City Attorney for the commencement of further legal proceedings in
any court with jurisdiction.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.3: Post-Construction Storm Water Management
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 8-21
9. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who does not comply with the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be subject to the forfeiture of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
10. Compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance may also be enforced by injunction in
any court with jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary, to prosecute for forfeiture or a cease
and desist order, before resorting to injunction proceedings.
11. When the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent determines that the
holder of a permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance has failed to follow practices set forth
in the storm water management plan, the Public Works Director or Designated Authorized
Agent may enter upon the land and perform the work or other operations necessary to bring
the condition of said lands into conformance with requirements of the approved plan. The
Public Works Director or Designated Authorized Agent shall keep a detailed accounting of
the costs and expenses of performing this work. These costs and expenses shall be
deducted from any financial security posted pursuant to this Section. Where such a security
has not been established, or where such a security is insufficient to cover these costs, the
costs and expenses shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property
and collected with any other taxed levied thereon for the year in which the work is
completed.
Section 8.4 Invasive Species Management
A. Purpose and Intent
In the interest of economics, health, ecology and recreation, regulations are now in place to
control and manage invasive species in the State of Wisconsin pursuant to Chapter NR 40, of the
State of Wisconsin Administrative Codes. It is the purpose of this section to recommend best
management practices to be used prior to, during and post construction, for the control of invasive
species by:
1. Identifying and limiting the spread of established populations.
2. Preventing the introduction or spread of new species not previously identified in the area.
B. General Guidelines
Refer to Section NR 40.04 and NR 40.05, of the State of Wisconsin Administrative Codes for
species listings and regulations regarding the transportation, possession, transfer and introduction
of prohibited and restricted species.
C. Land Disturbing Construction Activities
Prior to any construction disturbance, the use of best management practices is encouraged to
prevent the transfer and introduction of invasive species to un-infested sites in violation of NR 40
of the Wisconsin Administrative Codes. On sites with infestations of restricted or prohibited
species, contractors should adhere to the following requirements necessary to prevent
infestations.
1. Avoid invasive species populations, when feasible during soils disturbance activities.
2. Prior to moving equipment out of an infested area, all equipment should be, to the
maximum extent possible, clean of soils, seeds, plant parts, or invertebrates from exterior
surfaces.
Part 8: Environmental Protection
Section 8.4: Invasive Species Management
8-22 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
3. All contaminated soils, seeds, plant parts, or invertebrates found during inspections and
cleaning shall be disposed of in labeled garbage bags.
4. Areas where soils have been disturbed should be re-vegetated as soon as feasible.
5. Use non-invasive or native seed for cover crops or for re-vegetation and landscaping.
6. Ensure only the species specified in the plan are used.
7. Continue to monitor the re-vegetation site for invasive species spread.
Refer to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the Wisconsin Council on Forestry
for example best management practices.
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-1
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements specifies the types of land divisions that can occur in the City of Ashland. It also
specifies layout, improvements, and construction standards that are typically associated with land divisions. Refer to Part 4:
Zoning Districts for provisions relating to conservation subdivisions and traditional neighborhood design developments.
PART 9
LAND DIVISIONS AND
IMPROVEMENTS
Part 9: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 9.1 General Provisions of Land Divisions .................................................................................... 3
A. Intent ................................................................................................................................................ 3
B. Authority and Jurisdiction ................................................................................................................ 3
C. Types of Land Divisions .................................................................................................................. 3
D. Exclusions ........................................................................................................................................ 4
E. Compliance ...................................................................................................................................... 4
F. Land Suitability ................................................................................................................................ 5
G. Ownership and Maintenance of Common Areas and Common Facilities ....................................... 5
H. General Improvements ..................................................................................................................... 7
I. Development Agreement ................................................................................................................. 8
J. Dedication and Reservation of Land ................................................................................................ 8
Section 9.2 General Procedures and Required Information ................................................................... 8
A. General ............................................................................................................................................. 8
B. Pre-Application Meeting for Land Divisions ................................................................................... 8
C. Preliminary Plat................................................................................................................................ 9
D. Final Plat ........................................................................................................................................ 10
E. Certified Survey Map ..................................................................................................................... 11
F. Condominium Plats ........................................................................................................................ 12
G. Replats ............................................................................................................................................ 12
Section 9.3 Infrastructure Design Standards .......................................................................................... 12
A. Streets ............................................................................................................................................. 12
B. Private Streets ................................................................................................................................ 15
C. Blocks ............................................................................................................................................ 17
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1: General Provisions
9-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
D. Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Multi-Use Trail Circulation Layout ........................................................ 18
E. Parcels ............................................................................................................................................ 18
F. Easements ...................................................................................................................................... 19
List of Tables
Table Title Page
9.3.A General Street Design and Layout Standards .......................................................................... 12
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-3
Section 9.1 General Provisions of Land Divisions
A. Intent
This Part of this Ordinance is intended to regulate the division of land within the incorporated
area of the City of Ashland for the following purposes:
1. Provide for division of land in a manner that is consistent with the goals, objectives, and
policies of the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Ashland and that considers the
economic, social, and environmental aspects of the division of land;
2. Promote sensitive use, development, conservation, and protection of natural resources in
the City to achieve a balance between development and the sustaining natural resource
base;
3. Avoid the harmful effects of premature division of land;
4. Promote the public, health, safety, and general welfare;
5. Lessen congestions in the streets and highways;
6. Further the orderly layout and use of land;
7. Provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for solar collectors and to wind
for wind energy systems;
8. Prevent the overcrowding of land;
9. Facilitate adequate and economical provisions for water, sewerage, and other public
requirements;
10. Provide for proper ingress and egress;
11. Promote proper monumenting of subdivided land;
12. Encourage conveyance by accurate legal description;
13. Prevent and control erosion, sedimentation, and other pollution of the surface and
subsurface waters;
14. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful water conditions; and
15. Prevent flood damage to persons and property, and minimize expenditures for flood relief
and flood control projects.
B. Authority and Jurisdiction
The provisions this Ordinance are adopted under the authority granted by Section 236.45 of the
Wisconsin Statutes, relating to the subdivision of land. This Ordinance shall regulate the division
of land within the incorporated area of the City of Ashland.
C. Types of Land Divisions
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the following types of land division in the City of
Ashland:
1. Subdivision plat. Any division of land may be surveyed and a plat thereof approved and
recorded pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin
Statutes. However, a platted subdivision shall be required for any land division that creates
five (5) or more parcels one and one-half (1-1/2) acres or less in area, by division or by
successive divisions of any part of the original property within a period of five (5) years.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1: General Provisions
9-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
2. Certified survey map. In lieu of a subdivision plat, any division of land that creates four
(4) or less parcels or building sites, inclusive of the original remnant parcel, by division or
successive divisions of any part of the original property within a period of five (5) years,
shall be surveyed and a certified survey map of such division approved and recorded
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
3. Condominium plat. Any land divisions that creates condominiums having one or more
principal structures on any parcel shall be regulated pursuant to this Ordinance and Section
703.11 of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to condominiums.
4. Replats. Any replatting of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to vacate or alter
areas within a plat dedicated to the public, or to change the boundaries of a recorded
subdivision, shall be regulated pursuant to this Ordinance and Section 236.40 through
Section 236.44 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
D. Exclusions
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to the following:
1. Transfers of interest in land by will or pursuant to court order;
2. Cemetery plats under Section 157.07 of the Wisconsin Statutes;
3. Upon approval from the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent, the sale or
exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional parcels are
not thereby created and the parcels resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes
required by this Section or other applicable laws or ordinances;
4. Lands subdivided (prior to September 17, 1985) into residential or commercial lots where
the existing size is less than 20,000 square feet.
5. Assessors’ plats made under Section 70.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes, but such assessors’
plats shall comply with Sections 236.15(1)(a)-(g) and 236.20(1), (2)(a)-(c) of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
E. Compliance
No person, firm, or corporation shall divide any land within the City of Ashland that results in a
subdivision plat, certified survey map, condominium plat, or replat, and no such action shall be
entitled to record without compliance with the following:
1. The City’s Comprehensive Plan;
2. All applicable provisions of this Ordinance;
3. The provisions of Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to subdivisions;
4. The provisions of Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to condominium plats;
5. The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services regulating lot
size and lot elevation necessary for proper sanitary conditions if any lot or unit is not served
by public sewer and provisions for such service have not been made;
6. The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation relating to the provisions for the
safety of entrance upon and departure from state trunk highways or connecting highways
and for the preservation of public interest and investment in such highways;
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-5
7. The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources setting water quality
standards preventing and abating pollution, and regulating development within floodplain,
wetland, and shoreland areas; and
8. All other applicable ordinances.
F. Land Suitability
No land shall be divided which is held unsuitable for such use by the Plan
Commission or Common Council upon recommendation of the Public
Works Director or other Authorized Agent, for reasons of flooding,
inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable
topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety,
or welfare of the future residents or occupants of the proposed land division
or the City, or poses an imminent harm to the environment.
G. Ownership and Maintenance of Common Areas and Common
Facilities
Land divisions that create common areas and common facilities, such as those created in a
conservation subdivision or a condominium development, shall comply with the following
provisions relating to ownership and maintenance of common areas and common facilities.
1. Alternatives. Common areas or facilities within a land division or condominium may be
owned and maintained by one or more of the following:
a. A homeowners association;
b. A condominium association established in accordance with the Condominium
Ownership Act, Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes;
c. A nonprofit conservation organization;
d. The City of Ashland or another governmental body empowered to hold an interest in
real property; and/or
e. An individual who will use the land for open space purposes as provided by the
conservation easement.
2. Homeowners association. A homeowners association shall be established if the common
area is proposed to be owned by a homeowners association. Membership in the association
is mandatory for all purchasers of land in the development and their
successors. The homeowners association bylaws, guaranteeing
continuing maintenance of the common area and other common
facilities, and the declaration of covenants, conditions, and
restrictions of the homeowners association shall be submitted to the
City of Ashland as part of the information required for the
preliminary plat. The homeowners association bylaws or the
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions of the
homeowners association shall contain the following information:
a. The legal description of the common land;
b. A description of common facilities;
c. The restrictions placed upon the use and enjoyment of the lands or facilities;
d. Persons or entities entitled to enforce the restrictions;
Sustainability Tip.
To the maximum extent
practical, development in
areas with significant
natural features or
hazards should be
avoided.
Sustainability Tip.
Incorporation of common
areas and facilities can
help reduce costs for
individual uses and
protect large common
open spaces that benefit
the environment and the
community.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1: General Provisions
9-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
e. A mechanism to assess and enforce the common expenses for the land or facilities,
including upkeep and maintenance expenses, real estate taxes, and insurance
premiums;
f. A mechanism for resolving disputes among the owners or association members;
g. The conditions and timing of the transfer of ownership and control of land facilities
to the association; and
h. Any other matter the developer deems appropriate.
3. Condominium association. If the common areas and facilities are to be held under the
Condominium Ownership Act, Chapter 703 of the Wisconsin Statutes, then the
condominium instruments shall identify the restrictions placed upon the use and enjoyment
of the common areas. All common areas shall be held as a “common element” as defined
in Section 703.01(2) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
4. Nonprofit conservation organization. If the common area is to be held by a nonprofit
conservation organization, the organization must be approved by the City of Ashland
pursuant to the procedures for preliminary plat approval. The conveyance to the nonprofit
conservation organization must contain appropriate provisions for reversion in the event
that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to uphold the terms of the conveyance.
5. Public dedication of common areas and streets.
a. Common areas. The City of Ashland may accept the dedication of fee title or
dedication of conservation easement to the common area provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) The common area is accessible to the residents of the City of Ashland;
(2) The City of Ashland agrees to and has access to maintain the common area.
b. Streets. Streets or other public ways that have been designated by the City of
Ashland’s Common Council and/or designated on a duly adopted official plan shall
be dedicated or reserved by the subdivider to the City of Ashland. The street or
public way shall be made a part of the plat in the locations and dimensions indicated
in any applicable adopted plan of the City of Ashland and as set forth in this
Ordinance. Private streets may be allowed pursuant to Section 9.3 B.: Private
Streets.
6. Individual ownership. An individual may hold fee title to the land while a nonprofit or
other qualified organization holds a conservation easement for the common area.
7. Maintenance plan. Every conservation subdivision must include a plan that provides
evidence of a means to properly manage the common area in perpetuity and evidence of a
long term means to properly manage and maintain all common facilities, including any
storm water facilities. The maintenance plan shall be approved in conjunction and
following preliminary plat approval procedures.
a. Requirements. The maintenance plan shall accomplish the following:
(1) Designate the ownership of the common area in accordance with this Section;
(2) Establish necessary, regular, and periodic operation and maintenance
responsibilities;
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-7
(3) Estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, and other associated costs and
define the means for funding the same on an ongoing basis;
(4) Include a land stewardship plan specifically focusing on the long term
management of common areas. The land stewardship plan shall include a
narrative describing existing conditions; the proposed end state and the
measure proposed for achieving the end state; proposed restoration measures;
and the operations needed for maintaining the stability of resources. The
applicant may be required to place in escrow sufficient funds for the
maintenance and operation costs of common facilities for a maximum of one
year.
b. Failure to maintain. In the event the organization established to own and maintain
the common areas and common facilities, or any successor organization, fails to
maintain all or any portion of the common areas or common facilities in reasonable
order and condition in accordance with the maintenance plan and applicable laws,
rules, and regulations, the City of Ashland may serve written notice upon such
organization and upon the residents and owners of the common areas and common
facilities in reasonable condition. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections
required and the time within which the specified corrections shall be made. Upon
failure to comply within the specified time, the organization, or any successor
organization, shall be considered in violation of this Ordinance, in which case the
bond, if any, may be forfeited, and any permits may be revoked and suspended.
c. Corrective actions. The City of Ashland may enter the property and take corrective
actions. The costs of corrective actions by the City of Ashland shall be assessed
ratably, in accordance with tax assessments, against the properties that have the right
of enjoyment of the common facilities and shall become a lien on said properties.
The City of Ashland, at the time of entering upon such common facilities for the
purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the County
Register of Deeds upon the properties affected by such lien.
d. Amendments. Management plans can be amended by the owner pursuant to the
provisions of this Section with the approval of the Common Council.
H. General Improvements
Before the applicable authority approves a land division, the owner or owner’s agent shall
provide the required improvements at his or her expense, shall give bond in an amount equal to
the estimate of the City Engineer or other Authorized Agent, or make other financial
arrangements acceptable to the Common Council to cover the costs of the following:
1. Grading. Streets shall be graded to secure proper drainage and to prevent the collection of
storm water pools.
2. Surface water drainage. Surface water drainage shall be provided by storm sewers or
drainage courses adequate to protect roadway surfaces.
3. Sanitation. When located within the surface area of a public sanitary sewerage system,
sanitary sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire land division in such a manner as
to serve adequately all parcels with connection to such public system and in conformance
with all applicable regulations. Storm water drainage shall not be permitted to combine
with sanitary sewers nor shall sanitary sewerage be permitted in storm water sewers.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.1: General Provisions
9-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
4. Placing of monuments. The subdivider shall install monuments placed in accordance with
Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes or as may be required by the Public Works Director
or other Authorized Agent.
I. Development Agreement
Before or as a condition of receiving any final approval from the Common Council of any final
plat, certified survey map, or condominium plat for which public improvements are required by
this Ordinance, or for which public improvements, dedications, or fees are being deferred under
this Ordinance, or for which phasing approval is being granted under this Ordinance, the
subdivider shall sign and file a development agreement with the Common Council. The
development agreement shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and shall be approved
by the Common Council prior to the approval of the final plat or condominium plat.
J. Dedication and Reservation of Land
The Plan Commission or other applicable approval authority may require that suitable sites in a
proposed land division be dedicated or reserved for future public uses, including but not limited
to, parks, playgrounds, public buildings, open space, and areas of significant natural resources
that would benefit by dedication of the land to the public.
Section 9.2 General Procedures and Required Information
A. General
This Section specifies general procedures and required information relating to the division of land
in the City of Ashland. Refer to Part 3: Applications, Reviews, and Approval Procedures for
additional information.
B. Pre-Application Meeting for Land Divisions
1. Applicability. Prior to submitting an application for a land division, an applicant is
strongly encouraged to request a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator,
Public Works Director, or other Designated Authorized Agent, and the Plan Commission,
pursuant to Section 3.1, D., 1.: Pre-application Meeting. The pre-application meeting
allows the applicant the opportunity to receive general feedback as to how the proposed
land division is (or is not) in compliance with this Ordinance. The meeting also allows the
owner to receive general information about the types and details of improvements that are
required to be installed by and at the owner’s expense.
2. Required information. The applicant shall submit the following information on a sketch
plan that is prepared to a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet.
The sketch plan shall include the following information:
a. The approximate boundaries of the of land division, proposed street and parcel
design, numbers and approximate sizes of parcels and streets, as well as any areas
proposed to be dedicated to the public other than streets.
b. Existing site conditions, including, but not limited to, waterways, wetlands, areas of
flooding, rock outcrops, adverse slopes, and other conditions that might affect the
design or safety of the land division.
c. The locations where filling, grading, dredging, or lagooning will or are likely to
occur.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.2: Application Procedures and Required Information
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-9
d. The size and location of any land owned or controlled by the owner of the proposed
subdivision, which is contiguous with the proposed land division, even though it is
not included in the proposed land division.
e. Indication of the relationship of the proposed land division to existing highways,
streets, utilities, and similar features together with distances and direction to the
nearest water and sewer lines.
C. Preliminary Plat
1. Applicability. A preliminary plat shall be prepared for all land divisions that meet the
criteria specified in Section 9.1, C., 1: Subdivision Plat.
2. Required information to be shown on the preliminary plat. A preliminary plat shall be
prepared based on a survey by a Wisconsin registered land surveyor. The preliminary plat
shall be prepared at a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and
shall include the following information, except as may be waived by the Zoning
Administrator, Public Works Director, or other Designated Authorized Agent:
a. General information.
(1) Proposed name of the subdivision and location by section, township, and legal
description.
(2) Name and address of the owner, subdivider, or agent and surveyor.
(3) Location map.
(4) Date, graphic scale, and north arrow.
b. Existing conditions.
(1) The location and names of existing adjacent subdivisions, parks, and
cemeteries, and owners of record of abutting property that has not been platted.
(2) Existing zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(3) Location, size, and invert elevation of any existing sanitary or storm sewers,
culverts and drain pipes, the location of utility holes, catch basins, hydrants,
power and telephone poles, and the location and size of any existing water and
gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the proposed plat and/or
immediately adjacent to the proposed plat. The nearest such sewer or water
mains that might be extended to serve such lands shall be indicated by their
direction and distance from the nearest exterior boundary of the proposed plat
and their size and invert elevations.
(4) Type, width, and elevation of existing street pavement within the proposed plat
and/or immediately adjacent thereto, together with any legally established
centerline elevation.
(5) Location, right-of-way width, and names of all existing streets, alleys, or other
public ways, easements, railroad and utility right-of-ways, and all U.S. Public
Land Survey section and quarter section lines within the boundaries of the
proposed plat and/or immediately adjacent thereto.
(6) Location, delineated extent, and elevations of all lakes, ponds, streams,
flowages, wetlands, and floodplains.
(7) Existing topographic contours.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.2: Application Procedures and Required Information
9-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
(8) Existing natural and physical features including structures, driveways, rock
outcrops, land cover, vegetation, and similar features that may affect the
subdivision.
c. Proposed conditions.
(1) All required setbacks including building setbacks, wetland buffers, and similar
required setbacks.
(2) Exact length and bearing of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
(3) Location, width, and names of all proposed streets and public right-of-ways,
such as alleys and easements.
(4) Street plans and profiles showing existing ground surface, proposed and
established street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond
the limits of the proposed subdivision when requested by the Zoning
Administrator, Public Works Director, or other Authorized Agent.
(5) Dimensions and size of each lot together with proposed lot and block numbers.
(6) Location, dimensions, and size of all sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks,
playgrounds, drainage ways, or other public uses.
(7) Site plan and dimensions of all proposed pedestrian walkways and bicycle
routes.
3. Additional required information.
a. Narrative. A narrative shall be submitted with the preliminary plat that describes the
existing zoning and any zoning changes that are contemplated. However, the
indication of such information shall not constitute an application for rezoning. The
narrative shall also describe the proposed use of the parcels, the type of buildings, the
number of dwelling units per parcel, the proposed density, and any other information
that would assist the Plan Commission in making a decision on the preliminary plat
request.
b. Testing. Testing as required by the Public Works Director or other Authorized Agent
to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, water, and other pertinent conditions affecting the
subdivision.
c. Other related plans. Other related plans as required by this Ordinance or the Plan
Commission, including, but not limited to an erosion control plan, storm water
management plan, a market analysis plan, or any other plan as may be required to
adequately review the proposed subdivision.
d. Declaration of covenants and easements. The City Attorney shall review all draft
declaration of deed restrictions and protective covenants, conservation easements,
and homeowner’s associations, and shall approve said instruments as to form.
e. Staged development plan. Whenever a portion of a tract of land is proposed for
subdividing and the balance of the tract is of a size that would allow future
subdivision, the Plan Commission may require a tentative plan for such future
subdivision.
D. Final Plat
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.2: Application Procedures and Required Information
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-11
1. Applicability. Final plat approval shall be required within six (6) months of the last
required approval of the preliminary plat.
2. Required information. The final plat shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
Section 236.20 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The affidavits and certificates required by
Section 236.21 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be lettered or printed legibly with black
durable ink on the final plat. Additional information may be required as requested by the
Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director (or other Designated Authorized Agent), the
Plan Commission, or the Common Council in order to adequately review the final plat.
3. Recording the final plat. The final plat shall be recorded as provided in Section 236.25 of
the Wisconsin Statutes.
E. Certified Survey Map
1. Applicability. A certified survey map may be prepared in lieu of a platted subdivision for
land divisions that meet the criteria specified in Section 9.1, C., 2: Certified Survey Map.
2. Review and approval authorities. If the proposed certified survey map does not involve
dedications to the public, the certified survey map may, at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator or other Designated Authorized Agent, be reviewed and approved
administratively pursuant to Section 3.39: Certified Survey Map without Public
Dedication. If the proposed certified survey map involves dedication to the public, it shall
be reviewed and approved following similar procedures relating to plat review and
approval.
3. Required information. A certified survey may be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
or other Designated Authorized Agent pursuant to the certified survey map application
procedures described in Section 3.39: Certified Survey Map without Public Dedication. In
addition to the information required by Section 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the
certified survey map shall include the following information:
a. Date, graphic scale, and north arrow.
b. Name and address of the owner, subdivider, and land surveyor preparing the certified
survey map.
c. All existing structures, together with an identification of the type of structure; the
distances of such structures from existing and proposed property lines, wells,
watercourses, and drainage ditches; and existing property boundary lines in the area
adjacent to the exterior boundaries of the proposed certified survey map and within
one hundred (100) feet thereof. The proposed use of the existing structures to be
retained shall be noted. All wells within the exterior boundaries of the proposed
certified survey map, and within fifty (50) feet of the exterior boundaries of the map,
shall be shown.
d. Location, approximate dimensions, and area of any sites to be reserved or dedicated
for parks, playgrounds, drainage ways, open space, or other public use.
e. Location and names of adjoining streets, highways, subdivisions, parks, cemeteries,
public lands, and watercourses, including impoundments. The owners of record
abutting unplatted lands shall also be shown.
f. The lengths and bearing of the centerline of all streets shall be given to the nearest
0.01 foot and the bearings to the nearest one second of arc. The arc, chord, and
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.2: Application Procedures and Required Information
9-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
radius lengths, and the chord bearing, together with the bearing of the radii of the
ends of the arcs and chords, shall be given for all curved lines.
g. Street width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street line shall be given to
the nearest 0.01 foot.
h. Active and abandoned railroad right-of-ways within and abutting exterior boundaries
of the proposed certified survey map, and the right-of-way of existing and proposed
trails, sidewalks, and bicycle paths.
i. Easements for any public sanitary sewers, water supply mains, storm water
management facilities, drainage ways, or access ways.
4. Additional information that may be required. The Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent may require that the following additional information be provided when
necessary for the proper review and consideration of the proposed land division:
a. Topographic features including existing and proposed contours.
b. Soil types as shown on existing soil survey maps.
c. The square footage and elevation of the first floor of all buildings proposed to remain
on the site.
d. The results of any required soil borings.
e. Other information as required by the Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director,
or other Designated Authorized Agent.
F. Condominium Plats
A condominium plat prepared by a land surveyor registered in Wisconsin is required for all
condominium plats or any amendments or expansions thereof. Such plat shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of Section 703.11 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and shall be reviewed
and approved or denied in the same manner as a subdivision plat as set forth in this Ordinance for
preliminary and final plats. A condominium plat shall comply with the design standards,
improvements, and all other requirements of this Ordinance that would otherwise apply to
subdivision plats.
G. Replats
When it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to vacate or alter areas
within a plat dedicated to the public, or to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or
part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded plat as
provided in Section 236.40 through 236.44 of the Wisconsin Statutes. If the replat is proposing to
change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing
to replat shall follow the procedures for preliminary and final plat as specified in this Ordinance.
Section 9.3 Infrastructure Design Standards
A. Streets
1. Street layout to comply with Official Map and/or adopted plans. In any new
subdivision, certified survey map, or condominium, the street layout shall generally
conform to the arrangement, width, and location indicated on the adopted City of Ashland
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-13
Official Map, the adopted City of Ashland Comprehensive Plan, or any other adopted plans
of any applicable jurisdiction relating to streets in Ashland.
2. Street layout in areas with no Official Map or adopted plans. In areas where no
Official Map or other applicable plans have been adopted related to streets, the street design
and layout shall recognize the functional classification of the various types of streets as
specified in this Ordinance, shall be designed consistent with Table 9.3.A: General Street
Design and Layout Standards (except as allowed otherwise pursuant to Section 9.3, A., 3.),
and shall be developed and located in proper relation to the following:
a. Existing and proposed streets;
b. The topography;
c. Natural features, such as bodies of water and woodlands;
d. Public convenience and safety;
e. The proposed use of land to be served by such streets; and
f. The most advantageous development of adjoining areas.
Note: Data in Table 9.3.A is to be updated by the typical cross-sections developed by the City of Ashland’s
Department of Public Works and the Engineering Department.
3. Alternative street design and layout standards.
a. Intent. It is the first and foremost intent of this Section to ensure that streets function
safely and properly. However, in certain situations, the
standards specified in Table 9.3.A: General Street Design
and Layout Standards may require greater right-of-way and
pavement width than necessary. Therefore, it is also the
intent of this Ordinance to allow flexibility in the design and
layout of streets so as to use land efficiently, reduce
construction and maintenance costs, reduce storm water
runoff, and reduce the impact of streets on natural features.
b. Applicability. Alternative street and design and layout
standards may be incorporated into planned unit
developments (PUDs), conservation subdivisions, and
traditional neighborhood design developments, without a
variance, upon review by the Plan Commission and approval
Table 9.3.A: General Street Design and Layout Standards
Street Type
Minimum
Right-of-Way Minimum Pavement Width
Minimum Radius
of Curvature Maximum Grade
Arterial 120 feet 36 feet 300 feet 6 percent
Collector 80 feet 36 feet 200 feet 6 percent
Local 60 feet 26 feet where no parking is allowed
36 feet where parking on both sides
100 feet 12 percent
Marginal Access 50 feet 26 feet 100 feet 12 percent
Rural Residential 66 feet 24 feet with six-foot wide crushed
aggregate shoulders
Rural Ag/Undeveloped 80 feet 30 feet wide crushed aggregate
Alley 20 feet 10 feet 100 feet 12 percent
Pedestrian Way 10 feet 5 feet
Multi Use Trail 20 feet 8 feet
Sustainability Tip.
When properly designed,
streets with reduced rightof-
ways and pavement
widths can be more
economical, more
environmentally sensitive,
and more pedestrian
oriented than
conventional streets.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design Standards
9-14 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
by the Common Council.
4. Functional classification. Consistent with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation
(WisDOT), the street classifications specified in this Ordinance are based on the function
they are intended to perform. In general, street layout shall be consistent with the
following:
a. Arterial streets. Arterial streets, as hereafter defined, shall be arranged so as to move
relatively large volumes of traffic on reasonably direct routes to activity centers in the
city, such as centers of employment, centers of governmental activity, and regional
shopping areas. They shall also be properly integrated with regional and state
highways.
b. Collector streets. Collector streets, as hereafter defined, shall be arranged to provide
ready collection from neighborhoods or locally defined areas, and conveyance of this
traffic to arterial streets or highways. Collector streets shall be properly related to the
public transportation system, to special generators of traffic, such as schools,
religious institutions, retail centers, and high density residential areas, and to the
arterial streets and highways to which they connect.
c. Local streets. Local streets shall encourage interconnections with other local streets,
but shall also discourage larger volumes of through traffic generally associated with
collector and arterial streets.
d. Alleys. Alleys provide secondary access to residential properties and shall be
encouraged where streets are relatively narrow with limited on-street parking. Alleys
also provide delivery and service access or alternate parking access to non-residential
properties.
5. Relation to topography and natural resources. Streets shall be logically related to and
respectful of the topography and natural resources, while also allowing for the development
of usable parcels.
6. Access. Access shall be given to all parcels within a subdivision and, where applicable, to
adjacent lands, unless existing conditions make such a connection unfeasible.
7. Reserve strips. Reserve strips, which intentionally prevent access to a public street from
abutting property, shall not be provided as part of any land division to control access to
streets or alleys.
8. Half streets or partial streets. Half streets or partial streets shall not be permitted, except
where essential to reasonable subdivisions of land in conformance with all other provisions
of this Ordinance and where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of
the street can be secured. Wherever land to be divided borders an existing half street or
partial street, the land to be divided shall provide the other half of the street.
9. Inadequate width of existing streets. Where a proposed land division abuts or contains
an existing street of inadequate width or right-of-way, sufficient additional width shall be
provided pursuant to the street width and right-of-way requirements of this Ordinance.
Except that extension of existing streets with lesser width or right-of-way than required by
this Ordinance shall be permitted if a variance is granted pursuant to the variance
procedures of this Ordinance.
10. Additional street width or right-of-way width. Additional street width and/or right-ofway
beyond that required by this Ordinance shall be required whenever public safety,
convenience, or special conditions (such as parking in the public right-of-way) require it.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-15
11. Street intersections.
a. Angle of intersection. Street centerline intersections shall be at right angles or at as
near to right angles as practical. No intersection shall be at an angle of less than sixty
(60) degrees.
b. Continuous alignment of streets at intersections. Street shall not necessarily continue
across perpendicular streets. A tee intersection is permissible. However, where the
centerline of a street intersection is less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from
the centerline of another street intersection, the streets shall be adjusted to the
maximum extent possible, to provide a continuous alignment that avoids a jog.
c. Minimum distance between intersections on arterial streets. The number of
intersections along arterial streets and highways shall be kept to a minimum.
Wherever practical, the distance between intersections on arterial streets and
highways shall be at least twelve hundred (1,200) feet.
12. Street names. The naming of streets shall follow the City of Ashland’s “Policy for
Naming Public Improvements.”
13. Access restriction to arterial streets or highways. Whenever a proposed land division
contains or is adjacent to an arterial street or highway, access to said parcels shall, to the
maximum extent practical, be by a frontage road or adjacent collector or local street.
14. Cul-de-sac streets.
a. Length. Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed eight
hundred (800) feet in length, unless a variance is granted pursuant to the procedures
specified in this Ordinance. A variance shall only be granted if it is found to be
consistent with all the required criteria for approval and if it is clearly found that by
unreasonable land form, or irregular shape of the plat, that a normal street pattern
cannot be established, or that an unreasonable amount of wasted land would occur
unless the variance is granted. Consideration of a variance from the maximum
allowable length of a cul-de-sac should consider the need for efficient adequate
public safety, emergency access, snow plow maneuverability and service vehicle
access.
b. Radius of turn-around. Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular turn-around
having a minimum radius to the outside edge of the finished street or curb line of not
less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Potential future extension. Unless future extension is impractical or undesirable, the
turn-around right-of-way shall terminate at the property line of the development in
such a way as to permit future extension of the street into an adjoining tract. At such
time as such street is extended, the overage created by the turn-around outside the
boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property owners
fronting on the temporary turn-around.
15. Bicycle lanes. Where shown on the official map or a plan adopted by the City of Ashland,
or where required by the Plan Commission and Common Council, streets shall incorporate
designated bicycle lanes.
16. Where conflicts occur between this ordinance and City of Ashland Ordinance 612, the
street design standards in Ordinance 612 shall govern.
B. Private Streets
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design Standards
9-16 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
1. Private streets serving new development containing three (3) or more parcels and a single
common developer where the new development and private street originate from the public
right-of-way, may be allowed when approved by the Plan Commission and Common
Council, provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The private street shall be approved through a conditional use permit, planned unit
development plan, or subdivision plan pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Ownership and maintenance of said street shall be the responsibility of the property
or homeowner’s association.
c. An easement shall be granted to the City of Ashland that allows the City to use the
private street and rights-of-way for any reasonable public purpose, including but not
limited to travel by emergency vehicles and installation of public utilities and
conveniences.
d. New private streets that originate from graveled public streets shall be constructed to
the minimum standard shown in Figure 9.3 B-1b: Private Road Section (Gravel).
e. New private streets that originate from a paved or concrete public street shall be
constructed to the minimum standard shown in Figure 9.3 B-1a: Private Road
Section (Asphalt).
f. The Plan Commission and Common Council may require that the entire street be
brought up to a higher standard by the developer whenever the potential exists for
additional development off the private street.
g. A private street that serves five (5) or more building sites shall be designated as a
public street and shall be required to comply with the construction standards
specified in City of Ashland Ordinance 612.
h. Private streets shall not connect two (2) or more existing public streets or public
rights-of-way, unless authorized by the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent and the Plan Commission.
i. Should the abutting property owners request that the City take ownership and
maintenance of a private street, said street shall be constructed by the abutting
property owners to meet or exceed City standards for a public street as specified in
City of Ashland Ordinance 612. The City may, at their option and through mutual
agreement with the abutting property owners, assess abutting property owners for any
improvements or decline to assume any ownership or liability of such street.
j. No person shall sell any parcel of land abutting a private street unless the property
deed states that the street is not a public street and is not required to be maintained by
the City of Ashland.
k. Upon approval of a private street, the Council resolution shall be recorded at the
Ashland County Register of Deeds.
l. If necessary, the private street may be required to include some means of turnaround
for emergency and service vehicles – for example, a hammerhead.
m. The City shall not assume responsibility for any liabilities resulting from the private
street.
2. Use of existing private streets (created prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance)
intended to serve new development of a single parcel or multiple parcels located along or at
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-17
the end of the existing private street may be allowed when approved by the Plan
Commission and Common Council, provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The private street shall be approved through a conditional use permit, a planned unit
development plan, or subdivision plan pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Ownership and maintenance of said street shall continue to be the sole responsibility
of the property owners abutting the private street, or a homeowner’s association of
abutting property owners.
c. Proof of legal access and/or an easement, to the new development site, on the
existing private street, shall be provided by the developer to the City, and shall be
recorded with the Register of Deeds.
d. Any private street that is extended shall meet or exceed the construction standards for
private streets as shown in Figure 9.3 B-1b: Private Road Section (Gravel) and
Figure 9.3 B-1a: Private Road Section (Asphalt). The Plan Commission and the
Common Council may, through this permitting process, allow the private street to be
constructed to an average width and cross section of the private street section lying
between the public right-of-way and the proposed private street extension. The Plan
Commission and the Common Council may require that the entire private street be
brought up to a higher standard by the developer whenever the potential exists for
additional development of the private street.
e. Private streets shall not connect two (2) or more existing public streets or street
rights-of-way, unless authorized by the Public Works Director or Designated
Authorized Agent and Plan Commission.
f. Should the abutting property owners request that the City take ownership and
maintenance of a private street, said street shall be constructed, by the abutting
property owners, to meet or exceed City standard for a public street cross-section
pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance 612. The City may, at their option and
through mutual agreement with the abutting property owners, assess abutting
property owners for any improvements or decline to assume any ownership or
liability for such street.
g. No person shall sell any parcel of land abutting a private street unless the property
deed states that the street is not a public street and is not required to be maintained by
the City of Ashland.
h. If necessary, the private street may be required to include some means of a
turnaround for emergency and service vehicles – for example, a hammerhead.
i. The City shall not assume responsibility for any liabilities from the private street.
3. Private street permit fee. The City may charge a permit fee to recuperate costs associated
with the review of the proposed construction specifications of the private street and with
the inspection of the street construction. The fee shall be charged as specified in the City’s
fees schedule.
C. Blocks
The widths, lengths, and shapes of blocks that are created shall be suited to the planned use of the
land, zoning requirements, the need for convenient access, control and safety of traffic, and the
constraints of the natural environment. In addition, the design and layout of blocks shall comply
with the following standards:
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design Standards
9-18 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
1. Block length. The length of blocks in residential areas shall not be less than three hundred
(300) feet nor more than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet in length unless specified otherwise in
this Ordinance or dictated by topography, natural resource features, or other limiting factors
of good design. In no case shall a block be longer than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet unless
approved in writing by the Police Chief, Fire Chief and Public Works Director or their
Designated Authorized Agent.
2. Block width. The width of blocks shall be wide enough to provide for two (2) tiers of
parcels of appropriate depth except where otherwise required to separate residential
development from through traffic or where blocks abut railroads, bodies of water, or other
limiting features. Width of parcels reserved or laid out for non-residential use shall be
adequate to provide for off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated and
the area zoning restrictions for such use.
3. Pedestrian way at the center of blocks. Pedestrian ways (easement
of dedicated public right-of-way) of not less than ten (10) feet in width
may be required near the center and entirely across the width of any
block over eight hundred (800) feet in length if deemed essential by
the Plan Commission or Common Council.
D. Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Multi-Use Trail Circulation Layout
General criteria for requiring sidewalks (pedestrian ways). The
Common Council, in consultation with the Plan Commission, the Public Works Director, the
Zoning Administrator, and other Authorized Agents, shall determine if sidewalks (pedestrian
ways) shall be provided and, if so, where they should be provided. Placement shall be consistent
with all City ordinances, including Ordinance 530, and all sidewalk plans approved by the
Common Council.
E. Parcels
The size, shape, and orientation of parcels shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision
and for the type of development and use contemplated. The parcels should be designed to
provide an aesthetically pleasing building site and a proper architectural setting for the building
contemplated. In addition, the design and layout of parcels shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Parcel lines. Parcel lines shall not cross municipal boundaries. Where possible, side
parcel lines shall be perpendicular to the public right-of-way and tangent at a parcel corner
or a curved street.
2. Through parcels or double frontage parcels. Through parcels or double frontage parcels
shall be prohibited except where otherwise required to separate residential development
from through traffic or where blocks abut railroads, bodies of water, or other limiting
features.
3. Required frontage on a public street. All parcels shall front on a public street, except
when the Plan Commission deems that the subdivision would be better served by a private
street. In such case, a private street shall be consistent with the private street provisions of
this Section.
4. Minimum frontage on a street. No parcel shall have a frontage on a street of less than
thirty-five (35) feet as measured at the right-of-way line, and in the case of a cul-de-sac,
measured along the length of the arc of the right-of-way line.
Sustainability Tip.
Pedestrian ways at the
center of long blocks help
tie neighborhoods
together and encourage
pedestrian activity.
Part 9: Land Divisions and Improvements
Section 9.3: Infrastructure Design Standards
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 9-19
5. Area and dimensional requirements of parcels. Areas and dimensions of all parcels
shall conform to the zoning district requirements as specified in this Ordinance. In
addition, parcels not served by public sanitary sewer and/or water shall be of sufficient area
to permit onsite sewer and/or water in a manner consistent with all state and local laws and
regulations.
6. Parcel depth. Parcels shall have sufficient depth to allow reasonable development that is
consistent with this Ordinance. The preferred ratio of parcel depth to width for most
parcels is approximately two to one (2:1).
7. Parcel width. The width of parcels shall comply with the parcel requirements of the
applicable zoning district. Parcel width shall be measured at the required front building
setback line.
8. Corner parcels. Corner parcels shall have extra width (beyond the minimum width
required by the zoning district) to allow reasonable development that complies with the
setback requirements from all streets and that complies with all other applicable ordinances.
9. Potential future subdivision of large parcels. The City may require that large parcels be
laid out in such a manner as to allow for their future subdivision if so desired. To this
extent, the City may require additional footage or other dimensional requirements so as not
to preclude future subdivision.
10. Land remnants. All land remnants that do not comply with the area and dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance shall be avoided. If this requirement cannot be met, the
remnants shall be platted as outlots that may be combined with adjacent lots or parcels in
the future.
11. Flag lots. The creation of flag lots as defined by this Ordinance shall be prohibited in the
City of Ashland.
F. Easements
The Plan Commission or applicable approval authority shall require drainage and utility
easements at rear and side parcel lines and at other locations as deemed necessary. Easements
shall be no less than ten (10) feet in width and may be split evenly along common property lines.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 10-1
Part 10: Nonconformities, specifies required standards and procedures for addressing nonconformities as defined by this
Ordinance. Additional requirements relating to specific nonconformities may also be found in other parts of this Ordinance.
PART 10
NONCONFORMITIES
Part 10: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 10.1 General Provisions ................................................................................................................... 3
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 3
B. Prior Construction Approved ..................................................................................................... 3
C. Nonconformities Due to Governmental Acquisition of Right-of-Way ...................................... 3
D. Certificate of Occupancy ........................................................................................................... 3
E. Relief from Nonconforming Status ............................................................................................ 3
Section 10.2 Nonconforming Uses ................................................................................................................ 3
A. Applicability .............................................................................................................................. 3
B. Criteria for Continuance of Nonconforming Use ...................................................................... 3
C. Change in Nonconforming Uses ................................................................................................ 4
D. Elimination of Nonconforming Uses ......................................................................................... 4
Section 10.3 Nonconforming Parcels ........................................................................................................... 4
A. Applicability .............................................................................................................................. 5
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Parcels ............................................................. 5
C. Elimination of Nonconforming Parcels ..................................................................................... 5
Section 10.4 Nonconforming Structures ...................................................................................................... 6
A. Applicability .............................................................................................................................. 6
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Structures ......................................................... 6
C. Elimination of Nonconforming Structures ................................................................................. 6
Section 10.5 Nonconforming Site Features ................................................................................................. 6
A. Applicability .............................................................................................................................. 6
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Site Features .................................................... 6
Section 10.6 Nonconforming Signs .............................................................................................................. 7
A. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 7
Part 10: Nonconformities
Section 10.1: General Provisions
10-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Signs ................................................................ 7
C. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status ........................................................................................ 8
Part 10: Nonconformities
Section10.1: General Provisions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 10-3
Section 10.1 General Provisions
A. Intent
Within this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, situations may occur where as a result of the
provisions of this Ordinance, an existing use, parcel, structure, site feature, sign, or similar
situation does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this Ordinance. It is the intent of
this Ordinance to regulate such nonconforming situations to accomplish the following:
1. Recognize the existence of uses and dimensional and intensity characteristics of structures,
parcels, site features, and signs that were lawful when established before the effective date
of this Ordinance, but that no longer conform to all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Regulate the enlargement, expansion, intensification, or extension of any nonconformity or
any increase in the impact of a nonconformity on adjacent properties.
3. Encourage the elimination of nonconformities or their reduction of their impact on adjacent
properties and the community.
B. Prior Construction Approved
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of
a building legally under construction, or for which a permit for construction has been issued, at
the time of the passage of this Ordinance or amendments thereto.
C. Nonconformities Due to Governmental Acquisition of Right-of-Way
Where a lot, parcel, or tract is occupied by a lawful structure, and where acquisition of right-ofway
by eminent domain, dedication, or purchase by a city, county, state, or federal agency creates
a nonconforming situation regarding any provision of this Ordinance, then such situation shall be
deemed lawful.
D. Certificate of Occupancy
Certificates of occupancy for nonconformities existing on the effective date of this Ordinance
may be issued by the Building Inspector or other Designated Authorized Agent provided that
such certificates state that the nonconformity does not conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
E. Relief from Nonconforming Status
The owner of a nonconformity may seek relief from the provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to
the applicable procedures specified in Part 3: Applications, Review and Approval Procedures of
this Ordinance relating to variances, conditional uses, and amendments.
Section 10.2 Nonconforming Uses
A. Applicability
A nonconforming use may be continued subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance,
provided that such continuance is in accordance with the criteria for continuance as specified in
this Section and all other applicable regulations necessary to ensure adequate protection and
safety of adjacent property and the users and occupants of such nonconforming use.
B. Criteria for Continuance of Nonconforming Use
Continuance of a nonconforming use shall be permitted provided that all of the following criteria
are met:
Part 10: Nonconformities
Section 10.2: Nonconforming Uses
10-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
1. No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied at the effective date of this Ordinance. No nonconforming
use of land shall continue if it ceases for any reason (except where governmental action
impedes access to the property) for a period of more than twelve (12) consecutive months
or for twelve (12) months during any three (3) year period. No nonconforming land use
shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the parcel or lot other than that
occupied by such use on the effective date of this Ordinance.
2. No nonconforming use of a structure shall extend to any part of the structure that was not
manifestly arranged or designed for such use on the effective date of this Ordinance and no
such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside the structure. Moreover, such use or
structure shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, or reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered except for a permitted use. No nonconforming use of a structure shall
continue if it is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months.
3. Any nonconforming use that requires a license, permit, or other evidence of City approval,
initially issued lawfully prior to the nonconformity, shall be conducted in accordance with
the terms of the City’s approval, provided that the use has not been abandoned for a
continuous period of one (1) year or more. The license, permit, or other evidence of City
approval ceases at the time the nonconformity ceases to exist.
4. If a structure housing a nonconforming use requires repairs or alterations, is removed, or
damaged to the extent that the cost of repair, alteration or replacement exceeds fifty (50)
percent of the appraised market value as determined by the City Assessor, excluding land
value, the damaged structure shall not be repaired, or replaced, except in conformity with
this Ordinance or as allowed by Wisconsin Statutes.
C. Change in Nonconforming Uses
1. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.
2. When any nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not be later
changed to a nonconforming use.
3. A nonconforming use may be changed to reduce the nonconformity, but once reduced, the
use may not be changed to increase the nonconformity.
D. Elimination of Nonconforming Uses
The owner of a nonconforming use may employ one or more of the following mechanisms in an
attempt to eliminate the nonconformity:
1. Replace the existing nonconforming use with a conforming use.
2. Apply for a conditional use permit, provided that the use is listed as a conditional use in the
applicable zoning district.
3. Apply for a Zoning Map amendment to rezone the property to a zoning district in which the
existing use is permitted. Or request an amendment to the Unified Development Ordinance
to allow the nonconforming use to be a permitted use in the existing zoning district. An
application for a map or text amendment shall be approved or denied based on the criteria
specified in Section 3.3: Zoning Map Amendment or Section 3.4: Unified Development
Ordinance Text Amendment.
Section 10.3 Nonconforming Parcels
Part 10: Nonconformities
Section10.3: Nonconforming Parcels
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 10-5
A. Applicability
Any parcel that was legally created and is of record with Ashland County Register of Deeds
Office, but that does not comply with the minimum parcel requirements for the current zoning
district in which it is located, may continue to be used for the legal use for which it is zoned in
accordance with the criteria for continuance as specified in this Section and all other applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Parcels
1. Any existing conforming use or conforming structure on a nonconforming parcel existing
on the effective date of this Ordinance may be enlarged, extended, constructed, or moved
provided such change does not increase the degree of nonconformity and is consistent with
all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. However, a multi-family use may not be
constructed, extended, or enlarged on a nonconforming lot.
2. A vacant parcel not served by public sanitary sewer may be used as permitted by the
provisions of the applicable zoning district provided that it has at least one (1) acre of
buildable area and it is demonstrated that a safe and adequate onsite sewage system can be
installed to serve such use. The development shall meet all other applicable provisions of
this Ordinance.
3. A nonconforming parcel shall not be altered to increase the nonconformity.
4. If in the case of two (2) or more contiguous parcels under single ownership, any individual
parcel does not meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance, such individual parcel
shall not be considered as a separate parcel of land for purposes of sale or development, but
shall be combined with a contiguous parcel or parcels so that the combination of parcels
will equal one or more parcels of land meeting the full requirements of this Ordinance.
5. Nonconforming parcels may be combined for tax purposes with a contiguous parcel or
parcels under single ownership, but shall not be divided into nonconforming parcels, even
if the division is consistent with the original parcel configuration.
6. A development permit may be issued for construction of a single-family detached residence
on a nonconforming parcel of record if the parcel is under separate ownership from all
contiguous parcels and was created prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. Singlefamily
detached residences shall not be developed on nonconforming parcels of record less
than twenty-five (25) feet in width. Setbacks from interior parcel lines may be reduced to
three (3) inches per foot of parcel width on these nonconforming parcels. A Certified
Survey Map of the parcel may be required.
C. Elimination of Nonconforming Parcels
The owner of a nonconforming parcel may employ one or more of the following mechanisms in
an attempt to eliminate the nonconformity.
1. Combine the existing nonconforming parcel with a contiguous parcel to form a single, new
conforming parcel.
2. Request an amendment to the Unified Development Ordinance to allow the characteristics
of the existing nonconforming parcel to conform to the provisions of the applicable zoning
district. An application for a text amendment shall be approved or denied based on the
criteria specified in Section 3.4: Unified Development Ordinance Text Amendment.
Part 10: Nonconformities
Section 10.3: Nonconforming Parcels
10-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
D. Exception to limits on development of nonconforming parcels.
A nonconforming parcel may be used as a building site if:
1. The parcel does not have structures placed partly upon an adjacent parcel, and
2. The parcel is developed to comply with all other city ordinances.
Section 10.4 Nonconforming Structures
A. Applicability
Any structure existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, shall be allowed to continue subject to the criteria for continued use
as specified in this Section and all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Structures
1. A nonconforming structure may be continued provided that it remains otherwise lawful
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. No nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or altered in any way that increases its
nonconformity except as permitted pursuant to the applicable conditional use procedure as
specified in this Ordinance.
3. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of its replacement cost exclusive of foundations, at the time of destruction, it shall
not be reconstructed except in conformity with this Ordinance. A nonconforming structure
damaged or destroyed by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or
infestation on or after March 2, 2006, shall be allowed to be restored provided the structure
is restored to the size and use it had immediately before the damage or destruction. An
increase in size shall only be permitted if necessary to comply with applicable State or
Federal requirements.
4. If a nonconforming structure is moved for any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the
applicable provisions of the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved.
5. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged
with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
C. Elimination of Nonconforming Structures
A nonconforming structure may be altered to bring it into conformity. However, once brought
into conformity, it shall not be allowed to revert back to a nonconforming situation.
Section 10.5 Nonconforming Site Features
A. Applicability
Nonconforming site features, including parking lots, screening, landscaping, and similar features,
shall be allowed to continue subject to the criteria for continued use as specified in this Section
and all other applicable sections of this Ordinance.
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Site Features
Part 10: Nonconformities
Section10.5: Nonconforming Site Features
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 10-7
1. Upon any change in occupancy, nonconforming site features may be continued without
improvements, except that if the improvements exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the
existing feature, the feature shall be brought into full conformance with this Ordinance.
2. When expansion of an existing nonconforming site feature is required or planned, the
newly constructed portion shall be in conformance the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. In the case of a nonconforming fence or wall, the fence or wall shall lose its nonconforming
status and shall be brought into compliance or removed if one or more of the following
occurs:
a. The fence or wall is structurally altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or
repair, which tends to make the fence less in compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance than it was before the alteration;
b. The fence or wall is relocated;
c. The fence or wall fails to comply with the Ordinance in regard to maintenance and
repair; or
d. The fence or wall endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public.
Section 10.6 Nonconforming Signs
A. Intent
This Ordinance is intended to encourage the eventual elimination of signs that do not comply
with this Ordinance. However, it is also the intent of this Ordinance to avoid unreasonable
invasion of property rights while accomplishing removal of nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs shall be allowed to continue subject to the criteria for continued use as
specified in this Section and all other applicable sections of this Ordinance.
B. Criteria for Continued Use of Nonconforming Signs
1. A nonconforming sign shall only be allowed to continue if it was installed consistent with
the applicable ordinances and regulations in place at the time of the installation.
2. Alterations involving a change in the information on the face of a sign may be made to an
existing nonconforming sign if the change does not increase the area of the sign or the
sign’s compatibility with properties in the area. However, any nonconforming sign shall
either be eliminated or made to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance if an alteration,
modification, or improvement to the sign exceeds fifty (50) percent of the cost of installing
a new sign of the same type and at the same location. It shall not be reestablished after
damage or destruction by natural causes if the Zoning Administrator or Designated
Authorized Agent determines that the estimated cost of construction exceeds fifty (50)
percent of the estimated replacement cost.
3. Nothing in this Ordinance shall relieve the owner or user of a nonconforming sign or the
property owner on which the sign is located from the provisions of this Ordinance
regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs, except that such repair shall not extend
or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign.
4. An abandoned sign that endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the public shall be
abated by the owner within sixty (60) days of receiving notice. After sixty (60) days, the
sign may be removed by the City at the owner’s expense.
Part 10: Nonconformities
Section 10.6: Nonconforming Signs
10-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
C. Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status
A nonconforming sign shall lose its legal nonconforming status and shall be removed or brought
into conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance if any of the following occurs:
1. The sign is structurally altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair, that
increases the nonconformity.
2. The sign is relocated.
3. The sign fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance relating to maintenance,
repair, abandonment, or dangerous or defective signs.
4. Within two weeks of receipt of written notice from the Zoning Administrator or other
Authorized Agent of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be brought into
compliance with this Ordinance pursuant to the issuance of a sign permit, or shall be
removed.
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 11-1
Part 11: Violations and Remedies, describes general requirements for compliance with this Ordinance and general remedies for
actions that are not in compliance with this Ordinance. Specific enforcement and penalty standards are specified in various
Sections throughout this Ordinance.
PART 11
VIOLATIONS AND REMEDIES
Part 11: Table of Contents
Section Title Page
Section 11.1 Violations ............................................................................................................................ 11-2
A. General Compliance Required and Responsibilities for Compliance .................................. 11-2
B. Compliance Required for Issuance of Permits and Utility Connections .............................. 11-2
Section 11.2 Remedies ............................................................................................................................. 11-2
A. Types of Remedies ............................................................................................................... 11-2
B. Action and Notification Procedures ..................................................................................... 11-3
Part 11: Violations and Remedies
Section 11.1: Violations
11-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
Section 11.1 Violations
A. General Compliance Required and Responsibilities for Compliance
1. Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, and any use of any land or building
that is conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance,
shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful.
2. The City shall take action in accordance with this Ordinance and Wisconsin law to remedy
any such violation of this Ordinance known to the Building Inspector, Zoning
Administrator, Public Works Director, or Designated Authorized Agent.
3. Any person aggrieved by a violation of this Ordinance may request that the Common
Council, Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Public Works Director, or Designated
Authorized Agent act in his or her behalf to prevent unlawful development; to restrain,
correct, or abate such violations; to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure, or land;
or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such property. Such
procedures may also be instituted by any property owner and shall not limit taking action in
a court of law.
4. The owner of any building or land, or part thereof, where a violation of this Ordinance
exists, and any other responsible party in connection therewith, shall be responsible for
violations of this Ordinance.
B. Compliance Required for Issuance of Permits and Utility Connections
1. No building permit, development permit, certificate of occupancy, or other permit required
by this Ordinance shall be issued that is not in compliance with this Ordinance.
f. The City shall not connect City water or sewer to any property to which the provisions
of this Ordinance apply, unless the subject property is in compliance with this
Ordinance.
g. It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person to undertake and activity for which a
permit or approval under this Ordinance is required without first obtaining such permit
or approval.
h. It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person to undertake any activity for which a
permit or approval under this Ordinance is required without strictly complying with
any such permit or approval.
Section 11.2 Remedies
A. Types of Remedies
Remedies and enforcement powers of the City shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Withhold permits. The Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director,
or Designated Authorized Agent may deny or withhold permits, certificates, or other forms
of authorization on any land, structure, or improvement thereon for which there is an
uncorrected violation of this Ordinance or for which there is a violation of a condition or
qualification of a permit, certificate, approval, or other authorization previously granted by
the City. In lieu of withholding or denying an authorization, the City may grant such
Part 11: Violations and Remedies
Section 11.2: Remedies
11-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012
authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected within a reasonable
amount of time. This provision shall apply regardless of whether the current owner or
applicant is responsible for the violation in question.
2. Revoke permits. The City may revoke a permit or other authorization as follows:
a. Any permit may be revoked when the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator,
Public Works Director, or Designated Authorized Agent determines one or more of
the following conditions exist:
(1) There is a departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required
under the terms of the permit;
(2) The permit was procured by false representation or was issued by mistake; or
(3) Any provision of this Ordinance is being violated.
b. Before revocation pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, the Building
Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director, or Designated Authorized
Agent shall give notice of intent to suspend or revoke permits or approvals specifying
a reasonable time for compliance with this Ordinance. If notice of intent is given,
suspension or revocation shall not occur before the time for compliance has expired.
c. If compliance has not been met in the specified time, revocation of any permit may,
upon notice to the applicant and other known parties in interest (including any holder
of building or use permits affected) and after a public hearing, proceed by a supermajority
vote of the Common Council.
3. Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the Building Inspector, Zoning
Administrator, Public Works Director, or Designated Authorized Agent may stop work on
any building, structure, or land for which there is an uncorrected violation of the provisions
of this Ordinance or of a permit or other form of authorization issued hereunder. The stop
work order shall be in accordance with all applicable laws and building codes.
4. Revoke plan or other approval. Where a violation of this Ordinance involves failure to
comply with approved plans or conditions, the final review authority may, upon notice to
the applicant and other known parties in interest (including any holder of building or use
permits affected) and after a public hearing, revoke the plan (or other approvals) or
conditions its continuation on strict compliance.
5. Injunctive relief. The City may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop
any violation of this Ordinance or of a permit, certificate, or other form of authorization
granted hereunder.
6. Abatement. The City may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement,
injunction, or other action proceeding to abate or remove a violation or otherwise restore
the property in question to the condition that existed prior to the violation.
7. Penalties. Any person, firm, association, or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Ordinance or any permit or approval issued hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00) nor less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, per day, unless specified otherwise in this Ordinance or
limited by Wisconsin Statutes, plus required court costs and fees and the costs of
prosecutions including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. In any such action, the fact that a permit shall have
been issued by any Authorized Agent of department shall not constitute a defense, nor shall
Part 11: Violations and Remedies
Section 11.2: Remedies
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012 11-4
any oversight or error on the part of any public official, board, or department constitute a
defense.
8. Penalty for conducting work without a required permit. A double permit fee shall be
charged for work that is started before a required permit is issued. Such fee shall not
release the applicant from full compliance with this Ordinance nor from prosecution for
violation of this Ordinance.
9. Other remedies. The City shall have such other remedies as are and as may be from time
to time provided by Wisconsin law and the City Ordinances for violation of the provisions
of this Ordinance.
B. Action and Notification Procedures
1. Non-emergency situations. If violations of this Ordinance do not constitute an emergency
situation or require immediate attention to ensure the safety of the public and/or property,
then the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director, or Designated
Authorized Agent shall give notice of the nature of the violation to the property owner (or
to any other person who is party to the agreement or to any applicant for any relevant
permit in the manner hereafter stated). Notices of violation shall state the nature of the
violation and the time allowed to remedy the violation. The notice may also state the
corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement should
the situation not be corrected.
2. Emergency situations. If violations of this Ordinance constitute an emergency situation as
a result of safety or public concerns or violations that will create increased problems or
costs if not remedied immediately, then the City may use the enforcement powers under
this Ordinance without prior notice. However, the Building Inspector, Zoning
Administrator, Public Works Director, or Designated Authorized Agent shall attempt to
give notice the pertinent parties as soon as practical.
3. Continuation of previous enforcement actions. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit
the continuation of previous enforcement actions undertaken by the City pursuant to
previous and valid ordinances and laws.
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-1
PART 12
DEFINITIONS
Section 12.1 General
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation of this
Ordinance. If questions arise as to the interpretation of common usage terms, the Zoning Administrator or
Designated Authorized Agent of the City shall refer to the definitions contained in Merriam-Webster's
Collegiate Dictionary – Eleventh Edition or subsequent editions. Interpretations of land use activities shall be
based on the most current North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), Office of Management
and Budget (OMB), or subsequent editions. Interpretations of terms related to structures shall be based on the
applicable building codes.
Section 12.2 Defined Terms
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words as used herein are defined as follows:
A
A-Zones. Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map that would be inundated by the regional
flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A-Zones. The A-Zones may or may not be reflective of
flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.
Abandoned vehicle. Any vehicle that has been left unattended without the permission of the property owner
for more than forty-eight (48) hours. Refer to Section 342.40 of the Wisconsin Statutes for a more detailed
definition.
Accessory use, structure, or building. A use, structure, or building subordinate to the principal use of a
building or to the principal use of land and is located on the same parcel and serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building or land use. Accessory uses or structures to residential principal
uses may include: Garages, carports, greenhouses established for more than ninety (90) days, manufactured
fabric structures (such as those designed for storing cars, boats, or equipment but excluding various
recreational tent structures pursuant to Section 5.1, I: Recreational Vehicles, Trailers and Camping other
parking spaces, swimming pools, tennis courts, tree houses and tool sheds.
Accessory structure: wireless telecommunication facility. A building or cabinet like structure located
adjacent to or in immediate vicinity of a wireless telecommunication tower or antenna to house equipment
customarily incidental to the receiving or transmitting of wireless broadcasts, cellular telephone call, voice
messaging, and paging services.
Part 12: Definitions
12-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Adult entertainment establishment. An establishment, including, but not limited to, an adult bookstore,
adult theater, adult entertainment center, adult cabaret, adult strip club, adult steam room/bathhouse facility,
or any other business whose primary business activity is characterized by emphasis on matters depicting,
describing, or relating to nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, sadomasochistic activity, or other related
activity.
Adult family home. A facility licensed as an adult family home by the State of Wisconsin where three (3) or
four (4) adults not related to the operator reside and are provided with care, treatment or services above the
level of room and board. Such care and treatment may include up to seven (7) hours per week of nursing care
per resident.
Adult retail establishment. An establishment in which ten (10) percent or more of the gross public floor
area is devoted to, or ten (10) percent or more of the stock-in-trade consists of, the following: books,
magazines, and other periodicals, movies, videotapes, compact discs, digital versatile discs, novelty items,
games, greeting cards, and other materials that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities: human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or other related
activity.
Affordable housing. Housing in which mortgage, amortization, taxes, insurance, and condominium and
association fees, if any, constitute no more than twenty-eight (28) percent of gross household income for a
household of the size which may occupy the unit. In the case of dwelling units for rent, the rent and utilities
constitute no more than thirty (30) percent of gross annual household income for a household of the size
which may occupy the unit.
Agent. One who is authorized to act for or in the place of another, as a representative, emissary, or official of
a government agency.
Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating,
or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to
that of normal agricultural activities.
Agricultural research facility. The use of land to conduct research associated with agriculture. This term
includes, but is not limited to, an agricultural test plot, arboretum, and related offices, classrooms,
maintenance, and storage facilities.
Agricultural services. Establishments engaged in providing services to agricultural establishments and
landowners including soil preparation, crop services, veterinary services, farm management, and landscape,
and horticultural services.
Alley. A public way used primarily as a secondary service access to the rear or side of a property that abuts a
street.
Airport. The John F. Kennedy Memorial Airport located in Ashland County and annexed by the City of
Ashland, Wisconsin.
Airport affected area. The area located within three (3) statute miles of the John F. Kennedy Memorial
Airport property boundaries.
Airport overlay certificate of compliance. A certification that the construction and use of the land or a
building, is in compliance with all provisions of this ordinance.
Airport hazard. Any structure, object, natural growth, or use of land that obstructs the air space required for
the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing and taking
off.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-3
Airport runway. A portion of the airport having a surface specifically developed and maintained for the
taxiing, landing, and taking off of aircraft.
Animal boarding, grooming, or training. An establishment in which more than four domestic animals over
the age of six (6) months may be kept for boarding, breeding, safekeeping, convalescence, humane disposal,
placement, sale, bathing, trimming, training or sporting purposes. This term includes a commercial kennel.
Animal: commercial livestock. Animals or insects that are bred, raised, maintained or sold for commercial
use and exceed quantities established under Section 5.6 B. Animals: Keeping of. Commercial livestock
animals include horses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, bees and poultry.
Animal: domestic. An animal, including, but not limited to a dog and cat, that is commonly referred to as a
pet, and that can generally be kept inside a dwelling. This term does not include a horse, pig, or similar
animal that is typically kept only on agricultural or rural properties, and is not typically kept inside a dwelling.
Chickens and rabbits may be considered domestic animals pursuant to the specific use standards of this
Ordinance.
Animal: family farm (small). An animal that is bred, raised, or maintained on rural residential properties
for non-commercial use. Small family farm animals include poultry, rabbits, and pigeons. Specifically
excluded from this definition are roosters, turkeys and geese. Family farm animals shall be specifically for
use by the family living on the site and shall not be sold.
Animal: family farm (large). An animal that is bred, raised, or maintained on rural residential properties for
non-commercial use. Large family farm animals include horses, ponies, donkeys, mules, llamas, emus, sheep,
and goats. Specifically excluded from this definition are hogs and cattle. Family farm animals shall be
specifically for use by the family living on the site and shall not be sold.
Animal processing. The cutting, grinding, manufacturing, compounding, intermixing or preparation of meat
or meat food products for human consumption.
Animal: slaughter of (commercial and custom). The slaughter of food animals for human consumption on
a commercial basis or as a custom service for an individual who owns the animal, and uses all the resulting
products for his or her own consumption.
Antenna. Equipment used for transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals, which is attached to a tower,
building, or other structure, usually consisting of a series of directional panels, microwave or satellite dishes,
or omni-directional “whip” antennae.
Antenna elements: television. That portion or portions of the outside antenna system for television
receiving apparatus or equipment that are electrically connected to the receiver.
Antenna mast: television. That portion of the outside antenna system for television receiving apparatus or
equipment to which the antenna elements are attached.
Antenna tower or mast support: television. The support or extension required to elevate the antenna mast
to a height deemed necessary for adequate operation.
Antenna support system. Any building, pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or any other structure that
supports an antenna.
Antenna system: television. The combination of any antenna elements, mast, and tower or mast support as
defined by this Ordinance.
Antenna system height. The overall vertical length of the antenna system, as defined by this Ordinance,
above the ground, or if such system is located on a building, then, above that part of the level of such
building, upon which the system rests.
Part 12: Definitions
12-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Antique store. A retail establishment in which the display of human-made articles produced or constructed
at least fifty (50) years ago, or articles collected and recognized by a formal organization established to
research, promote and provide information about such articles, covers at least eighty-five (85) percent of the
display floor area. (See definition of retail establishment.)
Apiary. A place where bee colonies are kept.
Approval authority. Any City of Ashland official or employee vested with the duty or authority to review,
approve, or issue a permit, certificate, license, citation, variance, appeal, plan, amendment, plat or map
requested, submitted, or applied for under this ordinance.
Approved. To give formal or official sanction to by the Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, Plan
Commission, City Council, or other responsible entity.
Area: developed. The area of a parcel upon which improvements have been made.
Area: gross. The total area of land within the established parcel.
Area: undeveloped. The area of a parcel with no development. For the purposes of this Ordinance,
undeveloped area shall exclude water bodies, stream channels, delineated or mapped wetlands, and designated
natural areas.
Artist studio. Work space for one or more artists or artisans, including the accessory sale of art produced on
the property.
Assembly hall. An establishment providing meeting space for social gatherings, including but not limited to
wedding receptions, graduation parties, and business functions. This term includes, but is not limited to, a
banquet hall, rental hall, meeting space for a club or membership organization. This term does not include a
convention center.
Association. See Club or association.
Automated-teller machine (ATM). An electronic banking machine that takes the place of a human bank
teller and allows the user to access basic bank services, such as making deposits and cash withdrawals from
remote locations, twenty-four hours a day.
Average annual rainfall. A calendar year of precipitation, excluding snow, which is considered typical.
Awning. A shelter constructed of non rigid materials on a supporting framework projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building.
B
Bank or other financial institution. An establishment providing retail banking, credit, and mortgage
services. This term does not include a currency exchange, a payday loan establishment, or a title loan agency.
Unless specifically allowed in the district, this term does not allow for a drive-through window or an
automated-teller machine (ATM) as an outright permitted use.
Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as
published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
and depicted on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Basement. That portion of a building which is completely or partially below grade plane. A basement shall
be counted as a story above grade plane where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more
than six (6) feet above grade plane or more than twelve (12) feet above the finished ground level at any point.
Batch plant: concrete or asphalt. A facility that produces or processes concrete or asphalt.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-5
Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
Bed and breakfast establishment. An establishment that meets all of the following criteria:
? Provides eight (8) or fewer rooms for rent, to no more than twenty (20) tourists or other transients for
a length of time not to exceed ten (10) nights in a twelve (12) month period;
? Is the owner's personal residence and is occupied by the owner at the time of rental;
? Meals are served only to guests; and
? Breakfast is the only meal served to guests.
Bee. Any life stage of the common domestic honey bee.
Beekeeper. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees.
Best management practice (BMP). Structural or nonstructural measures, practices, techniques, or devices
employed to avoid or minimize soil, sediment or pollutants carried in runoff to waters of the state.
Billboard. See Sign: billboard
Blight. A deteriorated condition.
Block. The property abutting a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets. A
railroad right-of-way, the boundary line of un-subdivided acreage, or a body of water shall be regarded the
same as an intersecting or intercepting street for the purpose of defining a "block."
Bluff. A broad-faced or steep, promontory, bank, or cliff, primarily the result of erosion or excavation and
having a vertical relief greater than ten (10) feet.
Boarding or rooming home. A dwelling unit, or part thereof, occupied by a single housekeeping unit where
meals and lodging may be provided for three (3) or more persons not related to the owner for compensation
by previous arrangement.
Boathouse. Any permanent structure designed solely for the purpose of protecting or storing boats and
related equipment for noncommercial purposes.
Building. See Structure.
Building coverage. The percentage of a parcel that is covered by all principal and accessory buildings on the
parcel.
Building height. The vertical distance from the grade level at the front wall of the building to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the highest point of a mansard roof, or to the ridgeline of a gable, hip, or
gambrel roof.
Building inspector. The building inspector of the City of Ashland.
Building: principal. A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the property on which the
building is situated.
Buildable area. That part of the parcel not included within the open space areas required by this Ordinance.
Bulkhead line. A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a municipal
ordinance and approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Section 30.11 of the
Wisconsin Statutes and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the original ordinary high
water mark, except where such filling is limited by the floodway provisions of this Ordinance.
Business service. An establishment providing services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis,
including but not limited to the following: Advertising services, business equipment and furniture sales or
Part 12: Definitions
12-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
rental, protective services, employment agency, photocopy center, commercial photography studio, or mailing
service. This term does not include maintenance, repair and office uses such as the following: Accounting,
advertising, architectural design, community planning, environmental analysis, insurance, interior design,
landscape design, law, management consulting, or title research and real estate.
C
Campground. Establishments primarily engaged in providing overnight or short-term sites for recreation
vehicles, trailers, campers, and tents.
Camping unit. Any portable device, no more than four hundred (400) square feet in area, used as a
temporary shelter, including, but not limited to a tent, camping trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or
other mobile recreational vehicle.
Car wash. An establishment providing washing, waxing, or cleaning of light motor vehicles, including
access and queuing lanes.
Catering service. An establishment providing the processing, assembly, and packaging of food into servings
for consumption off-premises without provision for onsite pickup or consumption. This term includes, but is
not limited to, the preparation of meals by a catering businesses or by a nonprofit organization operating a
meal program.
Cemetery. A place for the interment of the dead. This term includes a columbarium or mausoleum, but does
not include a funeral home, crematorium, or mortuary.
Cease and desist. A court issued order to halt the activity that is being conducted without a permit or in
violation of this Ordinance.
Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate issued by the Historic Preservation Commission approving
alteration, rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction, or demolition of a historic structure, historic site or any
improvement in a historic district, refer to City of Ashland Ordinance 826.
Certificate of Compliance. See Airport overlay certificate of compliance or Floodplain certificate of
compliance.
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and
conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow is that water flowing within the limits of
the defined channel.
Chair. The Chair of the Plan Commission, the Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or other body as the
context requires.
City. The incorporated City of Ashland, State of Wisconsin.
Civic uses. See Government or community service use.
Clinic. An establishment operated by one or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors, mental health
professionals, or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons
solely on an outpatient basis.
Club or association. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues,
and are organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to
render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
College. An educational institution authorized by the State of Wisconsin to award baccalaureate or higher
degrees, or any campus of the State of Wisconsin vocational, technical, and adult education system. This
term includes any classroom, sporting facility, music hall, office, and related uses associated with such
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-7
institution. This term does not include a dormitory.
Co-location. The location of wireless telecommunication equipment from more than one provider on a
common tower or structure.
Colony (bees). A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood.
One (1) colony shall have the meaning of containing only one (1) queen.
Columbarium. A vault, wall, or similar structure with niches for urns containing ashes of the dead. Also see
definition of cemetery.
Combined sewer system. A system for conveying both sanitary sewage and storm water runoff.
Commercial trailer. A vehicle for transporting commercial goods. Usually associated with a semi truck.
Common open space. Undeveloped land within a conservation subdivision that has been designated,
dedicated, reserved, or restricted in perpetuity from further development and is set aside for the use and
enjoyment by residents of the development. Common open space shall not be part of individual residential
parcels. It shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain historic structures and archaeological sites
including Indian mounds, and/or such recreational facilities for residents as indicated on the approved
development plan.
Communication equipment: major. Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas,
public utility microwave antennas, personal wireless antennas, and satellite dishes with a diameter of greater
than three (3) feet.
Communication equipment: minor. Radio and television receiving antennas, including a single satellite
dish with a three (3) foot diameter or less, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those antennas necessary
for the operation of household electronic equipment, including radio receivers, federal licensed amateur radio
stations, and television receivers.
Communication service. A public or commercial facility primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting
and other information relay services. This term includes radio and television studios, cable and Internet
providers, and related services and equipment. This term does not include major communication equipment.
Community garden. A single piece of land gardened collectively by members of a community, typically in
an urban environment.
Community living arrangement. Refers to any of the following:
? Residential care center for children and youth. A facility operated by a child welfare agency licensed
under Section 48.60 of the Wisconsin Statutes for the care and maintenance of children and youth
residing in that facility.
? Group home for children. A facility operated by a person required to be licensed by the Wisconsin
Department of Health Services under Section 48.625 of the Wisconsin Statutes for the care and
maintenance of five (5) to eight (8) children, as provided by Section 48.625 (1) of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
Community-based residential facility. A place where five (5) or more adults who are not related to the
operator or administrator and who do not require care above intermediate level nursing care, reside and
receive care, treatment, or services that are above the level of room and board, but that include no more than
three (3) hours of nursing care per week per resident. This term does not include a convent or similar
facilities.
Community service uses. See government and community service uses.
Part 12: Definitions
12-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Comprehensive Plan. The long-range master plan for the desirable use and development of land in the City
of Ashland as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the Common Council after review by
the Plan Commission.
Compost bin. A Compost bin is a structure built to house compost and designed so as to facilitate the
decomposition of organic matter through proper aeration and moisture retention.
Composting. The biological decomposition of organic solid waste under conditions created, maintained or
controlled by a person or an entity.
Composting facility: community. A public or private facility for the deposit and controlled biological
reduction of organic wastes at a community or regional scale. This term does not include composting for
personal use pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and City of Ashland’s Ordinance 750: Property
Maintenance.
Composting facility: indoor. A public or private facility housed within a structure for the deposit and
controlled biological reduction of organic wastes at a community or regional scale. This term does not
include composting for personal use pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and City of Ashland’s
Ordinance 750: Property Maintenance.
Conditional use permit. A document signed by the Zoning Administrator or Designated Authorized Agent
specifying the requirements for which a conditional use may be permitted within a parcel. A conditional use
is a use permitted within a district other than a permitted use.
Condominium. A community association combining individual unit ownership with shared use or ownership
of common properties or facilities, established in accordance with requirements of the Condominium
Ownership Act, Chapter 703, Wisconsin Statutes. A condominium is a legal form of ownership of real estate
and not a specific building type or style.
Connected imperviousness. An impervious surface that is directly connected to a separate storm sewer or
water of the state via an impervious flow path.
Conservation easement. The grant of a property right or interest from the property owner to a unit of
government or nonprofit conservation organization stipulating that the described land shall remain in its
natural, scenic, open, or wooded state, precluding future or additional development.
Conservation or wildlife management. Planned protection, preservation, and management of natural
resources, including, but not limited to, plants, animals, and waters.
Construction site. An area upon which one or more land disturbing construction activities occur, including
areas that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale where multiple separate and distinct land
disturbing activities may be taking place at different times and on different schedules, but under one plan.
Conservation subdivision. A housing development in a rural setting that is characterized by compact parcels
and common open space, and where the natural features of the land are maintained to the greatest extent
practical.
Contiguous (parcel). A neighboring parcel, which shares a boundary with or touches the parcel physically.
Contractor’s shop. An establishment used for indoor maintenance, repair, or storage of a contractor’s
vehicles, equipment, or materials. A contractor’s shop may include the contractor’s business office.
Contractor’s yard. An establishment used for the outdoor repair, maintenance, or storage, of a contractor’s
vehicles, equipment, or materials, including the stockpiling of aggregate and other materials commonly used
in the construction business. This term does not include a batch plant that produces concrete or asphalt.
Convalescent home. See Nursing home.
Convenience store. See Retail, convenience.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-9
Convent (rectory and monastery). A building used to house the staff of a religious institution or the
members of a religious organization.
Corner side yard. See Yard: corner side.
Council. The Common Council of the City of Ashland, Wisconsin.
Courtyard. An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard, on the same parcel with a
building or group of buildings.
Crawlspace or crawlway. An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than
five (5) feet in height, used for limited access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
Cul-de-sac. A permanent street terminating at once end without connecting with another road and designed
so that it cannot be further extended without taking property not dedicated as a street.
Cultural institutions. An institution that displays or preserves objects of interest to the arts or sciences. This
term includes, but is not limited to, museums, art galleries, aquariums, and planetariums.
Currency exchange. In accordance with Section 218.05 of the Wisconsin Statutes, any person, except banks
incorporated pursuant to Wisconsin law, national banks pursuant to United States law, and any credit union
operating under Chapter 186 of the Wisconsin Statutes, which obtains a certificate of authority from the
Wisconsin commissioner of credit unions, engaged in the business of and providing for facilities for cashing
checks, drafts, money orders, and all other evidences of money acceptable to such community currency
exchange for a fee, service charge, or other consideration. This term does not include any person engaged in
the business of transporting for hire, bullion, currency, securities, negotiable, or nonnegotiable documents,
jewels, or other property of great monetary value, nor any person engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property at retail nor any person licensed to practice a profession or licensed to engage in any
business in Wisconsin, who in the course of such business or profession and, as incident thereto, cashes
checks, drafts, money orders, or other evidences of money.
Cutoff light fixture. See Shielded or cutoff light fixture.
D
Day care: licensed family home. A dwelling unit licensed as a family day care center by the State of
Wisconsin, pursuant to Section 48.65 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and Chapter DCF 250 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, where a resident of the dwelling provides care for not more than eight (8) children at
any given time for less than twenty-four (24) hours at time.
Day Care: licensed group child care center. Licensed group child care center by the State of Wisconsin,
pursuant to Section 48.65 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and Chapter DCF 251 of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code, where a person for less than twenty four (24) hours a day provides care and supervision for nine (9) or
more children who are not related to the provider.
Day care: unlicensed family home. A dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling provides care for not
more than three children for less than twenty-four (24) hours at a time.
Day care center: commercial. A facility in which the operator is provided compensation in return for
providing individuals with care for less than twenty-four (24) hours at a time. This term includes, but is not
limited to the following: day nursery, nursery school, adult day care center, or other supplemental care
facility. This term also includes a day care center that is accessory to another use and that is intended for use
by the employees of the principal uses and their immediate family. This term does not include family home
Part 12: Definitions
12-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
day care in which the operator resides.
Deck. An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or walls, but has a permeable floor that allows the
infiltration of precipitation.
Density. The number of dwelling units per net acre of land after land for streets and other public purposes is
removed.
Designated Authorized Agent. An employee of the City who has been designated by the department’s
established approval authority, and has been given the power to act on behalf of said approval authority.
Developer. A person, company, or a property owner’s authorized agent who develops real estate, especially
by preparing a site for residential, industrial or commercial use in order to build or sell.
Development. Any human made changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to the construction of buildings, structures, or accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial
alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of manufactured homes or mobile
homes; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, and the
deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
Development envelope. An area within which grading, lawns, pavement, and building will be located.
Development: pedestrian oriented. Pedestrian-friendly development with an emphasis primarily on
providing safe and efficient opportunities for people of all ages and abilities to access commercial and
residential destinations, to encourage people to walk rather than drive to destinations so as to reduce traffic
congestion and environmental impacts from automobiles, and to promote economic, environmental and
personal health and well-being.
Dormitory. A building used as a group living quarters for students associated with a college, university,
boarding school, or similar institution.
Drainage system. One or more artificial ditches, tile drains, similar devices that collect surface runoff of
groundwater and convey it to a point of discharge.
Drive-in restaurant. See Restaurant: drive-in.
Drive-through window. An establishment that allows patrons in a vehicle to drive up to a window for
service. A drive-through window is typically associated with fast food restaurants, banks or other financial
institutions and pharmacies.
Driveway. Private access from a public way to one (1) or two (2) parcels.
Drop-in center. See personal care services or drop-in center.
Dry cleaning and laundry drop off and pick up. An establishment that launders or dry cleans articles
dropped off on the property directly by the customer, or where articles are dropped off, sorted, and picked up,
but where laundering or cleaning is done elsewhere.
Dryland access. A vehicular access route that is above the regional flood elevation and that connects land
located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above the regional
flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
Duplex. See Dwelling: two-family (duplex).
Dwelling, accessory. An attached or detached dwelling unit with a maximum gross floor area of eight
hundred sixty-four (864) square feet that is located on the same parcel as a single-family dwelling.
Dwelling: multi-family. A residential structure located on a single parcel, containing three (3) or more
dwelling units. This term includes a condominium. This term does not include lodging establishments,
boarding houses, or guesthouses.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-11
Dwelling: single-family attached. A residential structure with one dwelling unit located on a parcel,
wherever such dwelling unit has at least two (2) exposed exterior walls and is attached by a common vertical
wall (not over twenty-five (25) feet in height) to an adjacent dwelling unit that is located on another parcel
and has at least two (2) exposed walls.
Dwelling: single-family detached. A residential structure containing one dwelling unit on a single parcel,
sharing no common walls with another dwelling unit. This term includes modular homes and manufactured
homes, but does not include mobile homes as defined by this Ordinance.
Dwelling: two-family (duplex). A residential structure located on a single parcel, that contains two dwelling
units, either side-by-side, or upstairs and downstairs.
Dwelling: twinhome. A residential structure containing two dwelling units in which each dwelling unit is
located on a separate parcel, but where each dwelling unit has at least two (2) exposed exterior walls and is
attached by a common vertical wall (not over twenty-five (25) feet in height) to the adjacent dwelling unit.
Also referred to a single-family attached dwelling with two (2) units.
Dwelling unit. A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) family,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation.
E
Emergency residential shelter. A facility, other than a community living arrangement, that provides shortterm
housing and a protective sanctuary for victims of fire, natural disaster, economic hardship, domestic
abuse or neglect, including emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape, child abuse, or
physical beatings, and which contains individual or group sleeping rooms and may or may not have food
preparation facilities and private shower or bath facilities.
Equipment. The implements used in an operation or activity.
Erosion. The process by which the land’s surface is worn away by action of wind, water, ice, or gravity.
Erosion and sediment control plan. A comprehensive plan developed to address pollution caused by
erosion and sedimentation of soil particles or rock fragments during construction.
Essential services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies, of underground and overhead lines and pipes for gas, electric, telephone,
communications, cable television, steam, public water supply, sanitary sewage collection, storm water
conveyance, or other comparable utilities. Essential services include such above surface facilities as poles,
guide wires, fire alarm boxes, water hydrants, utility posts, police call boxes, and stand pipes. Essential
services do not include larger utility facilities such as electric substations, wastewater treatment plants, well
houses, water reservoirs, wind energy facilities, and microwave and telecommunication towers.
Event: civic. An established and planned event which is of civic or public benefit, sponsored by a
governmental organization, educational institution or related civic organization, and promotes celebration,
well-being, community pride, culture or history.
Exceptional resource waters. Waters, which provide valuable fisheries, hydrologically or geologically
unique features, outstanding recreational opportunities, unique environmental settings, and which are not
significantly impacted by human activities. Chapter NR 102.11 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code
provides a list of exceptional resource waters.
Extractive industries. This group includes the mining, quarrying, excavation, processing, storing,
Part 12: Definitions
12-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
separating, cleaning, or marketing of natural resources such as sand, gravel, earth, peat, coal, minerals, gas,
and oil.
F
Façade. Any side of a building facing a public way or space.
Family. A person living alone, or two (2) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, in a
dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, motel, hotel, club, fraternity, or
sorority house, or other group, provided that unless all members except one are related by blood, adoption,
marriage, or are legally cared for, no such group shall contain over five persons.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that administers the National
Flood Insurance Program.
Fence. A structure intended to mark a boundary, provide screening, and/or prevent escape or intrusion. This
definition shall include a structure of stonework, cement or other masonry usually referred to as a “wall” in
Section 6.5: Fences and other relevant sections.
Festival grounds. An outdoor facility, including accessory structures, used primarily for the accommodation
of periodic or seasonal cultural or entertainment programs or events.
Filling station/convenience store. An establishment providing retail sale of fuel for motor vehicles, but not
motor vehicle maintenance or repair. This term includes accessory retail sales, commonly referred to as a
convenience store, but does not include a fast food/carry-out restaurant, nor does it include a car wash.
Final stabilization. All land disturbing construction activities at the construction site have been completed
and a uniform perennial vegetative cover has been established, with a density of at least seventy (70) percent
of the cover, for the unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or that employ equivalent
permanent stabilization measures.
Financial guarantee. A performance bond, maintenance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or
similar guarantees submitted to the City of Ashland by the responsible party to assure that the requirements of
this Ordinance and the applicable permits are carried out in compliance with the approvals and requirements.
Flag lot. A parcel of land shaped like a flag where the staff is a narrow strip of land providing access to a
street, with the bulk of the property lying to the rear of other parcels and containing no frontage.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas caused by one of the following conditions:
? The overflow or rise of inland waters;
? The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
? The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels along the
shore of Lake Superior; or
? The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly
unusual event.
Flood frequency. The probability of a flood occurrence that is determined from statistical analyses. The
frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified
number of years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. This map can be amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-13
Flood fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway that is covered by flood waters during the
regional flood and is generally associated with standing water rather than flowing water.
Flood hazard boundary map. A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are
designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map
forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Floodplain. The land that has been or may be hereafter covered by the flood water during the regional flood.
The floodplain includes the floodway and the floodfringe as those terms are defined in Chapter NR 116 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
Floodplain certificate of compliance. A certification that the construction and use of land or a building, the
elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure, is in compliance with all the provisions of this Ordinance.
Flood profile. A graph or longitudinal profile showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a
flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.
Floodproofing. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures,
water and sanitary facilities, and contents of buildings subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages.
Flood protection elevation. An elevation of two (2) feet of freeboard above the water surface profile
elevation designated for the regional flood.
Flood storage. Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during
analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
Floodway. The channel of a stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are
required to carry and discharge the flood water or flood flows of any river or stream including but not limited
to flood flows associated with the regional flood.
Floor area: gross (GFA). The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two (2)
buildings. The "floor area" of a building shall include all habitable area in a building including, mechanical
rooms, storage rooms, and restrooms.
Floor area: net. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several of floors of the building measured from
the interior side of exterior walls, excluding stairwells, mechanical rooms, toilet rooms, and similar areas.
Food center. A distribution center for food to persons where prepared food is distributed for immediate
consumption, or where on-premise consumption of the food occurs. A food center is not a “restaurant” as
elsewhere defined. One characteristic of a food center is that food is distributed primarily for no charge or for
less than fair market value, such as in an establishment frequently known as a “soup kitchen.”
Food store. A store intended for the sale of food and related items including, but not limited to, bakery
goods, groceries and convenience foods, fruit and vegetable markets, candy or confections, dairy products,
meats, health or organic foods and coffee or specialty drinks. Food stores, as defined, shall not involve
containment or the slaughter of animals nor shall they include stores elsewhere defined.
Food store: local. A food store, as defined, providing retail food sales to a local or neighborhood population
rather than a regional population, and is compatible with surrounding residential uses.
Footcandle. The illumination of a surface one foot distance from a source of light equivalent to one (1)
candle.
Part 12: Definitions
12-14 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Forb. A broad-leaved herb other than a grass.
Forestry. Establishments engaged primarily in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, and
related activities.
Foster care: family home. A facility, licensed by the State of Wisconsin, a county agency, or a child
welfare agency, where one (1) to not more than four (4) children reside and are provided with care and
maintenance in the primary dwelling of a foster parent.
Fraternity/sorority. A building used as a group living quarters for members of a general or local chapter of
a regularly organized college fraternity or sorority formed chiefly to promote friendship and welfare among
members.
Frontage. All the property abutting on one side of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or
between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of a dead-end street, or City boundary measured along the
street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street
that it intercepts.
Frontage: abutting. The part of a parcel that abuts or fronts an improvement.
Frontage: long. The long dimension of a corner parcel regardless of the principal building orientation.
Frontage: short. The short dimension of a corner parcel regardless of the principal building orientation.
Funeral home. An establishment providing services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of
deceased humans. This term includes, but is not limited to, a crematorium or a mortuary. This term does not
include cemetery.
G
Garage. An accessory building or portion of a building in which vehicles, boats, trailers, and other
implements are housed. An attached garage shall be defined as part of the principal building.
Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
Gardening. Plantings on a parcel that are intended for the production of food for the primary occupants of
the parcel. This term is intended to include a typical vegetable garden associated with a dwelling. This term
does not include agriculture.
Garden supply or landscaping center. An establishment providing the retail sale of plants and the sale or
rental of garden and landscape materials and equipment. This term includes outdoor storage of plants,
materials, or equipment.
Government or community service use. A government or non-profit community service (civic) use that
provides services to the community. Examples include a library, police station, fire station, teen center,
community center, public museum or art gallery, post office, public garden, and similar uses. This term does
not include a public works yard.
Group home for children. See Community living arrangement.
Graffiti. Graffiti shall mean any drawing, inscription, writing, figure or mark made upon a wall or other
exposed surface, including but not limited to any house, garage, rock, bridge, fence, gate, tree, monument,
motor vehicle, sidewalk, street, lamp post, street sign, underpass or retaining wall, whether publicly or
privately owned, with paint, chalk, dye, ink, pencil, wax or other similar substance or by etching, scratching,
cutting, burning or carving without the express consent of the owner of said wall or other exposed surface.
Grain elevator. A structure for elevating, storing, and discharging grain. This term includes related
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-15
processing of grain.
Grass lawn. A lawn consisting primarily of Kentucky bluegrass, perennial rye grass, fescues, and/or other
grasses generally associated with mowed and maintained grass lawns.
Green building and site design techniques. Techniques that significantly reduce or eliminate the negative
impact of building and site development on the environment and on the building occupants. Green building
and site design and construction practices address: sustainable site planning, safeguarding water and water
efficiency, energy efficiency, conservation of materials and resources, and indoor environmental quality. All
development in the City of Ashland is strongly encouraged to use green building and site design techniques.
Greenhouse: local. A temporary facility for the sale of plants and produce to a local or neighborhood
population rather than a regional population and is compatible with surrounding residential uses.
Gross floor area (GFA). See Floor area: gross.
Growth: natural. Any object of natural growth, including trees, shrubs, or foliage, except farm crops that
are cut at least once a year.
H
Habitable room. A room or enclosed floor space arranged for living, eating or sleeping purposes, not
including bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways, and other accessory
floor spaces.
Hard surface parking area. Hard surfaced parking areas shall be defined as having asphalt, concrete, paving
brick, block, compacted gravel or limestone, or pervious pavers.
Hazardous waste. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous waste materials, usually a by-product of manufacturing,
medical, scientific, or consumer use that, if improperly managed or disposed of, may pose substantial hazards
to human health and the environment. A waste is considered hazardous if it exhibits one or more of the
following characteristics: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, and toxicity.
Historic district. An area designated locally, or on the State or Nationally register, containing historic
structures, improvements or sites.
Historic site. Any parcel of land of historic significance due to a substantial value in tracing the history or
prehistory of humans, or upon which a historic event has occurred.
Historic structure. Any improvement that has a special character or specific historic interest or value as part
of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of Ashland, state, or nation.
Hive. A structure intended for the housing of bees.
Holiday lighting. Temporary, low wattage lighting commonly identified as a string or rope of individual
lamps, installed in connection with holiday or religious observances and removed thereafter.
Home improvement center. An establishment providing the sale or rental of building supplies, construction
equipment, or home decorating fixtures and accessories. This term includes a lumber yard or a contractor’s
building supply business, and may include outdoor storage or tool and equipment sales or rental. This term
does not include an establishment devoted exclusively to the retail sale of paint, wallpaper, or hardware, or
activities classified under vehicle/equipment sales and services, including vehicle towing services.
Home occupation. Any occupation for financial gain or support conducted only by members of the
immediate family residing on the property, provided that the specified use is incidental to the residential use.
Part 12: Definitions
12-16 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Homeowners association. A community association incorporated or not incorporated, combining individual
home ownership with the shared use or ownership of common property or facilities.
Hospital. A state-licensed institution providing primary health services and medical, psychiatric, or surgical
care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other physical or
mental conditions, and as an integral part of the institution, related accessory uses or facilities, including, but
not limited to, laboratories, central service facilities for inpatient or outpatient treatment, as well as training,
research and administrative services for patients and employees. Also included are health services and care,
which are shared with other hospitals or other health care providers.
Household goods. Products used in the home that are necessary for, or supplemental to, normal household
activities, including small appliances, but excluding furniture and major appliances.
Household maintenance and repair. An establishment providing the repair or servicing of household
goods, furniture, appliances, or lawn and garden equipment.
I
Illumination level. The intensity of light measured in foot candles from a point facing the light source.
Impervious coverage or impervious surface. An area that releases as runoff all or a large portion of the
precipitation that falls on it, except for frozen soil. Roofs, sidewalks, driveways, concrete slabs, patios,
parking lots, and streets are examples of areas that are typically impervious. Pervious pavers and pervious
pavement are not considered impervious.
Implements. A device used in the performance of a task.
Improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object constituting a physical betterment
of real property, or any part of such betterment, including streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lighting fixtures,
signs, and the like.
Improvement parcel. The unit of property that includes a physical betterment constituting an improvement
and land embracing the site thereof, and is treated as a single entity for the purpose of levying real estate
taxes. Provided, however, that the term “improvement parcel” shall also include any unimproved area of land
that is treated as a single entity for such tax purposes.
Incinerator. A device for burning permitted substances in which the combustion factors: temperature,
retention time, turbulence and combustion air, may be controlled.
Industrial park. A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two (2) or more separate
industrial buildings. Such development is planned, designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and
coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building
design, and orientation.
Industry: green. An industry/business that balances environmental, social and economic interests in its
operation.
Industry: heavy. A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products
predominantly from extracted raw materials or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes using
flammable or explosive materials or storage of manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Industry: light. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, or
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental
storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but exclusively basic industrial processing. This term also
includes a facility that is engaged primarily in mass printing and publishing of printed materials, such as
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-17
newspapers, magazines, books, greeting cards, and similar materials for the wholesale market or direct
distribution. This term does not include a commercial photo copy or printing shop.
Infestation. The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests within or contiguous to a structure or
property.
Infill development. An undeveloped area of land located within an existing development.
Infiltration. The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
Infiltration system. A device or practice such as a basin, trench, rain garden, or swale designed specifically
to encourage infiltration, but does not include natural infiltration in pervious surfaces such as lawns,
redirecting of roof downspouts onto lawns, or minimal infiltration from practices, such as swales or road side
channels designed for conveyance and pollutant removal only.
Informational meeting. An informal meeting of the Plan Commission, Common Council, or other elected or
appointed bodies to obtain comments from the public, or other agencies on certain matters, that do not require
a public hearing, prior to a decision regarding a proposed project. The proceedings may be recorded and a
report or recommendation may be included in the project file.
Institution. A nonprofit organization of a public character, or a building occupied by such organization.
Invasive Species. Section 23.22(1)(c), of the Wisconsin State Statutes states that “invasive species” means
nonindigenous species that cause or are likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human
health.
J
Junkyard. See Salvage operation, outdoor.
K
Karst feature. An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to
provide a conduit to groundwater, and may included caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed
bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps, or swallets.
Kennel, commercial. See Animal boarding facility.
L
Land. Soil, the ground surface itself, a subdivision, a tract or parcel, a lot or an open space, together with any
structures or improvements on it, extending above and below the surface.
Land disturbing construction activity. Any human made alteration of the land surface resulting in a change
in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative cover, that may result in runoff and lead in an
increase in soil erosion and movement of sediment into the waters of the state. Land disturbing construction
activity includes clearing and grubbing, demolition, excavating, pit trench dewatering, filling, and grading
activities.
Landmark. Any identified improvement that has a special character, special historic interest, or cultural
value as part of the heritage of the City.
Part 12: Definitions
12-18 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Landmark site. Any parcel of historic significance having value in tracing the history of aboriginal man or
upon which a historical event has occurred. A landmark site includes the parcel upon which a landmark has
been built.
Landfill: construction debris. A landfill for the exclusive use of construction debris, including but not
limited to concrete, masonry, and lumber.
Land filling and/or excavation. The action or process of filling, cutting, digging, scooping, or otherwise
altering the existing land.
Land filling: temporary. Temporary placement and use of land filling material, including sand, soil, gravel,
rock or other similar material, typically on a separate parcel from the development.
Landscaping. Plantings intended to enhance the aesthetic and/or environmental qualities of a parcel.
Laundromat. An establishment providing washing, drying, or dry cleaning machines on the property for
rental use by the general public for laundering or dry cleaning purposes.
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). LEED provides a green building rating system
that is a voluntary, consensus-based national rating system for developing high-performance, sustainable
buildings. LEED addresses all building types and emphasizes state-of-the-art strategies in five areas:
sustainable site development, water savings, energy efficiency, materials and resources selection, and indoor
environmental quality.
Light trespass. Stray light or spill light flowing across the property boundary.
Loading space. A dust-free and durable, hard surfaced area of adequate size for delivery vehicles expected to
be used, logically and conveniently located for bulk pickup and delivery, readily accessible when required
parking spaces are filled, which shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
Lodging establishment: short stay. Any temporary residential use of a room or suite of rooms in a building
or group of buildings by an individual or a group not to exceed thirty (30) days in a calendar year. Hotels,
motels, resorts, and other lodging facilities are included in this definition.
Lodging establishment: extended stay. A lodging establishment in which at least seventy (70) percent of
the accommodations are regularly used or available for occupancy of continuous periods of thirty (30) days or
more by persons who use the lodging establishment as their primary residence.
Long-term housing. Housing designed to accommodate individuals or families for greater than six (6)
months and support services for the purpose of facilitating the movement of the residents to independent
living. Housing is typically provided a little or no cost and food/meals may or may not be provided.
Lumber yard. See Home improvement center.
M
Machinery. Machines in general or as a functioning unit; a mechanically, electrically, or electronically
operated device for performing a task.
Maintenance agreement. A legal document that provides long term maintenance of storm water
management practices.
Major street. A highway, road, or street designated on the official Master Street Plan of the City.
Manufactured (or modular) home. A structure, constructed after June 15, 1976, pursuant to the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-19
and designed to be used as a permanent single-family dwelling, is installed pursuant to the manufacturer’s
instructions, is properly connected to all applicable utilities, and is set on an enclosed foundation pursuant to
Section 70.043(1) of the Wisconsin Statutes and Wisconsin Administrative Code COM 21.
Manufactured home community. Any plot or plots of ground upon which three (3) or more manufactured
homes that are occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located. This term does include a farm where
the occupants of the manufactured homes are the father, mother, son, daughter, brother, or sister of the farm
owner or operator, or where the occupants of the manufactured homes work on the farm.
Manufactured home dealer, sales and display. Establishment engaged in the sale and service of
manufactured and mobile homes, which may be displayed on the dealer lot for purpose of sale.
Manufacturing. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of material or
substances into new products.
Manufacturing: heavy. See Industry: heavy.
Manufacturing: light. See Industry: light.
Marina. A facility providing mooring of recreational boats in water, or piers, anchorage areas, launching
facilities, boat storage areas, or boat sales and service. This term does not include a ship terminal or
passenger terminal.
Mausoleum. A building for entombment of the dead above ground. Also see Cemetery.
Maximum extent practical. A level of implementing best management practices to achieve a performance
standard specified in this Ordinance, which takes into account the best available technology, cost
effectiveness, and other competing issues such as human safety and welfare, endangered and threatened
resources, historic properties, and geographic features. Maximum extent practical allows flexibility in the
way to meet the performance standards and may vary based on the performance standard and site conditions.
Meteorological tower. A tower used for the measurement of wind speed.
Mining. The process of digging, quarrying, excavating, processing, storing, separating, cleaning, and/or
transporting natural resources such as sand, gravel, and earth. For the purpose of this Ordinance, mining shall
not include the excavation, removal, or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay, or other material for the
following purposes:
? Excavation for the foundation, cellar, or basement of pending construction for which a permit has
been issued and which is to be erected immediately following the excavation, removal, or storage.
? On-site construction of approved roads, sewer lines, storm sewers, water mains, surface water
drainage, agriculture or conservation purposes, sod removal, or other public utilities.
? Landscaping purposes on a parcel used or to be used as a building site.
? Grading/excavation of less than one acre of land in conjunction with improvement of a site for
development, providing activities will be completed in one year.
? The removal of excess materials in accordance with approved plats or highway construction.
Mini warehouse. See Warehouse: self-storage.
Mobile home. A vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to be towed as a single
unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and used, or intended to be used,
primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid, uncollapsible construction, which has an overall length in
excess of forty five (45) feet. This term includes the mobile home structure, its plumbing, heating, air
Part 12: Definitions
12-20 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
conditioning and electrical systems, and all appliances and all other equipment carrying a manufacturer’s
warranty.
Model home. A model home is a dwelling manufactured, prefabricated, or otherwise erected or installed
upon a parcel for purposes of temporarily exhibiting the same as a sample, rather than for occupancy as a
residence.
Modular home. See Manufactured (or modular) home.
Monastery. See Convent.
Mural. A large scaled painting or artwork applied to and made integral with the surface of an exterior or
interior wall or other large permanent surface, which depicts a scene or event of natural, social, cultural, or
historical significance.
N
NAICS Group. The statistical classification standards for businesses and industries that appear in the North
American Industry Classification System Manual, published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
Natural landscape. Any land managed to preserve or restore primarily native Wisconsin grasses, forbs,
wildflowers, shrubs, trees, and aquatic plants.
Nonconforming parcel. A parcel that does not comply with the minimum parcel area or width requirements
of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming structure. A structure that does not comply with the bulk, yard, setback, or height
regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming use of land. Any use of a parcel that does not conform to the applicable use regulations of
the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming use of a structure. A use of a structure that does not conform to the applicable use
regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonprofit conservation organization. Any charitable corporation, charitable association, or charitable trust
(such as a land trust), the purposes or powers of which include retaining or protecting the natural, scenic, or
open space values of real property, assuring the availability of real property foe agricultural, forest,
recreational or open space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or enhancing air or water quality, or
preserving the historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural aspects of real property.
North American Industry Classification System. See NAICS Group.
Nuisance. A use of property or course of conduct, that interferes with the legal rights of others by causing
damage, annoyance, or inconvenience.
Nursing home. A facility where five (5) or more persons who are not related to the operator or administrator
reside, receive care or treatment and, because of their mental or physical condition, require access to twentyfour
(24) hour nursing services, including limited nursing care, intermediate level nursing care, and skilled
nursing services, as defined in Section 50.01 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
O
Occupant. Any person living, sleeping, occupying, or having possession of a space, in a building, structure,
or on a parcel of land.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-21
Occupancy. The purpose for which all or a portion of land, a building, or a structure is used or intended to be
used.
Office. Use of a building for government, business, professional, or administrative office. A general office is
characterized by a relatively low proportion of vehicle trips attributable to visitors or clients in relationship to
employees. Examples include, but are not limited to, offices of firms or organizations providing professional
services, such as accounting, insurance, architectural, and legal. This term does not include a bank or other
financial institution or the office of a physician, dentist, optometrist, chiropractor, and similar professions.
Off-premise sign. See Sign: off-premise.
Off-street parking. The parking of vehicles on a parcel, as opposed to a street right-of-way.
On-street parking. The parking of vehicles on a street right-of-way, as opposed to a parcel.
Open space, private or public. Private or public land or water, or a combination of land and water, that is
free of development, including agriculture uses. This term includes wildlife areas and conservation areas, but
it does not include public parks or commercial outdoor recreation facilities.
Open space: common. An area of land or water, or a combination of land and water within the site
designated for a Planned Unit Development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents.
Open space: public. An area of land or water or both on the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map
designated as park, beautification, or land to be kept free of development.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or property, which is let or offered for
occupancy.
Ordinary high water mark (O.H.W.M.). The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and
action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or
prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristics.
Outdoor mechanical and electrical equipment. Equipment used onsite for the regular operation of a
building or use. This term includes air conditioning units, power vents, and similar equipment. This term
does not include an outdoor wood-fired furnace, solar equipment, or a wind energy system.
Outdoor merchandise sales or storage. Retail sales or storage of merchandise listed in the definition of
retail establishment, primarily outside an enclosed structure, for more than ninety (90) days in any calendar
year.
Outdoor wood-fired furnace. Any furnace, stove, or boiler designed to burn wood, where the furnace is not
located within a building intended for human or domestic animal habitation.
Outstanding resource waters. National or state wild and scenic rivers. Chapter NR 102.10 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code provides a list of outstanding resource waters.
Owner. The owner or owners of the freehold estate of the property or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or
vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, a receiver, a personal representative, a trustee.
P
Parcel. A parcel of land means any contiguous quantity of land capable of being described with such
definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, that is designated by its owner or developer
as land to be used or developed as a unit, or that has been used or developed as a unit. Parcel includes an
Part 12: Definitions
12-22 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
easement supporting or related to a primary parcel, and a condominium unit. Only one such designation by
the owner shall be allowed under this Ordinance.
Parcel: corner. A parcel abutting upon two or more public rights-of-ways at their intersection or upon two
(2) parts of the same right-of-way, such that the rights-of-way or parts of the same right-of-way form an
interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is
the "corner."
Parcel: depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear parcel lines.
Parcel: double frontage. See Parcel: through.
Parcel: interior. A parcel other than a corner parcel.
Parcel: irregular. A parcel within a subdivision abutting a cul-de-sac or curbed street approximately equal
in area to the other parcels within the subdivision; however, having unusually short abutting frontage in
comparison to the other parcels.
Parcel line: front. The line separating the parcel from the street right-of-way.
Parcel line: rear. The parcel line opposite and most distant from the front parcel line.
Parcel line: side. Any parcel line other than a front or rear parcel line. A side parcel line separating a parcel
from a street right-of-way is called a side street parcel line. A side parcel line separating a parcel from
another parcel or parcels is called an interior side parcel line.
Parcel: parent. The existing parcel of record, as identified by individual tax parcel numbers, as of the
effective date of this Ordinance.
Parcel of record. A parcel that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds of Ashland County.
Parcel: remote. Parcels without abutting frontage that receive benefit from the improvement.
Parcel: through. A parcel having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. Also referred
to as a double frontage parcel.
Parcel width. The mean width of the parcel measured at right angles to its depth.
Park. Public or private land, including accessory structures, used primarily for outdoor recreation or for the
enjoyment of open space. This term does not include a private campground, community center, museum,
commercial outdoor recreation facility, commercial indoor recreation facility, or similar use.
Parking lot (or area). An area specifically designed and intended for the parking of vehicles.
Parking lot (or area): interior. All areas within the perimeter of a parking lot (or area), including planting
islands, curbed areas, corner lots, parking spaces and all interior driveways and aisles except those with no
parking spaces located on either side.
Parking space (or stall). A durable, hard surfaced area adequate for parking a motor vehicle with room for
opening doors on both sides, together with a clear, properly related access to a public street or alley, and
maneuvering room that shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
Passenger terminal. A facility for passenger transportation operations including, but not limited to, a
passenger rail station, bus terminal, airport terminal, or passenger ship terminal.
Patio. A level surfaced area adjacent to a principal building which is constructed on finished grade, without
walls or a roof. May be constructed of brick, concrete, stone, or other impervious materials.
Pay day loan establishment. An establishment providing loans to individuals in exchange for personal
checks as collateral.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-23
Pawn shop. A retail business where a lender pays money for a fee and holds some of the borrower’s personal
goods for collateral to be sold to the public in the event of default.
Performance standard. A narrative or measurable number specifying the minimum acceptable outcome for
a facility or practice.
Permit. A written authorization made by the approval authority to the applicant to conduct an activity for
which a permit is required.
Person. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other group acting as a unit.
Personal care services or drop-in center. A facility that provides a daytime communal atmosphere open to
the public, or by membership, for the provision of services to persons in need of assistance due to age,
physical or mental disability, illness or injury including but not limited to supervision of self-administered
medication, aid in personal hygiene, eating and drinking, or recreation. Services may or may not be provided
by licensed or certified professionals, shall not include any over-night stays nor contain overnight sleeping
facilities.
Personal service. An establishment providing services that are of a recurring and personal nature to
individuals. This term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
? Barber shop;
? Beauty salon;
? Shoe repair shop;
? Seamstress or tailor;
? Tanning salon;
? Massage establishment; or
? Body piercing or tattoo establishment.
This term does not include the following:
? Portrait studio;
? Dry cleaning and/or laundry establishment, drop-off and pick-up only;
? Laundromat;
? Photocopy center;
? Health club; or
? Repair shop for household items.
Personal storage building as a principal use. A principal building (as opposed to an accessory building)
used primarily for the storage of goods and materials by the property owner.
Personal wireless service. Licensed commercial wireless communication service, including cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (EMR), paging, and similar
services.
Pervious surface. An area that releases as runoff a small portion of the precipitation that falls on it. Lawns,
gardens, parks, forests, or other similar vegetated areas are examples of surfaces that typically are pervious.
Place of worship. See Religious institution.
Play equipment. Equipment, including swing sets, play structures, and similar equipment, intended
primarily for the recreational use of children.
Plat: final. The final map or drawing on which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is presented for final
approval and which, if approved, shall be submitted to the Ashland County Register of Deeds.
Part 12: Definitions
12-24 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Plat: preliminary. A drawing showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision prepared in the manner
and containing the data, documents, and information required by this Ordinance and submitted to the
applicable review and approval authorities for preliminary consideration.
Plumbing or plumbing fixtures. Water heating facilities, water pipes, gas pipes, garbage and disposal units,
waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines or other similar equipment, catch
basins, drains, vents or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or
vent lines.
Pollutant. As it relates to storm water and erosion control, any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
substances, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural wastes discharged into water.
Pollution. As it relates to storm water and erosion control, human made or human induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, and biological, or radiological integrity of water.
Porch. A covered projection, with or without walls, extending from the main wall of a building, usually with
a separate roof, providing a covered entrance and not intended for use as a livable space.
Post-construction site. A construction site following the completion of land disturbing construction activity
and final site stabilization.
Power generation plant. A facility that converts one (1) or more energy sources, including, but not limited
to a coal or wood burning plant or an ethanol plant.
Pre-development condition. The extent and distribution of land cover types present before the initiation of
land disturbing construction activity, assuming that all land uses prior to development activity are managed in
an environmentally sound manner.
Printing and publishing. A facility that is engaged primarily in mass printing and publishing of printed
materials, such as newspapers, magazines, books, greeting cards, and similar materials for the wholesale
market or direct distribution. This term does not include a commercial photocopy or printing shop.
Private Road. A road providing access from a public right-of-way to three (3) or more properties.
Property. A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon.
Protective area. An area of land that commences at the Ordinary High Water Mark of lakes, streams, and
rivers, or at the delineated boundary of wetlands, and that is the greatest of the following widths, as measured
horizontally from the top of the O.H.W.M. or delineated wetland boundary to the closest impervious surface.
This term does not include any area of land adjacent to any stream enclosed within a pipe or culvert, such that
runoff cannot enter the enclosure at this location.
Public art. Any visual works of art including but not limited to, murals, sculptures, monuments, fountains,
paintings, frescoes, stained glass or ceramics, which are located on public or private property and open to the
view of the public at no charge. Public art does not include that which contains characteristics of an
advertising sign, or identify or draw attention to an existing business, profession, or industry. Any private
visual works of art (not open to the view of the public) shall be defined and regulated as accessory structures.
Public park. Land owned or leased by a government entity for the purpose of providing public recreation
and/or open space.
Public way. All or any part of a road, street, slip, pier, lane, or paved alley.
Public works yard. Municipal, county, state, and federal administrative buildings; warehouses; garages;
storage yards; and shops that are owned and operated by a governmental unit.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-25
R
Railroads. Railroad rights-of-way but not including terminals, transfer and storage tracks not accessory
structures except those incidental to minor communications and switching equipment.
Rain barrel. A barrel used as a cistern, an artificial reservoir, to hold rainwater.
Raze (a structure). To demolish and remove a structure and to restore the site to a dust-free and erosion free
condition.
Recreation facility, commercial indoor. A commercial facility primarily used for the indoor conduct of, or
participation in, recreational activities, and secondarily for the viewing of such activities. This term includes,
but is not limited to, an indoor driving range, volleyball court, bowling alley, skating rink, billiard hall, video
game center, archery or shooting range, basketball court, indoor soccer, fitness center, and similar uses.
Recreation facility, commercial outdoor. A commercial facility primarily for the outdoor conduct of, or
participation in, recreational activities, and secondarily for the viewing of such activities. Such a facility may
include one or more related buildings and structures. This term includes, but is not limited to a golf facility,
tennis, basketball, volleyball, soccer, baseball, amusement or water park. This term does not include a
campground or outdoor shooting range.
Recreational vehicle. All types of recreation vehicles or devices normally used by adults, including but not
limited to such items as travel homes, camper trailers, pick-up camper attachments, all-terrain vehicles,
snowmobiles, boats, flotation devices, motor bikes, and including go-carts and stock cars.
Rectory. See Convent.
Recycling facility. A facility for the deposit, sorting, or batching, but not processing, of post-consumer
recyclable materials. This term includes, but is not limited to, a residential self-help, drop-off facility or a
transfer station that receives residential rubbish.
Regional flood. A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have generally occurred in
Wisconsin and which may be expected to occur on a water body because of like physical characteristics once
in every one hundred (100) years.
Regulation. An authoritative rule dealing with details or procedure.
Rehabilitation center/transitional living facility. A facility in which persons live while receiving therapy
and counseling for any of the following purposes: to assist them to recuperate from the effects of drugs or
alcohol; to assist them to adjust to living with the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder, or mental
retardation; to assist them to adjust to living with the handicaps of physical disability; to assist them to be
housed under supervision while under the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not
limited to, pre-release, work-release, and probationary programs.
Religious institution. A facility where people regularly assemble for religious worship and any incidental
religious education, which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship. This term does not include an elementary or secondary school, a specialty or personal instruction
school, or a college. This term is also known as a place of worship.
Rent-to-own establishment. An establishment that allows, between a consumer and a seller, renting of
furniture, appliances and other goods with the intention of future ownership of such goods.
Repair shops. Establishments engaged in miscellaneous repair of household items and smaller business
equipment for the general public and business.
Part 12: Definitions
12-26 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Research and development. At an establishment that conducts research, development, or controlled
production of high-technology electronic, industrial, or scientific products or commodities for sale, or
laboratories conducting educational or medical research or testing. This term includes, but is not limited to, a
biotechnology firm or a manufacturer of nontoxic computer components.
Residential care center for children and youth. See Community living arrangement.
Responsible person or party. The owner, operator, manager, occupant, or tenant of any structure or
property.
Restaurant: drive-in. A retail outlet where food or beverages are sold to a substantial extent for
consumption in parked motor vehicles.
Restaurant: fast food or carry-out. A restaurant, other than a sit-down restaurant, where the establishment
offers quick food, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for
service, or prepared quickly. Orders are generally not taken at a customer’s table and food is generally served
in disposable wrapping and containers. Food and beverages may be taken off the property for consumption.
This term does not automatically include nor preclude the use of a drive-through window. Refer to the
district provisions for information on drive-through windows.
Restaurant: sit down. A restaurant where food and beverage orders are generally taken at tables and food
and beverages are consumed at tables located on the property, where taking food or beverages from the
property is purely incidental, where food or beverages are normally served using non-disposable containers
and utensils, and where the consumption of food or beverages in vehicles on the property in which the
building is located does not regularly occur. This term does not automatically include nor preclude the use of
a drive-through window. Refer to the district provisions for information on drive-through windows. This
term does not include a tavern.
Retail. Sale to the ultimate customer for direct consumption and not for resale.
Retail establishment, convenience. Any retail establishment serving primarily the surrounding
neighborhood and offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly
associated with the same. Convenience stores do not include the sale of gasoline. This term does not
automatically include nor preclude the use of a drive-through window. Refer to the district provisions for
information on drive-through windows.
Retail establishment: general. An establishment providing retail sale of new products to the public and
rendering services incidental to the sale of such products. This term does not automatically include nor
preclude the use of a drive-through window. Refer to the district provisions for information on drive-through
windows. Retail establishments include, but are not limited to, the following:
? General merchandiser;
? Hardware store;
? Paint, glass, and wallpaper store;
? Food stores and local food stores;
? Apparel stores;
? Home furnishing and equipment store;
? Eating and drinking places;
? Used merchandise store;
? Miscellaneous retail;
This term does not include the following:
? Adult retail establishment or adult entertainment establishment;
? Lumber yard, building supply, or home improvement center;
? Garden center or landscaping center;
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-27
? Manufactured home dealers;
? Automotive dealers and service stations; or
? Pawn shop.
Right-of-way. An area of land over which people and goods have the right to pass or travel. A public rightof-
way grants passage to all and provides the right to park registered vehicles in accordance with local
parking restrictions.
Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, including but not limited to, the residue from
the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other
similar materials. For the purpose of this ordinance, rubbish shall also include all other household waste not
defined as garbage.
Runoff. Storm water or precipitation, including rain, snow or ice melt, or similar water that moves on the
land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
S
Salvage operation: indoor. An area where waste or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals,
paper, rags, rubber tires, used lumber, and bottles in an entirely enclosed building. An indoor salvage
operation may include used auto parts sales and installation of used auto parts from an auto wrecking yard. It
excludes establishments for the sale or purchase of used operable automobiles and the processing of used,
discarded, or salvaged materials as part of those manufacturing operations that conform to this Ordinance.
Salvage operation: outdoor. An open area where waste or secondhand materials are bought and sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, used lumber, and bottles. An outdoor salvage operation includes used
implement storage yards, automobile wrecking yards and, only where operated on the same parcel as said
auto wrecking yard, an outdoor salvage operation may also include the following associated uses: used auto
parts sales and installation of used auto parts from said auto wrecking yard. An outdoor salvage operation
includes any area of more than two hundred (200) square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk but
excludes uses established entirely within enclosed buildings in nonresidential districts. It also excludes
establishments for the sale or purchase of used operable automobiles and the processing of used, discarded, or
salvaged materials as part of those manufacturing operations that conform to this Ordinance.
Sanitary station. A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from a recreational vehicle holding
tank.
School: primary or secondary. A public, parochial, or private school that provides an educational program
for one or more grades between kindergarten and grade twelve (12), inclusive, and which is commonly known
as an elementary school, grade school, middle school, junior high school, or senior high school.
School: specialty or personal instruction. A business, professional, or other specialty school. This term
includes, but is not limited to, a school offering instruction in music, art, dance, martial arts, computer use or
programming, and cosmetology.
Sculpture. A three (3) dimensional (3-D) object fashioned, shaped and formed by hand or machine into a
work of art, generally for the purpose of decoration or artistic expression.
Seasonal market. A temporary facility used to conduct retail trade, including seasonal markets, farmer’s
Part 12: Definitions
12-28 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
markets, fish markets, produce stands, and horticultural nurseries.
Seasonal or temporary commercial sales/rentals. The sale or rental of seasonal or temporary items such as
rentals for activities like skating and bicycling, and seasonal refreshment stands.
Sediment. Solid material, capable of settling, that is transported by runoff, suspended within runoff or
deposited by runoff away from its original location.
Senior housing. Multi-family dwellings designed and intended to be used for persons who are fifty-five (55)
or older, plus the spouse of such persons. This term does not include community-based residential facilities.
Separate storm sewer. A conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems,
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels, or storm drains, which meet all of the
following criteria:
? Is designed or used for collection water or conveying runoff;
? Is not part of a combined sewer system;
? Is not draining to a storm water treatment device or system; and
? Discharges directly or indirectly into waters of the state.
Service building. In the context of a manufactured home community, mobile home park, or recreational
vehicle campground, a service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatory, and such facilities as
required by Wisconsin Department of Health Services.
Services: business. Establishments engaged primarily in rendering services to business establishments such
as advertising agencies, mailing services, employment agencies, and computer software companies.
Services: personal. Establishments engaged in providing services primarily to individuals and households,
such as laundry, dry cleaning, copy shops, beauty shops.
Services: professional. Establishments engaged in providing the general public and businesses with
professional services in an office setting. Including:
? Security and Commodity Brokers;
? Insurance Agents and Brokers;
? Real Estate Services;
? Holding and Other Investment Offices;
? Professional Health Services;
? Legal Services;
? Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management, and related services;
? Educational Services.
Services: social. Establishments engaged in providing social services. Including but not limited to:
? Child day care services;
? Food center;
? Individual and Family Social Services;
? Job Training;
? Long-term housing;
? Personal care services;
? Residential care services;
? Short-term / emergency housing or shelter facilities;
? Supply pantry;
? Vocational Rehabilitation.
Setback. The minimum distance a building or structure must be separated from a street or alley right-of-way
or parcel line.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-29
Shelter. See Short-term / emergency housing or shelter facility.
Shelter care facility. An unsecure place of temporary care and physical custody for children, including a
holdover room, licensed by the State of Wisconsin under Section 48.66 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
Shielded or cutoff light fixture. An exterior lighting fixture that uses a flat, clear lens with no refractorizing
element and that operates in a horizontal position with non-adjustable mounting hardware or brackets. Such a
fixture distributes light by means of an internal reflector only. The light source is totally concealed by the
fixture housing when the position of observation is at angle of less than fifteen (15) degrees from horizontal.
No light is permitted at an angle of more than four (4) degrees above horizontal.
Ship terminal. See Terminal: ship.
Shopping center. A preplanned group of retail stores with common use areas for access, pedestrian, auto and
service circulation, common parking, and landscaping.
Shorelands. Lands within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of navigable waters:
one thousand (1,000) feet from a lake, pond, or flowage; three hundred (300) feet from a navigable river or
stream, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
Short-term / emergency housing or shelter facility. A facility that is designed to provide housing to
individuals or families for less than six (6) months and support services for the purposed of facilitating the
movement of the residents to independent living or transitional housing. Housing is typically provided at
little or no cost, may or may not provide food/meals, and shower/bathroom facilities may or may not be
shared.
Sign. Any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, design, identification, description, illustration or
device, illuminated or non-illuminated, to advertise, identify, convey information or direct attention to a
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently
installed or situated merchandise. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign structures.
Sign: abandoned. A sign that for more than sixty (60) days has no longer correctly advertised a public
service message, bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, or activity conducted or a product available on
the property where the sign is displayed or elsewhere.
Sign: animated. A sign or display manifesting either kinetic or illusionary motion occasioned by natural,
manual, mechanical, electrical, or other means. Animated signs include the following types:
? Naturally energized. Signs whose motion is activated by wind or other atmospheric impingement.
Wind-driven signs include flags, banners, pennants, streamers, spinners, metallic disks, or other
similar devices designed to move in the wind.
? Mechanically energized. Signs manifesting a repetitious pre-programmed physical movement or
rotation in either one or a series of planes activated by means of mechanically based drives. Signs
with physically moving components visible from the public right-of-way are not permitted except for
those which revolve around a vertical axis at speeds less than seven (7) revolutions per minute.
? Electrically energized. Illuminated signs whose motion or visual impression of motion is activated
primarily by electrical means. Electrically energized signs include (but are not limited to) changeable
message signs, electronic message signs, and other signs that are animated by means of flashing,
scintillating, blinking, or traveling lights.
Sign: area identification. A sign using a single label and/or logo to identify a group of structures or a single
structure, such as a residential subdivision, apartment complex, industrial park or shopping center, consisting
of a freestanding sign, fence, wall or archway with letters or symbols affixed thereto.
Part 12: Definitions
12-30 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Sign: area of. The area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter that forms the outside shape,
but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of
more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled. Any irregular shaped sign area shall be computed
using the actual sign face surface. In the case of wall signs, the area of copy will be used.
Sign: awning. A sign painted on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
Sign: banner. A sign made of fabric or any non rigid material with no enclosing framework.
Sign: billboard. A sign that is designed for changeable copy, so the characters, letters, or illustrations can be
changed or rearranged within a fixed sign face which advertises a business, organization, event, person, place
or thing not located on the same premise (or property) as the billboard.
Sign: business identification. Any sign that promotes only the name and type of business on the property
where the business is located.
Sign: canopy. Any sign attached to or constructed in, on, or under a canopy or marquee.
Sign: changeable message. A sign, or part of a sign, such as a manual, electronic or electric controlled time
and temperature sign, message center or reader board, whether electronic, electric, or manual, where copy
changes.
Sign: construction. A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or material
supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located.
Sign: copy. The graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter, pictographic,
symbolic, or alphabetic form.
Sign: double-faced. A sign with copy on two (2) faces that is back to back, v-shaped, stacked, or side by
side.
Sign: electric. Any sign containing internal electrical wiring that is attached or intended to be attached to an
electrical energy source.
Sign: electronic message. A changeable message sign whose message is electrically activated, such as with
light bulbs or mechanical flip discs.
Sign: freestanding. A sign supported permanently upon the ground and not attached to any building.
Sign: illuminated. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose
of illuminating the sign.
Sign: incidental. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services
available on the property; for example, a credit card sign, or a sign indicating hours of business.
Sign: informational. An on-premise sign containing no other message, copy, or advertisement other than
providing instruction, direction, or assistance to pedestrians or vehicles. Such signs include parking only and
no parking, loading and unloading, self-service, restrooms, telephone, entrances and exits, walkways, or
directional arrows and symbols.
Sign: joint. A freestanding sign as defined in this ordinance which uses multiple subunits to identify two (2)
or more persons, businesses, or organizations operating on one parcel or contiguous parcels (e.g. shopping
center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may include the logo and/or name of persons or businesses included
but shall carry no other advertising matter.
Sign: low profile. A sign mounted directly to the ground with a maximum height not to exceed six (6) feet.
Sign: maintenance. The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner
that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-31
Sign: menu board. A drive-up sign that lists items in conjunction with a business serving customers in a
car.
Sign: monument. A freestanding sign mounted on a continuous, solid, opaque structural base, which base
length is at least sixty (60) percent the length of the sign face and which base depth is not narrower than the
structure containing the sign face or twelve (12) inches, whichever is greater.
Sign: neon. A sign where chemically inert gas such as neon is used to illuminate bent glass tubes when
electrified.
Sign: nonconforming. A sign that does not meet the provisions of this Ordinance.
Sign: off-premise. A billboard, poster panel, painted bulletin board, or other communicative device that is
used to advertise products, goods, services, ideas, or noncommercial speech that is not exclusively related to
the parcel or the owner of the parcel on which the sign is located.
Sign: on-premise. Any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products, or
services located on the parcel where the sign is installed and maintained.
Sign: pole (enclosed). A freestanding sign, that is not a low profile sign, supported on the ground by metal
or concrete poles, braces, or other supports, unless the support system is enclosed in a decorative material
such that the support enclosure has a width that is at least equal to one-half (1/2) the length of the sign face.
Sign: portable. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building and designed to be moved
easily.
Sign: projecting. A sign, normally double-faced, which is attached to and projects from a structure of
building fascia.
Sign: real estate. A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for
rent, lease, or sale.
Sign: roof. A sign erected upon, against, or above a roof.
Sign: sandwich. A hinged or unhinged A-frame portable sign that is generally temporary in nature and
placed near a roadway.
Sign: sidewalk. A non-illuminated sign, not permanently affixed to the ground or a building, and is
designed to be displayed during the daytime hours for business identification and to advertise the onsite sale
of products and services. Sidewalk signs may be of an A-frame design (for example, a sandwich sign) or of
another portable sign type that is displayed on the sidewalk or near the business’s entrance and complies with
the provisions of this Ordinance relating to sidewalk signs.
Sign: swinging. A sign installed on an arm, mast, or spar that is not, in addition, permanently fastened to an
adjacent wall or upright pole.
Sign: temporary, off-site. A sign that is installed for a limited time that is used to advertise products, goods,
services, ideas, or noncommercial speech that is not exclusively related to the property or the owner of the
property on which the sign is located.
Sign: temporary, on-site. A sign installed on the property for a limited time in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a temporary sign shall not refer to a real
estate sign, a political sign, or a sidewalk sign.
Sign: wall. A sign attached to a wall or building, with the face in parallel plane to the plane of the building
or wall.
Part 12: Definitions
12-32 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
Sign: window. A sign installed on a window for purposes of viewing from outside a building.
Sign contractor. Any person, partnership, or corporation engaged in whole or in part of the erection or
maintenance of signs, excluding the business that the sign advertises.
Sign determination: joint. An action by the Plan Commission to provide for the combination of multiple
freestanding signs into one multi-part sign structure. Under a Joint Sign Determination, existing and future
freestanding signage on said parcels shall be subject to the terms of the Determination.
Sign structure. Any device or material which supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign in a
stationary position, including decorative covers.
Sign subunit: joint. That portion of a larger Joint Sign structure dedicated to an individual business or
parcel.
Site. The entire area including the legal description of the land on which the activity is proposed or being
conducted.
Slope. An incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of horizontal magnitude to vertical
magnitude. (Example: 3:1 slope is 3 feet horizontal and 1 foot vertical.)
Sorority. See Fraternity/sorority.
Sport court. An outdoor play surface intended for use in sports. This term includes outdoor tennis courts,
basketball courts, volleyball courts, and similar uses.
Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC). The SIC Group is no longer in use. See NAICS Group.
Standard: performance. A criterion established in the interest of protecting the public health and safety for
the control of noise, odor, smoke, noxious gases, and other objectionable or dangerous elements generated by
and inherent in or incidental to land use.
Standard. Something set up and established by authority as a rule for the measure of quantity, weight,
extent, value, or quality.
State. The State of Wisconsin.
Stop work order. An order issued by the Building Inspector or their Designated Authorized Agent that
requires all construction activity on the site be stopped.
Storage canopy. A shelter for outdoor storage having a frame made of metal, plastic or combination
thereof, having fabric or plastic roof and walls, and not attached to any structure, building, fence or
anything permanently located on the ground.
Storm water management plan. A comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from
storm water after the site has undergone final stabilization following completion of the construction activity.
Storm water management system plan. A comprehensive plan designed to reduce the discharge of runoff
and pollutants from hydrologic units on a regional or municipal scale.
Stories above grade. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor directly above it, or if there is no floor above, then space between the surface of such floor and the
ceiling or roof above it. A basement shall only be considered a story above grade if the finished surface of the
floor above the basement is: 1) more than six (6) feet above grade plane; 2) more than six (6) feet above the
finished grade level for more than fifty (50) percent of the building perimeter; or 3) more than twelve (12) feet
above the finished ground level at any point.
Street. A public right-of-way, approved and accepted by public authority, that provides a primary means of
public access to abutting property. The term "street" shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway,
boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term.
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-33
Street: arterial. A major carrier of traffic within the City.
Street: collector. A street that serves as a connection between an arterial street and local, residential, or
minor streets. The term may include the principal entrance into a residential development and streets for
major circulation within such development.
Street: deteriorated existing bituminous or concrete surfaced. Street opened to travel prior to January 1,
1985, where the surface has deteriorated to a stage requiring new construction.
Street: existing. Street or highway open to travel prior to January 1, 1985.
Street: marginal access. A street or service road parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street that provides
access from the arterial street to abutting properties.
Street: new. Street or highway not open to travel prior to January 1, 1985.
Street: private. A purported street, way, or strip of land reserved for the use of a limited number of persons
or purposes as distinguished from a publicly dedicated street.
Street: residential. A street that provides access to individual parcels.
Street: surfaced. A street or highway with existing bituminous or concrete pavement surfacing.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, including, without limitation because of enumeration,
buildings, fences, pergolas and arbors, canopies, signs, billboards, satellite dishes, fire escapes, chute escapes,
railings, water tanks, towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks, stairways, tents and anything erected and framed of
component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground, including a
mobile home, manufactured home, modular home or travel trailer.
Subdivider. Any person, corporation, partnership, association, individual, firm, trust, or agent dividing or
proposing to divide land.
Subdivision. As defined in Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes.
Substantially complete. The date at which the work or building project, or a designated portion of the work
or building project thereof is sufficiently complete, in accordance with the construction contract documents,
so that the owner may use or occupy the work or building project or designated portion thereof for the
intended use for which it is originally designed and intended for. Partial use or occupancy shall not
necessarily result in the project being deemed substantially complete and shall not be evidence of substantial
completion.
Super-majority vote. A vote of three fourths (¾) or greater of the entire membership of the voting body.
Supplied. Installed, furnished, or provided by the owner or operator.
Supply pantry. A distribution center for food, clothing and other essential items to persons at no charge or
for less than fair market value where no on-premise consumption of the items occurs. A supply pantry does
not include Retail Establishment: Used Merchandise Stores as elsewhere defined.
Sustainability. Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs. (Brundtland Commission, 1987)
Swimming pool. An above or below ground tank or container intended for swimming, wading, or sitting in.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, a swimming pool shall mean any pool, hot tub, or similar device, with a
water depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches at any point and a water surface area of more than one
hundred fifteen (115) square feet.
Part 12: Definitions
12-34 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
T
Tavern. An establishment providing alcohol beverages by the drink to the public, where food or packaged
alcohol beverages may be served or sold only as accessory to the primary use. This term does not include an
assembly hall or a recreation facility.
Technical standard. A document that specifies design, predicted performance, and operation and
maintenance specifications for a material, device, or method.
Temporary construction building. A temporary office, including a manufactured building, used onsite for
management of a construction project.
Temporary real estate sales office. A temporary office, including a manufactured building, for marketing,
sales, or rental of residential, commercial, or industrial development for a specified period.
Terminal: freight, commercial. A facility for truck, air, or railway freight service and operations, including
but not limited to pickup, sorting, preparing, packaging, crating, terminal and facility operations, line-haul
loading and unloading, scaling, and delivery. This term includes the onsite storage of materials, trucks and
semi-trailers and the installation of a scale. Industrial freight terminals include but are not limited to
grain/farm, food, garbage, recyclables, forestry products, hazardous materials, machinery, equipment and
vehicles.
Terminal: freight, local. A facility for local freight service and operations, including, but not limited to
local pickup, local storing and terminal operations, line-haul loading and unloading, destination sorting and
terminal operations, and local delivery. This term includes the temporary onsite storage of trucks and semitrailers
outdoors. Local freight terminals include but are not limited to postal, people, linen, and furniture.
Terminal: ship. A facility for the docking, loading, or unloading of ships, barges, or boats, that primarily
transport freight.
Theater. An establishment for presenting motion pictures or live performances for observation by patrons.
This term includes a movie theater, an outdoor stage, band shell, or amphitheater, but does not include an
adult entertainment establishment.
Through lot. See Lot: through.
Title loan agency. An establishment providing loans to individuals in exchange for receiving title to the
borrower’s motor vehicles as collateral.
Tool and equipment rental facility. An establishment providing the rental of tools, lawn and garden
equipment, party supplies, and similar goods and equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance.
This term does not include a motor vehicle rental facility.
Top of the channel. An edge, or point on the landscape, landward from the ordinary high water mark of a
surface water of the state, where the slope of the land begins to be less than twelve (12) percent continually
for at least fifty (50) feet. If the slope of the land is twelve (12) percent or less continually for the initial fifty
(50) feet, landward from the ordinary high water mark, the top of the channel is the ordinary high water mark.
Tourist home. A rooming house operated in conjunction with a bed and breakfast establishment licensed
under Chapter HSS 197 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code that is located at its nearest point no more than
one hundred (100) feet away from the building housing the bed and breakfast or on the same parcel.
Tower. Any pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof, to which an antenna could be attached, or which is
designed for an antenna to be attached, and all supporting lines, cables, wires, and braces.
Traditional neighborhood design. A comprehensive planning system that includes a variety of housing
types and land uses in a defined area and permits educational facilities, civic buildings and commercial
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-35
establishments to be located within walking distance of private homes. The design is served by a network of
paths, streets and lanes suitable for pedestrians as well as vehicles, where public and private spaces have equal
importance, creating a balanced community.
Transitional living facility. See Rehabilitation center.
Tree. Any object of natural growth, except farm crops that are cut at least once a year, and except shrubs,
bushes, or plants that do not grow to a height of more than twenty (20) feet.
Tree: significant. Trees that are in good health, on the City of Ashland’s preferred species list, and meet the
following minimum sizes. Deciduous trees that are a minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2) caliper inches,
measured at four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the root collar, and Coniferous trees or multi-trunk
deciduous trees that measure at least six (6) feet in height.
Turf-grass. Grass commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play areas such as, but not limited to, blue grass,
fescue, and rye grass blends.
Two-family dwelling. See Dwelling: two-family (duplex).
Twin home. See Dwelling: twin home.
Type II distribution. A rainfall type curve as established in the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Technical Paper 149, published in 1973, the Type II curve is applicable to all of
Wisconsin and represents the most intense storm pattern.
U
Underlying zone. The zoning district classification within an overlay district determining requirements
including, but not limited to permitted, conditional, and prohibited uses.
Uniformity ratio. The ratio between the average illumination and the minimum illumination as determined
by measurements taken on a four (4) foot grid throughout the area to be lighted.
Use. The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed, or intended or for which
either land or a building or structure is, or may be, occupied or maintained.
Use, principal. The main use to which a parcel is devoted and the main purpose for which the property
exists.
Use, accessory. See: Accessory use.
Utility facilities. Utility equipment including, but not limited to, electric utility substations, water reservoirs,
water treatment plants, sewer treatment plans, transformer stations, booster stations, transmitters, and other
comparable utility facilities.
V
Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary
to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
Variance: area. A variance from the provisions of this Ordinance governing area, setbacks, frontage, bulk,
density, and similar requirements.
Variance: use. A variance from the provisions of this Ordinance governing a permitted, conditional, and
Part 12: Definitions
12-36 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
accessory uses.
Vehicle. A machine propelled by power, other than human power and designed to travel along the ground, air
or water by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and used to transport persons or property or to pull
machinery, including, without limitation because of enumeration, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motor homes,
motorcycles, tractors, buggies, wagons, boats and aircraft.
Vehicle sales and/or rental. Any property or structures used for the display, sale and/or rental of vehicles,
implements, trailers or recreational vehicles in operable condition.
Vehicle repair and/or service. An establishment providing the repair or servicing of vehicles, including the
sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts, where all such work is performed within an
enclosed building. This term includes, but is not limited to, the repair or servicing of batteries, tires, mufflers,
brakes, shocks, transmissions, or engines, and it includes paint and body work. This term includes, but is not
limited to, an auto repair shop, auto body shop, wheel and brake shop, or tire sales and installation shop.
Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or
removing such air from, any space.
Veterinary clinic: large animal. An establishment providing medical and surgical treatment of all domestic
animals (including dogs and cats) and all farm animals (including horses, cattle, and hogs), including
grooming and boarding for not more than thirty (30) days if incidental to the medical care. This term includes
an animal crematorium.
Veterinary clinic: small animal. An establishment providing medical and surgical treatment of household
animals including dogs, cats, birds, and similar animals. Large farm animals including cattle, horses, hogs,
and similar animals shall not be treated at a small animal veterinary clinic. This term includes grooming and
boarding for not more than thirty (30) days (if incidental to the medical care) and an animal crematorium.
Visual screen. A permanent fence or wall that permits no view into the area to be screened; or plantings or
vegetation that permit no view into the area to be screened and that admit a maximum penetration of light
through no more than an evenly distributed twenty five (25) percent of their vertical surface during any
season of the year.
W
Wall. An upright structure of masonry serving to enclose, divide, or protect an area.
Warehouse: general. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
Warehouse: self-storage. Warehouses serving primarily the general public with separate access for each
storage stall, one-story, less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet per building; total area less than sixty
thousand (60,000) square feet.
Waterfront, commercial. Commercial uses that cater to people using the waterfront or commercial uses that
have a direct benefit from being located on the waterfront. Examples of waterfront commercial uses may
include boat rental, restaurants, conference facilities, and similar uses.
Water-oriented research facility. Research facilities that utilize the waterfront for research purposes.
Waters of the state. Those portions of Lake Superior and Lake Michigan within the boundaries of
Wisconsin, and all bays, rivers, streams, ponds, springs, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, water
courses, drainage systems, and other surface water and groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private,
within the State of Wisconsin or its jurisdiction.
Wetland: highly susceptible. Includes the following types of wetlands: fens, sedge meadows, bogs, low
prairies, conifer swamps, shrub swamps, other forested wetlands, fresh wet meadows, shallow marshes, deep
Part 12: Definitions
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-37
marshes, and seasonally flooded basins.
Wetland: less susceptible. Includes degraded wetlands that are dominated by invasive species, such as reed
canary grass.
Wholesale and distribution facility. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, construction contractors, and
professional business users; or to other wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for
or selling merchandise to such persons or companies.
Wildlife management area. An area specifically managed for wildlife and related uses.
Wind energy facility. Equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from wind into usable
forms of energy as defined by Section 66.0403(1)(m) of the Wisconsin Statutes. This equipment includes any
base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, or other
components used in the system.
Wind generator. Blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on top of
the tower.
Workmanlike. Executed in a skilled manner; for example, plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged, done
without marring adjacent work and done by using materials that match adjacent work.
Y
Yard. All areas of a parcel not covered by a principal building.
Yard: corner side yard. The yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and lying between an open
public right-of-way and the principle structure.
Yard: front. The area extending the full parcel width and situated between the front parcel line and the face
of the principal building that is parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the front parcel line.
Yard: rear. The area extending the full parcel width and situated between the rear parcel line and the face of
the principal building that is parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the rear parcel line.
Yard: side. The area extending between the front yard and the side yard and situated between the side parcel
line and the face of the principal building that is parallel, or most nearly parallel to, the side parcel line.
Yard waste. All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other materials
accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.
Z
Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City Ashland.

City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: June 26, 2012 Appendices
This table of appendices lists additional information to aid the reader in understanding the goals and intent of the Unified
Development Ordinance and/or comparing uses, dimensions, standards, and districts. These appendices are intended for
general reference only. If a conflict exists between the information presented in these appendices and the information specified
in the text of the Unified Development Ordinance or on the Official Zoning Map (in the Office of the Zoning Administrator), the text
and the Official Zoning Map shall take precedence.
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
TABLE OF APPENDICES
Appendix A Resolutions
A-1 Ashland Eco-municipality Resolution ..................................................................... A-1
Appendix B Maps
B-1 Zoning District Map & Amendments ....................................................................... B-1
B-2 Overlay Map ............................................................................................................. B-2
B-3 Zoning District Map Section Plates .......................................................................... B-3
Appendix C Tables
C-1 Land Use Table ......................................................................................................... C-1
C-2 Dimensional Requirements Table ............................................................................. C-7
C-3 Sign Standards Table .............................................................................................. C-11
Appendix D Illustrations & Diagrams
D-1 Figures ..................................................................................................................... D-1
12-2 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
APPENDIX A
RESOLUTIONS
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-3
APPENDIX A-1
Ashland Eco-municipality Resolution
DOUBLE CLICK ON THE BLUE TAG
TO VIEW THE PDF VERSION OF THE RESOLUTION
12-4 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
APPENDIX B
MAPS
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-5
APPENDIX B-1
Zoning Districts Map
DOUBLE CLICK ON THE BLUE TAG
TO VIEW THE PDF VERSION OF THE
11 x 17 ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
(Click on Amendment to view the PDF)
Seq. Ordinance 1789 – Adopted 06-26-2012
12-6 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
APPENDIX B-2
Overlay Districts Map
DOUBLE CLICK ON THE BLUE TAG
TO VIEW THE PDF VERSION OF THE
11 x 17 OVERLAY DISTRICTS MAP
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-7
APPENDIX B-3
District Map Section Plates
DOUBLE CLICK ON THE BLUE TAG
TO VIEW THE PDF VERSION OF THE
11 x 17 DISTRICT MAP SECTION PLATES
12-8 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
APPENDIX C
TABLES
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-9
APPENDIX C-1
Land Use Table
DOUBLE CLICK ON THE BLUE TAG
TO VIEW THE PDF VERSION OF THE
LAND USE TABLE
12-10 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
APPENDIX C-2
Dimensional Requirements Table
DOUBLE CLICK ON THE BLUE TAG
TO VIEW THE PDF VERSION OF THE
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS TABLE
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012 12-11
APPENDIX C-3
Sign Standards Table
DOUBLE CLICK ON THE BLUE TAG
TO VIEW THE PDF VERSION OF THE
SIGN STANDARDS TABLE
12-12 City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: August 28, 2012
APPENDIX D
ILLUSTRATIONS & DIAGRAMS
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
APPENDIX D-1
FIGURES
ILLUSTRATION FIGURES
Figure 4.50 A-1 Floodplain ..................................................................................................................... 2
Figure 6.1 A-1a Parcel Width & Depth (Corner Parcel) ......................................................................... 3
Figure 6.1 A-1b Parcel Width & Depth (Interior Parcel) ........................................................................ 3
Figure 6.1 A-2a Front & Rear Yard (Interior Parcel) .............................................................................. 4
Figure 6.1 A-2b Front & Rear Yard (Corner Parcel) .............................................................................. 4
Figure 6.1 A-3a Side Yard (Corner Parcel) ............................................................................................. 5
Figure 6.1 A-3b Side Yard (Interior Parcel) ............................................................................................ 5
Figure 6.1 B-1b Front & Rear Setbacks (Interior Parcel) ....................................................................... 6
Figure 6.1 B-1a Front & Rear Setbacks (Corner Parcel) ........................................................................ 6
Figure 6.1 B-2a Side Setbacks (Corner Parcel) ...................................................................................... 7
Figure 6.1 B-2b Side Setbacks (Interior Parcel)...................................................................................... 7
Figure 6.1 C-1a Building Heights for Different Roof Types .................................................................. 8
Figure 6.1 C-1b Building Heights for a Flat Roof & Uneven Grade ...................................................... 8
Figure 6.1 E-1a Corner Lot Principal & Accessory Building ................................................................. 9
Figure 6.1 E-1b Interior Lot Principal & Accessory Building ................................................................ 9
Figure 6.1 D-1 Impervious Surfaces ................................................................................................... 10
Figure 6.1 H-1 Vision Triangles .......................................................................................................... 10
Figure 6.3 F-1 Parking Lot (or Area) .................................................................................................. 11
Figure 6.3 F-2b Interior Parking Lot (or Area) ..................................................................................... 12
Figure 6.3 F-2a Interior Parking Lot (or Area) with Islands ................................................................ 12
Figure 6.3 F-3 Parking Lot (or Area) Angles ..................................................................................... 13
Figure 6.3 F-4 Parking Lot (or Area) Space Dimensions ................................................................... 13
Figure 6.5 C-1a Fences with Vision Triangles (Corner Parcels) .......................................................... 14
Figure 6.5 C-1b Fences (Interior Parcel) ............................................................................................... 14
Figure 6.6 C-1 Types of Signs Not Requiring a Permit ...................................................................... 15
Figure 6.6 F-1 Types of Signs Requiring a Permit ............................................................................. 15
Figure 6.6 E-1 Sign Design ................................................................................................................. 16
Figure 6.6 D-1 Prohibited Signs .......................................................................................................... 16
Figure 6.6 F-3a Types of Freestanding Signs ....................................................................................... 17
Figure 6.6 F-3b Freestanding Sign Heights .......................................................................................... 17
Figure 9.3 B-1a Private Road Section (Alternate A) ............................................................................ 18
Figure 9.3 B-1b Private Road Section (Alternate B)............................................................................. 18
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
FLOODPLAIN
FILL
BUILDING
ABOVE
FLOOD
BUILDING
ENCROACHMENT
FLOOD FRINGE
FLOOD
FRINGE
O.H.W.M.
REGIONAL FLOOD
FLOODWAY
UNIMPROVED
PATH
Figure 4.50 A-1: Floodplain
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
RIGHT-OF-WAY
PARCEL WIDTH
PARCEL DEPTH
ALLEY
STREET FRONTAGE
SIDE STREET FRONTAGE
Figure 6.1 A-1a: Parcel Width & Depth (Corner Parcel)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
ALLEY
STREET FRONTAGE
PARCEL DEPTH
PARCEL WIDTH
Figure 6.1 A-1b: Parcel Width & Depth (Interior Parcel)
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
ALLEY
STREET FRONTAGE
REAR YARD
FRONT YARD
Figure 6.1 A-2b: Front & Rear Yard (Interior Parcel)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
FRONT YARD
REAR YARD
ALLEY
SIDE STREET FRONTAGE
STREET FRONTAGE
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Figure 6.1 A-2a: Front & Rear Yard (Corner Parcel)
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
SIDE YARD
SIDE YARD
ALLEY
SIDE STREET FRONTAGE
STREET FRONTAGE
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Figure 6.1 A-3a: Side Yard (Corner Parcel)
ALLEY
STREET FRONTAGE
SIDE YARD
SIDE YARD
Figure 6.1 A-3b: Side Yards (Interior Parcel)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
RIGHT-OF-WAY
ALLEY
STREET FRONTAGE
Figure 6.1 B-1b: Front & Rear Setbacks (Interior Parcel)
FRONT AND REAR
SETBACKS
FRONT AND REAR
SETBACKS
Rignt-Of-Way
ALLEY
Figure 6.1 B-1a: Front & Rear Setbacks (Corner Parcel)
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
Right-Of-Way
ALLEY
SIDE
SETBACKS
Figure 6.1 B-2a: Side Setbacks (Corner Parcel)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
ALLEY
STREET FRONTAGE
Figure 6.1 B-2b: Side Setbacks (Interior Parcel)
SIDE
SETBACKS
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
GAMBREL
MANSARD
GABLE
AND HIP
BUILDING
HEIGHT
BUILDING
HEIGHT
Figure 6.1 C-1: Building Heights for Different Roof Types
BUILDING
HEIGHT
BUILDING
HEIGHT
Figure 6.1 D-1: Building Height for a Flat Roof & Uneven Grade
HIGHEST
GRADE
LOWEST
GRADE
COPING OF A
FLAT ROOF
AVERAGE
GRADE
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE
Figure 6.1 E-1a: Corner Lot Principal & Accessory Building
RIGHT-OF-WAY
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES
Figure 6.1 E-1b: Interior Lot Principal & Accessory Building
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
DRIVEWAY
&
SIDEWALK
PATIO or
SOLID DECK
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE
DRIVEWAY &
SIDEWALKS
IMPERVIOUS
SURFACES
Figure 6.1 D-1: Impervious Surfaces
Rignt-Of-Way
ALLEY
15 FEET
15 FEET
10 FEET
10 FEET
Figure 6.1 G-1: Vision Triangles
RIGHT-OF-WAY
10 FT 10 FT
DRIVEWAY
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
PARKING
LOT
(OR AREA)
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
Figure 6.3 F-1: Parking Lot (or Area)
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
INTERIOR PARKING LOT
(OR AREA)
Figure 6.3 F-2b: Interior Parking Lot (or area)
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
INTERIOR PARKING LOT
(OR AREA)
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
Figure 6.3 F-2a: Interior Parking Lot (or area) with Islands
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
ENTRANCE/
EXIT
30°
angle
45°
angle
60°
angle
75°
angle
90°
angle
Parallel
Figure 6.3 F-3: Parking Lot (or Area) Angles
90° angle Parallel
60° angle 75° angle
30° angle 45° angle
17'
20'
19'
20' 9
9
9
9
9' 18'
23'
8.5'
9' 9'
9'
9'
Driveway Width
12' One-Way or 19' Two-Way
Driveway Width
12' One-Way or 19' Two-Way
Driveway Width
16' One-Way or 20' Two-Way
Driveway Width
22' One-Way or 22' Two-Way
Driveway Width
25' One-Way or 25' Two-Way
Driveway Width
12' One-Way or 19' Two-Way
Figure 6.3 F-4: Parking Lot (or area) Space Dimensions
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
ALLEY
SIDE STREET FRONTAGE
STREET FRONTAGE
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Figure 6.5 C-1a: Fences with Vision Triangles (Corner Parcel)
HOUSE
FRONT YARD –
max height - 4'
REAR YARD –
max height - 6'
SIDE YARD –
max height - 6'
CORNER SIDE YARD
– max height - 4'
Vision
Triangle
Vision
Triangle
3' alley setback
ALLEY
STREET FRONTAGE
FRONT YARD –
max height - 4'
Figure 6.5 C-1b: Fences (Interior Parcel)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
HOUSE
HOUSE
R-O-W
SIDE YARD –
max height - 4'
SIDE YARD –
max height - 6'
REAR YARD –
max height - 6'
3' alley setback
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
CHEQUAMEGON BAY
AUTO SALES
& SERVICE
PROJECTING
SIGN
CLOTHING & GIFTS
COF FE E
SH OP
MAIN STREET RETAIL
MOTEL
&
RESTAURANT
ROOF
SIGN
10%
off
SIDEWALK SIGN
INFORMATIONAL
SIGNS
POLITICAL &
CAMPAIGN
SIGN
VOTE ON
ELECTION DAY
OPEN
Nonflashing
NEON
SIGN
Est. 1922
PLAQUES, DATES,
SYMBOLS, ETC.
CANOPY SIGN
(letters <9")
CLOTHING & GIFTS
ASHLAND BUILDING
NO
PARKING
Figure 6.6 F-1: Types of Signs Requiring a Permit
Figure 6.6 C-1: Types of Signs Not Requiring a Permit
BURGERS – CHICKEN – RIBS
WALL
SIGN
CANOPY SIGN
(letters >9")
BILLBOARD
WALL
SIGN
DELI & GROCERIES
Ashland’s
Lakeside Shops
FREESTANDING
SIGN
#1 Ribs/Chicken
#2 Surf Platter
#3 Burger Basket
#4 Combo
MENU
BOARD
SIGN
Beachside Cafe
Kayak Ren tal s
CUSTOMER
PARKING
ONLY
Con st r u ct ion
Bu i lder s I n c.
Single-Family Home
Development
ON-SITE
CONSTRUCTION
SIGN
No
trespassing
FOR SALE
CITY REALTY
REAL ESTATE
SIGN
NO
DUMPING
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
Sign Copy and
Graphic Area
Area of Sign
Structure
Exterior
Lighting
Signs
Affixed to
Lamp Posts
& Utility
Poles
Abando ned
Signs
PROHIBITED Flashing & Blinking ...
Port abl e Signs Not
Used In The Normal
Course Of Business
Painted Signs
on the Fac e
of a Struc ture
ROOF SIGN
without a conditional use permit
signs af f ix ed t o
sat el l it e dishes
Double Sided Sign
(angle between may
not exceed 45°) Sign Structure
Height
Minimum
Sign / Vehicle
Clearance 16'
Unshielded
lighting
INTERIOR
LIGHTING
Sign
Height
Sign
Width
Figure 6.6 E-1: Sign Design
Figure 6.6 D-1: Prohibited Signs
City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012 Appendices
MOTEL
&
RESTAURANT
A SH L A N D
RET A I L
A N D
G RO C ERI ES
BOOKSTORE &
COFFEE SHOP
ASHLAND
BUSINESS OFFICE
LOW-PROFILE
(FREESTANDING)
SIGN
MONUMENT
SIGN
JOINT MULTI-POLE
(FREESTANDING)
SIGN
ENCLOSED or SINGLE POLE
(FREESTANDING) SIGN
Max
Height
20'
ENCLOSED or SINGLE POLE
(FREESTANDING) SIGN – City
Center (CC), Regional
Commercial (RC) & Industrial
Districts Only
JOINT MULTI-POLE
(FREESTANDING) SIGN –
City Center (CC), Regional
Commercial (RC) &
Industrial Districts Only
LOW-PROFILE
(FREESTANDING) SIGN –
in those Districts allowing
Freestanding Signs
MONUMENT SIGN –
in those Districts allowing
Freestanding Signs
Max
Height
20'
Max
Max Height 6'
Height 6'
Figure 6.1 F-2a: Types of Freestanding Signs
Figure 6.6 F-2b: Freestanding Sign Heights
N EW
&
U S E D C A R S
Appendices City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance Adopted: January 10, 2012/Revised: March 13, 2012
Figure 9.3 B-1a: Private Road Section (Asphalt)
Figure 9.3 B-1b: Private Road Section (Gravel)
Page 782A-1
CHAPTER 782A. CHANGE THE CLASSIFICATION OF CERTAIN PROPERTIES
FROM TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT TO INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
782A.01 Property Changed. The following described property is hereby changed from the
classification of Two Family Residence District as provided in Zoning Ordinance No. 679 to
Industrial District, to-wit:
The area located on the south side of Sixth Street, between 14th and 15th Avenues West,
consisting of Lots 4, 5 and 6, Block 66, Ashland Proper, City of
Ashland, County of Ashland, Wisconsin.
782A.02 Change Effected. The change effected by this Ordinance is to allow construction on
the described lots of a 40' x 80' steel building, and to allow for razing and replacement of the
frame building now situated thereon, and to allow for the continued use of the premises for
storage and draying purposes. Should the proposed steel building not be constructed or should
the described lots be used other than for storage and dray line purposes, the classification thereof
shall revert to that of Two Family Residence District.
ADOPTED: 782A (772) 6/13/1967
Page 782G-1
CHAPTER 782G. CONSTRUCTION OF A 3' X 7' DIRECTIONAL SIGN.
782G.10. A 3' x 7' lighted directional sign for the hospital may be erected on property described
as:
The unplatted portion of Government Lot 2 lying between Block 100 and 101
North of right-of-way line of Front Street Section 5-47-4.
ADOPTED: 782G (932) 1/8/1980
Page 787E-1
CHAPTER 787E. A VARIANCE TO ALLOW CONSTRUCTION OF A COMMERCIAL
GARAGE IN A TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
787E.01. Variance. A 25 foot by 35 foot commercial garage addition may be built on the
following described property:
Lots 23 and 24, Block 196, Ellis Division, City of Ashland.
ADOPTED: 787E (901A) 5/9/1978
Page 787F-1
CHAPTER 787F. AN ORDINANCE TO GRANT A ZONING USE VARIANCE FOR A
PARKING LOT AT 1322 FRONT STREET EAST.
787F.01. Zoning Use Variance. A parking lot shall be allowed to be constructed at the
following site:
Lots 11 and 12, Block 54, Ellis Division.
ADOPTED: 787F (908) 10/10/1978
Page 787G-1
CHAPTER 787G. GRANT A ZONING USE VARIANCE TO ALLOW CONSTRUCTION OF
AN ADDITION ONTO A RESIDENCE LOCATED IN AN AREA ZONED INDUSTRIAL A.
787G.01 Variance. An addition for residential use may be built onto the existing residence at 816
Water Street, legally described as lots 16-17, Block 42, Ellis Division.
ADOPTED: 787G (921) 5/8/1979
Page 787H-1
CHAPTER 787H. AN ORDINANCE TO GRANT A ZONING USE VARIANCE TO ALLOW
RECONSTRUCTION OF A RESIDENCE LOCATED IN AN AREA ZONED
INDUSTRIAL A.
787H.01 Variance. A residence may be reconstructed at 816 Water Street, legally described as lots
16 - 17, Block 42, Ellis Division.
Adopted: 787H (924) 7/10/1979
Page 787H-2
Page 787K-1
CHAPTER 787K. AMEND THE CITY ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 679.
787K.01. Amendment. Ordinance No. 679 is hereby amended so as to change the designation of
the property hereinafter described from a one family residence district to a two family residence
district. The property affected is described as follows:
Lots 15 and 16, Block 257, Ellis Division, City of Ashland.
Adopted: 787K (810) 11/10/1970
Page 787R-1
CHAPTER 787R. GRANT A ZONING VARIANCE TO ALLOW CONSTRUCTION OF
A POLE BUILDING FOR EQUIPMENT STORAGE PURPOSES ON LAND ZONED AS
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, AND TO REDUCE THE SIDEYARD
SETBACK REQUIREMENT FOR THIS BUILDING.
787R.01. Steel Pole Building. A 100' x 50' steel pole building shall be allowed to be erected on
Lots 1 and 2, Block 55, Ellis Division, to store equipment and vehicles.
787R.02. Sideyard Setback. The sideyard setback bordering 12th Avenue East, and Lot 1,
Block 55, Ellis Division shall be reduced to 0 feet, for the construction of said building.
Adopted: 787R (882) 1/11/1977
Page 787S-1
CHAPTER 787S. GRANT A ZONING USE VARIANCE TO ALLOW A COMMERCIAL
PRINT SHOP IN A CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
787S.01 Property. The following described property shall be allowed to be used for the purpose
of a commercial job printing shop:
The west 45 feet of the East 70 feet of Lots 1, 2, and 3 and the south 10 feet
of the east 70 feet of Lot 4, Block 83, Ellis Division.
Adopted: 787S (885) 2/8/1977
Page 787T-1
CHAPTER 787T. ZONING USE VARIANCE TO ALLOW RELOCATION OF CERTAIN
ADVERTISING PANELS.
787T.01 Advertising Panels. Advertising panels located on Lots 1 and 2, Block 48, Ellis Division,
City of Ashland, may be relocated to Lots 13 and 14, Block 53, Ellis Division, City of Ashland.
ADOPTED: 787T (890) 6/15/1977
Page 787V-1
CHAPTER 787V. AMENDMENT TO OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF
ASHLAND IN ORDER TO PLAT A STREET IN ELLIS DIVISION.
787V.01. Official Zoning Map Amended. The official zoning map of the City of Ashland shall be
amended in order to plat a street which shall be located in Blocks 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30 in Ellis
Division of the City of Ashland which shall be legally described as follows:
To locate the point of beginning commence at a 1" iron pipe at the intersection of
the westerly R/W line of Prentice Avenue and the northerly R/W line of C&NW
Railroad, (said northerly R/W line being 50 feet from the center line of the
C&NW Railroad tract), run N 32°-00'-00" W, 133.78 feet along said westerly
R/W line of Prentice Avenue to a 1" iron pipe which is the point of beginning.
Thence from said point of beginning S 58° -00'-00" W, 315.00 feet to a wooden
hub.
Thence S 43°-20'-00" W, 741.15 feet to a wooden hub marking the intersection
with the easterly R/W line of Ellis Avenue.
Thence N 32°-00'-00" W, 66.00 feet along the easterly R/W line of Ellis Avenue
to a point.
Thence N 43°-20'-00" E, 741.15 feet to a point.
Thence S 32°-00'-00" E, 6.00 feet to a point.
Thence N 58°-00'-00" E, 315.00 feet to a wooden hub on the westerly R/W line of
Prentice Avenue.
Thence S 32°-00'-00" E, 60.00 feet to the point of beginning.
Said parcel contains approximately 1.56 acres.
Bearings are based on the center line of Prentice Avenue bearing S 32°-00'-00" E.
787V.02. Access. This street shall provide access from Prentice Avenue to the Ashland Marina.
ADOPTED: 787V (1116) 11/10/1987
Page 787W-1
CHAPTER 787W. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF ASHLAND SHALL BE AMENDED TO
PLAT AND OPEN A STREET LOCATED IN BLOCKS 120 AND 121, ELLIS DIVISION.
787W.01.The Official Zoning Map Amended. The official zoning map of the City of Ashland
shall be amended in order to plat and open a street which shall be located in Blocks 120 and 121
in Ellis Division and also a portion of platted but unopened 4th Street West in the City of
Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin, which may be legally described as follows:
Commencing at the northwesterly corner of said Block 120, thence southerly
along the westerly R/W line of said Block 120, 150 feet more or less to a point
that intersects with the south line of Lot 7; thence easterly along said south line of
Lot 7 150 feet more or less to a point on the center line of the vacated alley;
thence S 78? 15' 01" E to the north line of Lot 13; thence easterly along said
north line of Lot 13 to the easterly R/W line of Block 121; thence southerly along
said easterly R/W line of Block 121 to a point 10 feet (measured at right angles)
from the center line of Wisconsin Central Track number 8; thence westerly and
parallel to the south line of Block 121 to a point; thence N 78? 15' 01" W 54.40
feet to the southerly line of said Block 120; thence continuing N 78? 15' 01" W
128.44 feet to a point 9.99 feet south of the southerly line of Lot 5, Block 120;
thence westerly and parallel to said southerly line of Lot 5, 125.19 feet to a point
on the westerly line of Block 120; thence northerly 60 feet more or less to the
point of beginning.
787W.03. Access. This street shall provide access from Ellis Avenue to Third Avenue West and
shall henceforth be known as Depot Drive.
ADOPTED: 787W (1130) 4/12/1988
Page 787X-1
CHAPTER 787X. ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE
CITY OF ASHLAND TO PLAT AND OPEN THE CONNECTING ROAD BETWEEN
FRONT STREET TO THE ENTRANCE TO THE MARINA PARKING AREA.
787X.01. The official zoning map of the City of Ashland shall be amended in order to plat a
street which shall be located in Ellis Division of the City of Ashland which shall be legally
described as follows:
To locate the point of beginning commence at a point on the intersecting center
lines of Ellis Avenue (State Highway 13) and Front Street (U.S. Highway 2);
thence S 58? 14' 22" W, 30.00 feet to a point on the Front Street center line;
thence N 31? 45"38' W, 54.00 feet to a point which is the point of beginning.
Thence from said point of beginning N 31? 45" 38' W, 523.22 feet to a point;
thence N 58? 14' 22" E, 15 feet to a point; thence N 44? 57' 25" W 622.34 feet to
a point; thence S 45? 02' 35" E 40.00 feet to a point; thence S 44? 57' 25" E
622.34 feet to a point; thence N 58? 14' 22" E 25.00 feet to a point on the easterly
right-of-way line of North Ellis Avenue; thence S 31??45" 38' E 523 feet more or
less to a point at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of North Ellis
Avenue and the northerly right-of-way line of Front Street; thence S 58? 14' 22"
W 80.00 feet to the point of beginning.
Bearings are based on the center line of Front Street (U.S. Highway 2) bearing N
58? 14' 22" E.
787X.02. This street shall provide a connection from Front Street to the Marina Parking area and
shall henceforth be known as North Ellis Avenue.
ADOPTED: 787X (1140) 7/12/1988
Page 788T-1
CHAPTER 788T. ORDINANCE TO CONDITIONALLY REZONE TO C-2
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL THE FOLLOWING PROPERTY: 623 2ND
AVE EAST, PARCEL 201021870000.
788T.01. Rezoning of Parcel. Parcel 201021870000 is hereby changed from the zoning
classification of R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residential District to C-2 Neighborhood
Commercial subject to all of the following conditions:
(a) The rezone to C-2 Neighborhood Commercial shall only be valid so long as the
property is used as a community-based organization administering and offering services to the
needy (said rezone is not specific to NWCSA—only to such use);
(b) Said use shall be established within one year; and
(c) If either or both of the foregoing conditions are not met, the zoning of said property
shall revert to the R-2 Single- and Two-Family Residential District or equivalent district.
788T.02. Future Development. All future development in the area shall comply with all
City Ordinances.
ADOPTED: 788T (1712) 8/25/2009
Page 794E-1
CHAPTER 794E. AN ORDINANCE TO GRANT A ZONING VARIANCE TO
ALLOW RELOCATION OF ADVERTISING PANELS ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
FRONT STREET BETWEEN 28TH AND 29TH AVENUE.
794E.01. Zoning Variance. A zoning use variance is hereby granted to relocate 2 12 foot
by 25 foot advertising panels to Lot 5, Block 17, Lake Shore Division, City of Ashland.
ADOPTED: 794E (904) 7/11/1978
Page 796C-1
CHAPTER 796C. AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING CERTAIN USES AND
OPERATIONS IN AN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION.
796C.01. Variance. A variance be granted to allow the following uses by Land O’ Lakes,
Inc., in a zoned Central Business District on Lots 9 thru 13, inclusive, and the South 100 feet
of Lot 17, Block 2, Phillips Addition: bulk petroleum storage, including gas, oil, diesel fuel,
kerosene, and L.P. gas; a fertilizer blending plant; and feed mill construction and operation.
ADOPTED: 796C (859) 7/13/1976
AMENDMENTS: 796C (1318) 5/10/1994
Page 800A-1
CHAPTER 800A. AN ORDINANCE TO GRANT A ZONING VARIANCE TO
ALLOW CONSTRUCTION OF A COMMERCIAL STORAGE GARAGE IN TWOFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL.
800A.01. Zoning Use Variance. The following described property within the City of
Ashland is granted a zoning use variance to allow construction of a commercial storage
garage:The east sixty (60) feet of fractional Block 117, Vaughn Division and the part of
Wilmarth’s unplatted land in Section 5, Township 47, Range 4 West, as described in
Volume 298, pp. 400-405.
ADOPTED: 800A (898) 3/15/1978
Page 801B-1
CHAPTER 801B. AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
OF THE CITY OF ASHLAND IN ORDER TO PLAT AN ALLEY IN VAUGHN AND
HUMBIRDS ADDITION.
801B.01. Zoning Map. The official zoning map of the City of Ashland shall be amended in
order to plat an alley in Block 6, Vaughn and Humbirds Addition adjacent to Lots 1 through
6 and Lots 18 through 20 and the E 55’ of Lots 15, 16, and 17.
801B.02. Alley Access. This alley shall provide access from 6th Street West to 7th Street
West.
ADOPTED: 801B (1186) 6/13/1989
Page 806A-1
CHAPTER 806A. AN ORDINANCE TO GRANT A ZONING USE VARIANCE FOR
WAREHOUSING OF CARPETING.
806A.01. The Following Described Property May Be Used for Warehousing of
Carpeting. The existing 28 foot by 50 foot wooden structure at 507 Sanborn Avenue. The
legal description of the property boundaries on which the building is located is a parcel of
land in the SE ¼, SE ¼ as described in Vol. 202, p. 439, Section 6, T47, R4W.
(agricultural).
ADOPTED: 806A (920) 4/10/1979
Page 806G-1
CHAPTER 806G. AN ORDINANCE TO GRANT A ZONING USE VARIANCE TO
ALLOW THE CONSTRUCTION OF THREE EIGHT-PLEX MULTI-FAMILY
DWELLING UNITS IN AN AGRICULTURAL ZONED DISTRICT.
806G.01. Zoning Use Variance. The construction of three eight-plex apartment structures
shall be allowed to be erected on the following described property:
Those portions of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter
(SW ¼ NE ¼) of Section Four (4), Township Forty-seven (47) North,
Range Four (4) West, and of Fractional Lots Thirteen (13), Fourteen
(14), Fifteen (15) and Sixteen (16) in Block Three Hundred Six (306) of Ellis
Division, all being within the City of Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin,
described as follows:
The point of beginning is that point marked by an iron pipe, on the easterly
line of Third Avenue East, as extended, which is 200 feet southerly, as
measured along said easterly line Third Avenue East and of such easterly line
as extended, from the northwest corner of said Block 306. From said point of
beginning proceed South 32 degrees 24’ 15” East, 261 feet to a point marked
by an iron pipe; thence North 57 degrees 33’ 45” East, to a point on the west
line of Prentice Avenue; thence North 32 degrees 24’ 45” West, 261 feet to a
point marked by an iron pipe which is the northeast corner of Lots Sixteen
(16) in said Block 306 of Ellis Division; thence South 57 degrees 33’ 45”
West, 300.21 feet to the point of beginning.
806G.02. Lot Size Requirement. The lot requirement shall be 3,262 square feet per family
dwelling unit.
Adopted: 806G (886) 2/8/1977
Page 806N-1
CHAPTER 806N. AN ORDINANCE TO APPROVE A PUD-GDP (PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN) IN AGRICULTURAL
ZONING/PRENTICE, INC./LOCATED EAST OF TURNER ROAD IN GOVERNMENT
LOT #2, SECTION 6, T47N, R4W.
806N.01. Plan approval. General Development Plan is hereby approved on the following
described property which is zoned Agricultural: East of Turner Road in Government Lot #2,
Section 6, T47N, R4W. A copy of the combined PUD-GDP and PUD-SIP, dated April 8, 1997,
shall be attached to this ordinance and is incorporated by reference. A copy of the Prentice
Heights Site Plan shall be attached to this ordinance and is incorporated by reference.
806N.02. Revocation. If substantial development progress has not occurred within one year of
passage of this ordinance, the Council may, following Planning Commission recommendation,
revoke the PUD-GDP approval and revert the site zoning to its previous zoning district
classification.
ADOPTED: 806N (1391) 4/8/1997
Prentice, Inc.
Planned Unit Development
General Development Plan (GDP)
Specific Implementation Plan (SIP)
April 8, 1997
Developers
Prentice Inc. has purchased 10 acres of property located adjacent to Turner Road, across from the
Platter Restaurant. The president of Prentice, Inc. is Mr. Thomas Trudeau of Trudeau Construct
located in Bayfield, Wisconsin. The property is described as Govt. Lot #2, Section 6, T47N, R4W
in Ashland.
Zoning
The property is currently zoned as agricultural. The land use plan designates the property to be
rezoned in the future as suburban residential. The suburban residential zoning requires a minimum
lot size of at least V% acre. The property owner has applied for a Planned Unit Development (PUD)
designation for the project. In general, the PUD designation allows the City and the developer to
negotiate higher density, mixed uses or development clustering in exchange for open space areas,
public amenities or protection of unique land characteristics. The development proposal includes
a request for mixed residential uses that would not normally be allowed under standard suburban
residential zoning. In exchange, the project attempts to leave drainage ravines largely undisturbed,
tries to maintain scenic vistas of Lake Superior, and reduces the number of building units from the
number that would normally be allowed under standard suburban residential zoning.
Site Plan
A detailed site plan, based on a certified survey, has been prepared showing the precise location and
size of all proposed lots. In addition, the plan shows the following:
Land uses and development densities
Size, arrangement and location of all lots
Location of all buildings
Location of all public and private streets
Artesian well location
Locations of mature trees and vegetation
Locations of wetland areas
Site topography and drainage patterns
Rear yard setbacks for lots located on the south border of the project
Building Set Backs
The rear yard set back for lots on the south side of the development will be at least 35 feet. The 35-
foot set back will be shown on the site plan.
Wetlands
The location of all known wetlands on the property will be shown on the site plan. All wetlands
areas will be undisturbed by the development. A 20-foot buffer zone will be provided around
wetland areas.
Development Density
The plan provides for the construction of 21 residential dwelling units on 14 lots. The residential
mix will include: (1) six-unit condominium, (2) two-unit villas, and (11) single family homes. The
plan asks for flexibility to change the use of the six-unit condominium site to a two-unit villa if the
market is stronger for villas. The City of Ashland will not permit the construction of additional
condominium units other than the units shown on Prentice Heights Plat F.
Public Improvements
All public improvements in the housing development will be constructed to specifications
established by the City of Ashland. The City Engineer will oversee all design of public utilities and
public improvements and will serve as the construction inspector for the project.
Perhaps the most significant public improvement on the site will be the drainage plan. Natural
drainage ravines and swales will remain largely unchanged. As part of the design of the drainage
plan, a complete hydraulic analysis of surface water runoff will be done. The hydraulic analysis will
include documented information from USGS maps and undocumented features including artesian
wells and upstream drainage impacts. As a minimum, the culverts will be sized to meet the water
discharge created from a 25-year storm.
The project will be served by a new sanitary sewer line that will be installed under or adjacent to the
new City street. The 8-inch sewer line will flow by gravity to a main line located on Turner Road.
The Turner Road sewer main discharges into the Turner Road lift station which has sufficient
capacity to accept the additional flows.
It is anticipated that private wells will be installed to provide water to the residential units. However,
before construction, the City Engineer will complete a study to determine the feasibility of extending
municipal water service from Sanborn Avenue to the project.
The developer proposes the construction of a new City street, named Prentice Heights Road. The
street will be built to City construction standards and will include curb and gutter. A cul-de-sac with
a turn radius sufficient to meet the needs of emergency vehicles will be provided. The vertical
alignment of the public road will be controlled by the building's finished floor elevations and the
depth of public utilities. The City may choose to delay the placement of asphalt on the road bed if
there is concern about additional trench settling or high water content in the road base. The delay
in placing asphalt will not exceed one year from the completion of street base improvements.
Electric and gas service will be extended to the lots prior to the completion of street construction.
No excavation materials or spoils materials from the project shall be deposited in ravines or
negatively impact natural drainage patterns.
Protection of Vistas
Every effort will be made to protect or possibly enhance the view of Lake Superior for properties
located south of the development. Each of the dwelling structures will be limited to single story
construction as viewed from the street. The only exception to this standard will be the six-unit
condominium which will have four units on the main floor and two units on a second story. Each
structure will be constructed with a 6/12 roof pitch. Some trees on the north border of the
development may be removed or pruned in a way to enhance views for existing or proposed housing.
Erosion Control Plan
All slopes will be left untouched as much as possible. As a minimum measure, contractors will be
required to place filter cloth and hay bales to control soil erosion. Additional measures to control
erosion will be provided if the City Engineer deems necessary. All disturbed areas will be seeded
and mulched after construction.
Landscaping Plan
A color rendering of a site plan has been prepared to give an overall impression of the expected
landscaping improvements to the site. To the extent possible, existing vegetation will be left
untouched, especially in the ravine and swale areas. The goal of the landscaping plan will be to
minimize the area utilized for manicured lawn. Developed grass and green space areas will be
primarily limited to the areas immediately adjacent to the building areas and driveways. A variety
of shrubs and bushes will be used as selective screening between some of the building sites.
Restrictive Covenants
Declarations of restrictions and covenants will be provided for the development. The restrictive
covenants will not be less restrictive that requirements imposed by the City by Ordinance and will
not be less restrictive than any formal condition attached to the approval of the development by the
Planning Commission or City Council. The restrictive covenants will provide for an architectural
review comrnittee to be formed. Membership on the review committee will include property owners
as lots are sold with the review committee being comprising all of the owners of property at the
completion of the development. The City of Ashland will be provided with a copy of the final
version of restrictive covenants before construction and executed copies of the restrictive covenants
will be provided to the City as lots are sold.
Property Values
The general sale price of the condominium units will be in the low $100,000 range. Villas will be
marketed for approximately $150,000 each and single family home values are expected to range
from $140,000 to $200,000. Main floor square footage for the housing units will be at least 1,200
sf.
Timetable for Development
The length of time of the development will greatly depend on the sales of the lots. Construction of
the public improvements are expected to begin by the late spring or early summer of 1997.
Construction of any housing is expected to begin during the middle part of summer 1997. It is
anticipated that the project will be completely built out within approximately three years.
Fencing
Assuming that the existing fence between adjoining property owners and the development property
is properly located on the property boundary, such fence shall remain intact and undisturbed.
However, if the fence is not located properly, the developer and the property owner will need to
resolve the boundary issues.

Pager 807B-1
CHAPTER 807B. AN ORDINANCE TO APPROVE A PUD-GDP (PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN) IN AGRICULTURAL
ZONING/ELK’S CLUB GOLF COURSE EXPANSION AND HOUSING
PROJECT/LOCATED IN SECTIONS 6 & 7, T47N, R4W, ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
HIGHWAY 137 (GOLF COURSE ROAD).
807B.01. A Planned Unit Development.
(a) General Development Plan is hereby approved on the following described property
which is zoned Agricultural:
On the South Side of Highway 137 in Sections 6 & 7, T47N, R4W.
(b) A copy of the PUD-GDP dated June 4, 1998, and the PUD-SIP (Amended
Declaration of Restrictions & Covenants) dated March 16, 2002, shall be attached to this
ordinance and incorporated by reference.
(c) A copy of the Elk’s Club Development plan shall be attached to this ordinance and is
incorporated by reference.
(ATTACHMENTS ARE FILED IN THE VAULT WITH ORIGINAL ORDINANCE)
ADOPTED: 807B (1436) 6/16/1998
AMENDMENTS: 807B (1500) 8/8/2000; 807B (1520) 7/31/2001;
807B (1540) 4/16/2002
Page 808-1
CHAPTER 808. AN ORDINANCE TO APPROVE A PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT-GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (PUD-GDP) IN THE PLANNED
RESIDENTIAL/INSTITUTIONAL ZONING DISTRICT, LOCATED WEST OF FARM
ROAD, LOT 1 OF CSM 652.
808.01 Plan Approval. A Planned Unit Development-General Development Plan is hereby approved on
the following described property which is zoned Planned Residential/Institutional:
LOCATED WEST OF FARM ROAD, LOT 1 OF CSM 652
A copy of the Salem Church of Ashland PUD-GDP and associated Site Plan is attached to this ordinance
and is incorporated by reference.
808.02 Conditions. The following conditions shall be incorporated into the PUD-GDP:
(a) The deviation from the parking lot screening shall not be approved, and screening shall include
1) a 3’ high berm with landscaping features to include deciduous and/or coniferous shrubs and
may also include other decorative features and is subject to approval at time of SIP review, not
per the developer; or 2) maintained lawn with planting 3’ high or greater plantings to be
predominantly coniferous shrubs and/or trees to provide year-round screening and to be spaced to
allow growth, but also to ensure screening is adequate at the onset of development, which is
subject to approval at the time of the SIP review, not per the developer. The parking lot screening
is required because of the significantly increased number of parking spaces provided on the site
and the reduction being requested for interior parking lot landscaping.
(b) The parking area behind the building is to be paved by the time the first residential apartment is
approved for occupancy, to protect the visual integrity of the development for future renters and
minimize dust.
(c) Revise the sign requirements as follows: 1) Signs within a PUD are to have a unified appearance
that is integral to the PUD design concept. Therefore, the sign requirements identified for Area 1
shall also be applicable to Area 2, and there should be a statement added in the sign requirements
that all signs within the PUD must be unified in appearance/design; 2) Free-standing signs
(monument) should be limited to one per building, must include some landscaping/plantings at
the base of the sign; may not exceed 20’ in height, and may not exceed 75 square feet in area for
institutional uses or 32 square feet for residential uses; 3) More than one wall sign may be
installed on a building wall as long as the total area of the signage does not exceed 2 square feet
per lineal foot of building wall on which it is attached; 4) Electronic message center signs are
permitted within the PUD by right but may not comprise more than 30% of the total sign area of
the sign which they are part of; 5) Only one temporary informational sign may be allowed to be
displayed on a property at a time, and such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area; and 6)
interior or exterior sign lighting is permitted, however such lighting must be designed, located, or
shielded to not cast glare/direct light onto adjacent roadways or surrounding properties; and 7) all
other sign standards not addressed shall be as per the city’s UDO.
(d) Revise lighting as follows: All light trespass shall be contained to go no further than 10’ from the
property line on which the lighting is located; all fixtures be full cut-off or shielded; light fixtures
within the PUD shall be of the same or similar style/fixture type so as to result in a unified
development appearance throughout the development.
Page 808-2
(e) The minimum landscape requirements are to be one-half of the planting requirements as
identified in the UDO to ensure a minimum level of landscaping is provided.
(f) If it is intended that the private street may be become a public street in the future, the roadway
must be completed in conformance with the City’s minimum construction standards, and the road
design and related elements (ditch, trail, sidewalks, etc.) must receive approval from the Public
Works Department. Depict the 66’ r-o-w width for the private street (Salem Drive) on the CSM
to identify the area that comprises the private street and related elements that are subject to access
and maintenance agreements between the private parties, and to grant the City an easement to use
the private street and associated right-of-way for any reasonable public purpose, including but not
limited to travel by emergency vehicles and installation of public utilities and conveniences that
may be needed.
(g) Depict the future private street extension area should be depicted on the GDP site plan identifying
where the street is proposed to terminate in the future or if the street is anticipated to allow for
future connection to the property to the south.
(h) The design/construction of the bike path is subject to review and approval by Public Works if it is
desired that the private street/r-o-w is to potentially be dedicated to the public in the future. If it
is to remain private, the bike path can be constructed to private development standards. Also, the
future extension of the bike path on the south side of the private street should be depicted on the
GDP site plan.
(i) Indicate the sidewalk on the north side of the private street will be constructed in conjunction
with the development of the residential buildings on the north side (i.e., as a building is
constructed, so shall the public sidewalk that is proposed adjacent to the building), not per
discretion of the developer.
(j) Provide the public easement for pedestrian access on the CSM to be created for the property
development as that is the appropriate time to place easements and ensure they are depicted and
in place on a property.
(k) Provide the easement for public trail use in the existing trail area that cuts across the back corner
of the property on the CSM for the property development.
(l) Indicate that building materials are subject to review and approval as part of the SIP or by the
Plan Commission for each portion of development.
(m) Public utilities are subject to review and approval by the Public Works Department and any
revisions necessary will be incorporated into the GDP.
(n) Stormwater/drainage is subject to review and approval by the WDNR and with the City’s Public
Works department, and any revisions to the stormwater plans will be incorporated into the GDP.
Page 808-3
(o) Rooftop mechanical screening is required to protect the public interest and nearby future
development.
The PUD-GDP is an interim zoning classification that does not enable any development until the
PUD-Specific Implementation Plan (SIP) is approved.
ADOPTED: 808 (2016-1884) 10/25/2016













Page 809-1
CHAPTER 809. ORDINANCE TO APPROVE A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTSPECIFIC
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN (PUD-SIP) IN THE PLANNED RESIDENTIAL/
INSTITUTIONAL ZONING DISTRICT, LOCATED WEST OF FARM ROAD, LOT 1
OF CSM 652.
809.01 Plan Approval. A Planned Unit Development-Specific Implementation Plan is hereby approved
for Area 1 of the PUD-GDP on the following described property which is zoned Planned
Residential/Institutional:
LOCATED WEST OF FARM ROAD, LOT 1 OF CSM 652
A copy of the Salem Church of Ashland PUD-SIP and associated Site Plan is attached to this ordinance
and is incorporated by reference.
809.02 Conditions. The following conditions shall be incorporated into the PUD-SIP:
(a) Provide a bike rack on-site.
(b) Snow storage areas have not been identified on the plan, however there is substantial area
on the site to accommodate snow storage. Staff will work with the developer to ensure
appropriate snow storage areas are provided for and depicted on the site plan.
(c) Receive final approval of the stormwater management plan from the WDNR and City
Public Works Department.
(d) The design/construction of the bike path is subject to review and approval by the Public
Works Department if it’s desired that the private street may possibly become a public road. In
addition, the future extension of the bike path along the church frontage on Salem Drive must be
depicted on the site plan.
(e) At this time, public sidewalk is not provided for along the Farm Road frontage; the
developer shall work with the Department of Public Works to discuss the provision for public
sidewalk in this location and determine if it is to be provided, and if so, the timing of
construction.
(f) Proposed utilities are depicted on the site plan are subject to review and approval by the
Public Works department.
(g) Following final design of the plans, the applicant shall provide a CD copy of the final
building floor plan layout and utility plan (in a .dxf format). Such information shall be provided
to the Fire Department prior to the issuance of an Occupancy permit.
(h) Parking lot screening shall be revised to include either 1) a 3’ high berm with landscaping
features to include deciduous and/or coniferous shrubs and may also include other decorative
features; or 2) maintained lawn with planting 3’ high or greater plantings to be predominantly
coniferous shrubs and/or trees to provide year-round screening and to be spaced to allow growth,
but also to ensure screening is adequate at the onset of development, (if amendment to the GDP is
approved).
Page 809-2
(i) Provide the architectural detail of the dumpster enclosure. Amendments to the landscape
plan are subject to review and approval by Planning & Development staff.
(j) Details of the proposed signage shall be submitted to the Department of Planning &
Development for review and approval and conformance to the GDP.
(k) The height of the light poles shall be provided to the Planning Department. The wall
packs proposed on the west and south building walls shall be the full cut-off lighting option, not
the refractive lens.
(l) Building materials are subject to review and approval by the Plan Commission.
(m) Any private street constructed as part of this project may be dedicated to the public only
upon acceptance by the City. Whether or not such street is accepted shall be determined at the
time that it is offered. Nothing in this Chapter or in Chapter 808 shall be construed as a promise
or commitment to accept any such street.
The PUD-SIP constitutes the final zoning for the subject property.
ADOPTED: 809 (2016-1885) 10/25/2016
Page 809-3














Page 826-1
CHAPTER 826. HISTORIC PRESERVATION.
826.01. Adoption of Pamphlet. This “Historic Preservation Ordinance” is hereby adopted in
pamphlet form, as authorized by Wisconsin State Statutes 66.0103.
826.02. Permanently on File. The “Historic Preservation Ordinance” pamphlet shall be
permanently on file and open to public inspection in the Office of the Clerk after its adoption.
826.03. Purpose and Intent. It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements or sites of special character or special
architectural or historic interest or value is of importance to the public and will contribute to the
health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. The purpose of this chapter is to:
(a) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of such
improvements, sites and districts which represent or reflect elements of the City of Ashland’s
cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history.
(b) Safeguard the City of Ashland’s historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected
in such historic structures, sites and districts.
(c) Foster civic pride in the notable accomplishments of the past.
(d) Stabilize and improve property values.
(e) Protect and enhance the City of Ashland’s attractions to residents, tourists and visitors,
and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry.
(f) Improve and enhance the visual and aesthetic character of Ashland.
(g) Educate the public regarding the need and desirability of a historic preservation program
and its enhancement of the quality of life.
(h) Ensure compliance with the State of Wisconsin Historic Preservation Program as
established in Wisconsin State Statues 44.30-44.48.
826.04. Definitions. The definitions shall be as follows:
(a) Certificate of Appropriateness. This certificate is issued by the Commission approving
alteration, rehabilitation, construction, reconstruction or demolition of a historic structure,
historic site or any improvement in a historic district.
(b) Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission created under this section.
(c) Façade. Any side of a building facing a public way or space.
(d) Historic district. An area designated by the Common Council, on recommendation of the
Page 826-2
Commission that contains two or more historic improvements or sites.
(e) Historic site. Any parcel of land of historic significance due to a substantial value in
tracing the history or prehistory of man, or upon which a historic event has occurred, and which
has been designated as a historic site under this section, or an improvement parcel, or part
thereof, on which is situated a historic structure and any abutting improvement parcel, or part
thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the historic structure is situated.
(f) Historic structure. Any structure which has a special characteristic or special historic
interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of Ashland, state
or nation and which has been designated as a historic structure pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(g) Improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other object constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment, including streets, alleys,
sidewalks, curbs, lighting fixtures, signs and the like.
(h) Improvement parcel. The unit of property which includes a physical betterment
constituting an improvement and land embracing the site thereof, and is treated as a single entity
for the purpose of levying real estate taxes. Provided, however, that the term “improvement
parcel” shall also include any unimproved area of land which is treated as a single entity for such
tax purposes.
(i) Owner’s Agent. One who is authorized to act for or in the place of an owner, as a
representative, emissary, or official of a government agency.
(j) Property. A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon
(k) Sign, abandoned. A sign that for more than sixty (60) days has no longer correctly
advertised a public service message, bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, or activity
conducted or a product available on the property where the sign is displayed or elsewhere.
(l) Sign maintenance. The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a
sign that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.
826.05. Historic Preservation Commission. A Historic Preservation Commission is hereby
created. The Commission shall be considered an advisory committee to the Common Council.
The purpose of the Commission shall be to recommend to the Common Council the designation
of historic structures, historic sites and historic districts in the City of Ashland. The Commission
shall also issue Certificates of Appropriateness for construction, reconstruction, alteration and
demolition of designated historic structures, sites and districts. The Commission may also serve
as a resource to persons owning property or structures that may be considered historic. Resource
activities may include providing information pertaining to historic preservation funding, research
of historic structures, advice on historic building renovation and recognition of historic building
features.
Page 826-3
826.06. Historic Preservation Commission Composition. A Historic Preservation Commission
shall consist of seven (7) members. The presence of four (4) members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum. Of the membership, if available in the community, one (1) shall be a
registered architect; one (1) shall be a historian; one (1) shall be a licensed real estate broker; one
(1) shall be an alderman; and three (3) shall be citizen members. Each member shall have, to the
highest extent practicable, a known interest in historic preservation. The Mayor shall appoint the
commissioners subject to confirmation by Common Council. Of the initial members so
appointed, two (2) shall serve a term of one (1) year, two (2) shall serve a term of two (2) years,
and three (3) shall serve a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, the term for each member shall be
three (3) years.
826.07. Designation of Historic Structure, Historic Site and Historic District. The
Commission shall recommend the designation of historic structures and historic sites and
recommend designation of historic districts within the City limits. Historic designations shall be
approved by the Common Council. Once designated, such historic structures, sites and districts
shall be subject to all the provisions of this ordinance.
826.08. Historic Structure, Historic Site and Historic District Designation Criteria. For
purposes of this chapter, a historic structure, historic site, or historic district designation may be
placed on any site, natural or improved, including any building, improvement or structure located
thereon, or any area of particular historic, architectural, archeological or cultural significant to
the City of Ashland such as historic structures, sites, or district which:
(a) Exemplify or reflect the broad cultural, political, economic or social history or the nation,
state or community; or
(b) Are identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local
history; or
(c) Embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or specimen inherently
valuable for a study of a period, style, method of construction, or of indigenous materials or
craftsmanship; or
(d) Are representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect who
influenced his age; or
(e) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to prehistory or history.
826.09. Process to Designate a Historic Structure and Historic Site.
(a) Notice. The Commission may, after notice and public hearing,
recommend the designation of historic structures and historic sites, after application of the
criteria in Section 826.041 above. Historic Preservation Commissioners shall take current
photographs to document each designation to support the historic significance structure or site.
At least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, the Department of Planning & Development shall
notify the owners of record, who are owners of property in in question and those who are in
Page 826-4
whole or in part situated within two hundred (200) feet of the property under consideration.
These owners shall have the right to provide oral or written comments at the public hearing, prior
to final action by the Commission on the designation. Notice of such hearing shall also be
published as a Class 1 Notice, under the Wisconsin Statutes. The Department of Planning &
Development shall also notify the following: Department of Public Works, Building Inspection
Office, Parks & Recreation Department, Fire and Police Departments, County Health
Department and the Plan Commission. Each such department may respond to the Department of
Planning & Development with its comments on the proposed designation.
(b) Public Hearing. The Commission shall then conduct such public hearing and, in addition
to the notified persons, may hear expert witnesses and shall have the power to subpoena such
witnesses and records as it deems necessary. The Commission may conduct an independent
investigation into the proposed designation. Within thirty (30) days after the close of the public
hearing, the Commission may recommend to the Common Council the designation of the
property as either a historic structure or historic site. A special meeting may be convened if
necessary.
(c) Designation. After the Common Council has designated the structures or sites as historic,
by formal resolution, notification shall be sent to the property owner or owners by the
Department of Planning & Development. Notification shall also be given to the Historic
Preservation Commission, Building Inspection Office, Plan Commission, and the City Assessor.
The City Clerk shall cause the designation to be recorded, at the City of Ashland’s expense, in
the County Register of Deeds office.
826.10 Process to Designate a Historic District.
(a) Survey. For preservation purposes, the Historic Preservation Commission may select
geographically defined areas within Ashland to be designated as a Historic District and shall,
with the assistance of the Department of Planning & Development, prepare a historical and
architectural survey for each area. A Historic District may be designated for any geographic area
of particular historic, architectural or cultural significance to the City, after application of the
criteria in Section 826.08 above. Each designation shall include a historical and architectural
survey with cultural and architectural analysis, current photographs supporting the historic
significance of the area, the specific guidelines for development and a statement of preservation
objectives.
(b) Notice and Hearing. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing
when considering the plan for a Historic District. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such
hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 1 Notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in the
official City paper. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall also be sent
to the Alderman of the Aldermanic District or Districts in which the Historic District is located,
and the owners of record who are owners of property within the proposed Historic District or are
situated in whole or in part within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of the proposed
Historic District. Said notice is to be sent at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public
hearing. These owners shall have the right to provide oral or written comments at the public
hearing, prior to final action by the Commission on the designation. The Department of
Page 826-5
Planning & Development shall also notify the following: Department of Public Works,
Building Inspection Office, Parks & Recreation Department, Fire and Police Departments,
County Health Department and the Plan Commission. Each such department may respond to the
Department of Planning & Development with its comments on the proposed designation.
Following the public hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission shall vote to recommend,
reject or withhold action on the designation.
(c) Designation. The Common Council, upon receipt of the recommendations from the
Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing, notice to be given as noted in
Subsection (b) above and shall, following the public hearing, either designate by formal
resolution, or reject the Historic District. Designation of the Historic District shall constitute
adoption of the plan prepared for that district and direct the implementation of said plan.
(d) Record. After the Common Council has designated the Historic District, notification shall
be sent to the property owner or owners by the Department of Planning & Development.
Notification shall also be given to the Historic Preservation Commission, Building Inspection
Office, Plan Commission, and the City Assessor. The City Clerk shall cause the designation to
be recorded, at the City of Ashland’s expense, in the County Register of Deeds office.
826.11. Recognition of a Historic Structure, Site, and District. At such time as a historic
structure, site or district has been properly designated, the Commission may cause to be prepared
and erected on such property at the City of Ashland’s expense, a suitable plaque declaring that
such property is a historic structure, site or district. Such plaque shall be so placed as to be easily
visible to passing pedestrians and/or vehicles. Where such location cannot be found, interior
installations may be approved by the Commission.
826.12. Rescindment of the Designation of a Historic Structure, Site or District.
(a) Criteria. The designation of a historic structure, site or district may be rescinded
if the Historic Preservation Commission and City Council finds that the property now lacks the
historic characteristics for which the structure, site or district was originally listed, no longer
exists, or if an economic hardship can be demonstrated.
(b) Notice and Hearing. Should a property owner request to rescind the designation of a
historic structure or site, the applicant may request such action in writing to the Department of
Planning & Development. The Commission shall hold a public hearing when considering the
request. The Department of Planning & Development shall notice the time, place and purpose of
such hearing shall be given by publication as a Class 1 Notice under the Wisconsin Statutes in
the official City paper. The Department of Planning & Development shall notify the owners of
record, who are owners of property in question and those who are in whole or in part situated
within two hundred (200) feet of the property under consideration. These owners shall have the
right to provide oral or written comments at the public hearing, prior to final action by the
Commission on the designation. Said notice is to be sent at least ten (10) days prior to the date
of the public hearing. The Department of Planning & Development shall also notify the
following: Department of Public Works, Building Inspection Office, Parks & Recreation
Department, Fire and Police Departments, County Health Department and the Plan Commission.
Page 826-6
Each such department may respond to the Department of Planning & Development with its
comments on the request to rescind the historic designation.
(c) Recommendation. Following the public hearing, the Commission shall vote to
recommend, reject or withhold action on the request to rescind the historic designation. Within
thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing, the Commission may recommend to the
Common Council the request to rescind the historic designation of the property. A special
meeting may be convened if necessary.
(d) Action. The Common Council will review and take action on the request. Approval to
rescind the designation shall be by formal resolution. Following Council action notification shall
be sent to the property owner or owners by the Department of Planning & Development in
addition to the Commission, Building Inspection Office, Plan Commission, and the City
Assessor. The Council approved rescind of the historic designation shall be recorded, at the City
of Ashland’s expense, in the County Register of Deeds office.
826.20. Construction, Reconstruction, Alteration and Demolition of Designated Historic
Structures, Historic Sites and Historic Districts; Historic Preservation Certificate of
Appropriateness Required. No owner or person in charge of: a historic structure; repository;
historic site; or structure including signage within a historic district shall reconstruct, alter, cause
willful neglect, or demolish all or any part of the exterior of such property or construct any
improvement upon such designated property or properties or cause or permit any such work to be
performed upon such property or demolish such property unless a Certificate of Appropriateness
has been granted by the Historic Preservation Commission. A Certificate of Appropriateness is
required for all projects that require a Building Permit pursuant to City of Ashland Ordinance
748. Unless such certificate has been granted by the Commission, work shall not commence,
and the Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for any such work.
826.30. Process for Issuance of a Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness.
(a) Purpose. The issuance of a Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness is
intended to ensure that the City of Ashland adequately safeguards its historic and cultural
heritage as embodied and reflected in its designated historic structures, sites, and districts.
(b) Pre-application. The property owner (or owner’s agent) of a major project requiring the
issuance of a Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness may request a pre-application
meeting with the Building Inspector and the Chair of, or the Historic Preservation Commission
to discuss the proposed project.
(c) Application. A completed application shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent.
(d) Certificate of Appropriateness. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent
may issue the Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness for certain projects which will
have little effect on the appearance of the exterior of the structure. Types of projects that may be
Page 826-7
approved by the Building Inspector include the following items listed below. However, if the
Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent determines that one of the projects listed
below may have a significant effect on the exterior appearance of a structure, the Building
Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent may call for review by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(1) Repair or partial replacement of porches, cornices, exterior siding, doors, balustrades,
stairs, or other trim when the repair or replacement is done in-kind and matches the
appearance of the material being replaced.
(2) Repair of existing wheelchair ramps, unless the ramps are to be substantially replaced.
(3) Foundation repair and replacement with like materials.
(4) Removal of exterior paint by non-destructive means.
(5) Exterior painting of wood siding, features, and trim.
(6) Exterior painting of brickwork, if existing surfaces are already painted.
(7) Repair or in-kind installation of roofing, gutters, and down spouts.
(8) Window repair, including caulking and weather-stripping of existing window frames,
installation of new, clear glass in existing sashes, and replacement of glazing compound
in existing sashes.
(9) Installation of storm windows as follows:
(A) Glass and screen replacement in existing storm window units.
(B) New wood or baked-enamel finished metal storm windows, installed on the
exterior, provided that they:
(i) Completely fill the original window openings with glazed window units;
(ii) Match the meeting rail (or other major division) pattern of the primary
window;
(iii) Do not protrude beyond the face of the building.
(C) New interior storm windows, provided that they:
(i) Completely fill the original interior window opening with glazing;
(ii) Do not cause damage to the original interior trim;
(iii) Match the meeting rail (or other major division) pattern of the primary
window;
(iv) Are designed to seal completely so as to protect the primary window
from condensation damage.
Page 826-8
(D) Replacement of primary (non-storm) windows provided that they:
(i)Completely fill the original window opening with glazing;
(ii) Do not cause damage to the original interior trim;
(iii) Match the meeting rail (or other major division) pattern of the existing
windows.
(10) Installation of storm doors on elevations not facing streets. .
(11) Replacement of the face of an existing sign with new information
(12) Demolition of garages or other accessory buildings that have no historical
significance.
(e) Projects that will require review and approval for the issuance of the Certificate of
Appropriateness by the Historic Preservation Commission:
(1) Any project that creates a significant change in appearance, such as altered windows,
new porches, alterations to the roofline, enclosing porches, etc.
(2) Additions, including decks.
(3) Construction or replacement of wheelchair ramps.
(4) New structures (i.e., accessory structures).
(5) New signs and the modification of existing signs that are more than replacement of
the face of an existing sign with new information.
(5) Permanent removal of historic original materials, trim, decorative elements, etc.
(7) Caulking and weather-stripping with compatibly colored materials.
(8) Installation of awnings, provided that the proposed design will not detract from the
character of the building or district.
(9) The property owner may ask for a full review by the Historic Preservation
Commission for any project, including projects that fall into the categories listed
above.
(f) Review and Approval. For projects requiring review and approval by the Historic
Preservation Commission, the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent will prepare a
report which shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission. Within thirty (30)
days of the City’s receipt of a complete application, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for a Historic Certificate of
Appropriateness. A special meeting may be convened if necessary.
(g) Review Criteria. In all of its determinations of architectural appropriateness and historical
integrity in the design and construction of buildings and structures, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall use the publication entitled, “The Secretary of Interior’s Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties: With Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitation, Restoring, and
Reconditioning,” as guidelines and the following criteria as standards:
Page 826-9
(1) Compatible use with minimal alteration. Every reasonable effort shall be
made to provide a compatible use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure, or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose.
(2) Preservation of original character. The distinguishing original qualities or
character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features shall be avoided
when possible.
(3) Product of their own time. All buildings, structures, and sites shall be
recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historic basis and that seek to
create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Significant changes over time. Changes that may have taken place in the
course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its
environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this
significance shall be recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive features. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship that characterizes a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
(6) Repair or replacement of architectural features. Deteriorated architectural
features are to be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is
necessary, the new material shall match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features
shall be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic physical or pictorial
evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
(7) Surface cleaning. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with
the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the
historic building material shall not be undertaken without approval from the Historic
Preservation Commission.
(8) Archeological resources. Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and
preserve archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary alterations. Contemporary design for alterations and additions
to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy
significant historic, architectural, or cultural material and when such design is compatible with
the size, scale, color, material, character of the property, neighborhood, or environment.
Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to a structure shall be done in such a manner that
if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity
of the structure would be unimpaired.
826.31. Criteria for Denial. If the Historic Preservation Commission determines that any of the
following conditions exist, then the Historic Preservation Commission shall deny the request for
a Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness:
Page 826-10
(a) Detrimental changes. In the case of the designated historic structure or historic site, the
proposed work would detrimentally change, destroy, or adversely affect any exterior feature of
the improvement or site upon which said work is to be done;
(b) Adverse effect on neighboring property. In the case of the construction of a new
improvement upon a historic site, or within a historic district, the exterior of such improvement
would adversely affect or not harmonize with the external appearance of other neighboring
improvements on such site or within the district;
(c) Inconsistent with specified design guidelines. In the case of any property located in a
historic district, the proposed construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, or demolition does
not conform to the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and to objectives and design guidelines
for the historic preservation of said district;
(d) Uniqueness cannot be reproduced. The building or structure is of such old and unusual or
uncommon design, texture, and/or material that it cannot be reproduced without great difficulty
and/or expense;
(e) Demolition is not necessary for reasonable use of the property. In the case of a request for
a demolition permit, denial of the demolition permit would not result in the loss of all reasonable
or beneficial use of or return from the property; or If the Historic Preservation Commission
denies the issuance of a Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall, with the cooperation of the applicant, work with the applicant in
an attempt to modify the proposed work in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, so
that a Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness may be issued.
826.32. Supplemental standards. The Historic Preservation Commission and the Common
Council may approve such supplemental standards as it may find necessary to maintain the
historic character of designated sites, structures, or districts. Such guidelines may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(a) Material samples. Charts or samples of acceptable materials for siding, foundations, roofs,
or other parts of buildings.
(b) Illustrations. Illustrations of appropriate architectural details, porch treatments, entrances,
signage, or street furniture.
(c) Specifications. Specifications of appropriate rhythms, proportions, and relationships to
streets, sidewalks, and other structures and buildings.
826.33. Signs. The following standards shall be used by the Historic Preservation Commission
and Department of Planning & Development for all new, replacement or modifications to a sign
on a designated historic structure, site or within a designated historic district, excluding local,
State or Federal signs required by law. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required for
a change of copy on any sign, nor for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and
repair of the sign or sign structure. Standards under Section 6.6 C: Signs not requiring a sign
permit, in the City of Ashland Unified Development Ordinance 781 shall be in effect for historic
sites, structures, and districts unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance or within an issued
Certificate of Appropriateness.
Page 826-11
(a) The size, shape and character of signs shall be in keeping with the historic character of the
historic structure and of the historic site on which the sign is located. Good signage could create
an effective depiction of goods, items, or services and should relate to its surroundings in an
inoffensive and constructive way.
(b) Abandoned signage from defunct activities shall be removed unless it is an integral part of
the structure’s original architecture or otherwise approved to remain by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
(c) Plastic formed signs shall be prohibited unless such materials or plastic-like materials
simulate historic signage.
(d) Externally illuminated signs are encouraged; however, internally illuminated channel
lettering and non-flashing, illuminated neon or “neon” in appearance signs may be permitted
where appropriate.
(e) Roof signs, including signs mounted on a roof surface or projecting above the roof line of
a structure if either attached to the structure (or cantilevered over the structure) shall be
prohibited, except with the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to the City of Ashland’s
Unified Development Ordinance 781, Section 3:9: Conditional Use Permit.
(f) No sign shall be placed so as to visibly obscure architectural details that are important to
the historic character of the district, structure, or site upon which the sign is placed.
(g) All signs shall be placed below the upper edge of the traditional sign band associated with
the historic structure, unless on does not exist or signage above the traditional sign band is
necessary to respect the unique historical character of the building.
826.34. Other permits. The issuance of a Historic Preservation Certificate of Appropriateness
shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals as required by the City
of Ashland or other applicable jurisdictions. A building permit or other municipal permit shall
be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the Historic Preservation Certificate of
Appropriateness required for the proposed work.
826.35. Appeals. Should the Historic Preservation Commission fail to approve issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness due to the failure of the proposal to conform to the provisions of
this Ordinance, the applicant may appeal such decision in writing to the Common Council within
thirty (30) days. The Common Council shall hold a public hearing when considering the written
appeal for the denial of the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness. Following the public
hearing, the Common Council shall uphold or reverse the Historic Preservation Commission’s
decision based on the approval criteria specified in this Section.
826.36. Permit Expiration. Compliance with a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be started
within twelve (12) months from the issuance of the Certificate. Failure to commence work shall
require a reissuance of the Certificate of Appropriateness by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
826.37. Ordinary Maintenance and Repairs. Ordinary maintenance and repairs may be
undertaken without a Certificate of Appropriateness provided that the work involves repairs to
existing features of a historic structure or sites or the replacement of elements of a structure with
pieces identical in appearance and provided that the work does not change the exterior
appearance of the structure or site and does not require the issuance of a building permit. All
Page 826-12
work must be completed according to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment
of Historic Properties.
826.60. Minimum Maintenance of Designated Historic Structures, Historic Sites and
Historic Districts. Every person responsible for a designated historic structure, site or district
shall keep the following in good repair:
(a) Exterior. All the exterior portions of such improvement and any exterior portions of a
structure, including fences or walls, that may be affected by the improvement.
(b) Interior. All interior portions of such improvement, which, if not maintained, may cause or
tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvement to deteriorate, decay, become damaged,
or otherwise fall into a state of disrepair.
826.70. Interim Control During the Designation Process of a Historic Structure, Site or
District. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for alteration or
construction on a nominated historic structure, site, or any property or structure within a
nominated historic district from the date of the meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission
at which a nomination is first presented until the final approval by the Common Council or the
denial of a nomination; unless such alteration or construction is an activity allowed under Section
823.30(d) or is necessary for public health, welfare or safety purposes. In no event shall the
delay be for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
826.80 Conformance with Regulations. Every person in charge of a historic structure, historic
site or improvement in a Historic District shall maintain same or cause or permit it to be
maintained in a condition consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and the Unified
Development Ordinance 781.
826.90. Penalties for Violations. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent may
enforce the terms of this Ordinance in a manner consistent with the Unified Development
Ordinance 781. Any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any provision of this
ordinance shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, per day. Each day during which a violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense.
826.100. Emergency Conditions. In any case where the Building Inspector or Designated
Authorized Agent determines that there are emergency conditions dangerous to life, health or
property affecting a historic structure, site or a property in a historic district, the Building
Inspector may order the remedying of these conditions without the approval of the Commission
which may include demolition. The Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent shall
promptly notify the Commission of the action being taken. When the emergency conditions do
not require demolition, the Building Inspector or Designated Authorized Agent shall make every
effort to carry out the intent of this ordinance and to use the design guidelines of the Commission
when remedying the emergency conditions.
ADOPTED: 826 (1792) 7/31/2012
Page 826-13
CHAPTER 830. AUTHENTIC ASHLAND 2035 (COMPREHENSIVE PLAN)
830.01 Recitals.
WHEREAS,
(a) Wisconsin Statutes 66.23(2) and (3) authorizes the City to prepare and adopt a
Comprehensive Plan as defined in Section 66.1001(1)(a) and 66.1001(2) Wisconsin
Statutes, for the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing coordinated development
that is harmonious with existing development in the City of Ashland, which will, in
accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals,
and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development; and
(b) The City of Ashland Comprehensive Plan, Authentic Ashland 2035, has been
prepared in accordance with the requirements and elements of Wisconsin Statutes Sec.
66.1001 (Smart Growth Legislation); and
(c) The Ashland City Council has adopted a resolution identifying the procedures
designed to foster public participation in the development of the Comprehensive Plan, as
required by Section 66.1001(4)(a) of the Wisconsin Statutes; and
(d) Authentic Ashland 2035 contains data, maps, goals and objectives for the nine
elements specified in Wisconsin Statutes Sec. 66.1001(2); and
(e) The City noticed and held a public hearing for members of the public to make
comments on the proposed Comprehensive Plan before the Plan Commission and City
Council on February 16, 2017, in compliance with the procedures in Section 66.1001(4)
of the Wisconsin Statutes; and
(f) The City of Ashland Plan Commission, by majority vote of the entire
Commission, has adopted a resolution approving and recommending to the City Council
the adoption of the document entitled Authentic Ashland 2035; and
NOW, THEREFORE the City Council of the City of Ashland, Ashland County,
Wisconsin do ordain as follows:
830.02 The City Council of the City of Ashland, Wisconsin, does, by enactment of this
ordinance, formally adopt the document entitled Authentic Ashland 2035 as the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Ashland pursuant to Section 66.1001(4)(c) of the
Wisconsin Statutes; and
830.03 This Ordinance shall become effective upon passage by a majority vote of the
members-elect of the City Council and publication of notice thereof as required by law.
ADOPTED: 830 (2017-1888) 2/16/2017
Page 831-1
CHAPTER 831. FAIR HOUSING.
831.01. Adoption of State Statute. The City of Ashland hereby adopts Section 106.50,
Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, and all subsequent amendments thereto.
831.02. Prevention and Removal of Discrimination. The officials and employees of the
City of Ashland shall assist in the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in
housing within the City by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set
forth in Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended.
831.03. Forms for Complaints. The City Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to be
filed under Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended, and shall assist any person
alleging a violation thereof in the City to file a complaint thereunder with the Wisconsin
Department of Work Force Development, Equal Rights Division, for enforcement of
Section 106.50, Wisconsin Statutes, as amended.
ADOPTED: 831 (1699) 3/10/2009
Page 834-1
CHAPTER 834. FRAUD ON RESIDENTIAL LANDLORDS.
834.01. Fraud on Residential Landlords Prohibited. Any person who, with intent to defraud,
does any of the following shall be guilty of violating this chapter:
(a) Intentionally absconds without paying rent that has been contractually agreed upon in
an oral or written lease with a landlord. Prima facie evidence of intentionally absconding will be
established if a tenant fails to pay rent due prior to the vacating of the rental premise by the
tenant and the non-payment of said rent continues for a period of five (5) days after vacation of
the premise; or
(b) Issues any check, money order or any other form of bank or monetary draft as a
payment of rent, where such document lacks sufficient funds, where the account is closed, or
where such draft is unredeemable in any other form or fashion. Prima facie evidence of intention
to defraud will be established if a tenant fails, within five (5) days of a written demand by the
landlord or agent, to pay in full the total amount of the draft presented as rent payment plus any
bank charges to the landlord attributable to the unredeemability of the draft.
834.02. Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to rental agreements between residential
landlords and tenants only. The words and terms used in the ordinance shall be defined and
construed in conformity with the provisions of Chapter AG 134, Wisconsin Administrative
Code, Chapter 704, Wisconsin Statutes, and Section 990.00 (1) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
834.03. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall
be fined not less than twenty-five (25) dollars nor more than five hundred (500) dollars for each
offense.
ADOPTED: 834 (1185) 5/09/1989
845 – Page 1
CHAPTER 845. RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION
845.01. Purpose. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of preserving and promoting public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, and the general welfare and prosperity of the people of the
City of Ashland. A systematic, city-wide program for registration of residential rental units is
necessary to insure that owners may be contacted so that building code and property maintenance
standards may be enforced in the interests of providing safe, decent, and sanitary living
conditions in rental units, preventing deterioration of those units, and preventing or remediating
neighborhood blight.
845.02. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) “Department” means the City of Ashland Planning and Development Department.
(b) “Dwelling” means a building, or part of a building, which includes one or more distinct
living units. The term "dwelling" excludes rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes,
hospitals, assisted living centers, community based residential facilities, adult homes and other
facilities licensed or certified by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services, hotels, motels,
properties owned or operated by the Ashland Housing Authority, or dormitories owned by a
college or university.
(c) “Owner” means any person who alone or jointly or severally with others is the recorded
or beneficial owner or has legal or equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, or has charge,
care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of
the estate of the owner.
(d) “Person” includes an individual, a partnership, a limited liability company, a trust, an
estate, an association, a corporation, or any other legal or commercial entity.
(e) “Rent” means, for consideration, monetary or otherwise to lease, to sublease, to let, or
to otherwise grant the right of a tenant to occupy a dwelling not owned by the tenant.
(f) “Unit” or “dwelling unit” means any independently rented living space with a term of
lease 30 days or more.
845.03. Residential rental registration required.
(a) No owner shall rent any dwelling unit to another person unless, at the time the
dwelling unit is rented, the owner has registered that dwelling unit with the Department. Each
separate dwelling unit must be identified and registered. The Department shall prescribe a
registration form that includes the following items:
1. Identification of unit or units to which registration applies.
845 – Page 2
2. Name of the owner.
3. Name of the owner’s authorized contact person.
4. Address and phone number where the contact person may be contacted.
(b) Unless a dwelling unit is registered, no owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
permit any person to occupy the dwelling or dwelling unit as a tenant or otherwise.
(c) Each registration is valid from the date of issuance for as long as the owner owns
the unit, except as provided in subsection (e), or Section 845.04, below.
(d) The owner of any dwelling unit shall report any changes in the registration for the
unit within ten days of the change. Failure to report a change shall be deemed a lapse in
registration and the unit shall be treated as if not registered.
(e) Registration does not warrant that the dwelling or dwelling unit to which it is
issued is free of ordinance violations or otherwise fit for human habitation.
845.04. Revocation or suspension of registration.
(a) The Department may revoke or suspend a registration if there has been fraud,
misrepresentation, or a false statement contained in the registration application.
(b) No owner shall rent a dwelling or dwelling unit to another person after its
registration is revoked or suspended. Upon revocation or suspension of the registration, the
Department shall immediately notify the tenant(s) of the affected dwelling unit that the unit is
not registered.
(c) Whenever an owner wishes to appeal the decision of the Department to revoke or
suspend a registration, the owner shall, within ten business days of the notice of revocation or
suspension, deliver to the City Clerk a written objection, stating specific reasons for contesting
the decision. Upon receipt of the written objection, the matter will be placed on the agenda for
the Housing Appeal Board for a review hearing no less than 15 days and no more than 45 days
from the date that the objection is received by the City Clerk. The Housing Appeal Board
shall be composed of the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The decision of the
Housing Appeal Board shall constitute a final decision. The provisions of Sections 68.11(2)
and (3), 68.12, and 68.13, Wis. Stats., shall apply to such appeals but otherwise the City elects
not to be bound by Chapter 68, Wis. Stats., in appeals under this chapter.
845.05. Reinstatement of the registration.
Where a registration was denied or revoked, an owner may seek reinstatement of the
registration upon the filing of a new registration application for the dwelling or dwelling unit and
payment of a reinstatement fee in addition to the application fee.
845 – Page 3
845.06. Remedies and application of other provisions; penalty.
(a) Remedies.
(1) The remedies provided in this chapter are not to be construed to be
exclusive of any other remedy under the Code or this chapter, and the Department may
take further actions to ensure compliance with this chapter including, but not limited to,
seeking injunctive relief or obtaining a special inspection warrant under Sec. 66.0119,
Wis. Stats.
(2) Nothing in this chapter limits, impairs, alters, or extends the rights and
remedies of persons in the relationship of landlord and tenant that exist under applicable
law.
(3) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority of the
Department to perform housing inspections in accordance with the Code or enforcing any
other provision of State or federal law.
(b) Penalties. Any owner violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $100.00 nor more than $200.00 for the first offense; not less than
$200.00 nor more than $400.00 for the second offense; and not less than $500.00 nor more
than $1,000.00 for the third or subsequent offense. Each day that a violation continues to exist
constitutes a separate offense. Each unit for which a violation occurs is a separate offense.
ADOPTED: 845 (2016-1872) 6/14/2016
AMENDMENTS: 845 (2016-1878) 7/12/2016; 845 (2017-1892) 3/28/2017
Page 857-1
CHAPTER 857. FIREWORKS.
857.01. Regulation of Fireworks. It shall be unlawful at all times for any person, firm or
corporation to sell, possess or use fireworks within the City of Ashland.
857.02. Definition. “Fireworks” are defined as set forth in Sec. 167.10(5)(a)1, Wis. Stats., and
any amendments thereto.
857.03. User’s Permit. Sec. 857.01 shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation who has
received a user’s permit from the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee for such sale, possession or
use. The user’s permit may be issued only to a public authority, a fair association, an amusement
park, a park board, a civic organization, a group of resident or nonresident individuals or an
agricultural producer for the protection of crops from predatory birds or animals.
857.04. Transporting. This ordinance does not prohibit the possession of fireworks in the City
of Ashland while transporting the fireworks to a city, town, village or county where the
possession of the fireworks is authorized by permit or ordinance.
857.05. Violation. Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a forfeiture of not less
than $100.00 and no more than $500.00 for each violation.
857.06. Adoption of Statute. The provisions of Sec. 167.10, Wis. Stats., and any amendments
thereto are hereby adopted by this reference.
ADOPTED: 857 (1661) 6/26/2007
Page 862-1
CHAPTER 862. UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS OR MODIFICATIONS TO THE
COMMUNITY CABLE T.V. SYSTEM.
862.01. Unauthorized Reception of Cable Service. The purpose of this section is to make it
unlawful to receive or view cable television services without payment to the cable TV franchise
operator. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, group, company, corporation, or
governmental body or agency to:
(a) Intercept or receive or assist in intercepting or receiving any communication service
offered over a cable system, unless specifically authorized to do so by the cable company;
(b) Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical, mechanical, acoustical, or
by other means, with any cable, wires, components, or other devices used for the distribution of
cable television service for the purpose of distributing cable television service to any other
dwelling unit without authorization from the cable company.
862.02. Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, group,
company, corporation or governmental body or agency to willfully interfere, tamper, remove,
obstruct, or damage any part or segment of the operator’s community antenna system within the
City for any purpose whatsoever.
862.03. Violation. Any person, firm, group, company, corporation or governmental body or
agency convicted of violation of this section shall forfeit a sum not less than $50.00 and not
more than $200.00 together with costs of such prosecution. Violation of this section shall be
considered a separate offense for each 24 hour period of violation continuing after notification or
discovery.
ADOPTED: 862 (1189) 6/13/1989
AMENDMENTS: 862 (1316) 4/12/1994
Page 863-1
CHAPTER 863. CABLE TELEVISION REGULATORY AND FRANCHISING
ORDINANCE OF 1995.
863.01. Adoption of Pamphlet. The “Ashland Cable Television Regulatory and Franchising
Ordinance of 1995" is hereby adopted in pamphlet form, as authorized by Wisconsin State
Statute 66.035.
863.02 Pamphlet on File. The “Ashland Cable Television Regulatory and Franchising
Ordinance of 1995" pamphlet shall be permanently on file and open to public inspection in the
office of the Clerk after its adoption, and was on file and open to public inspection in the office
of the City Clerk since August 10, 1994. Further, copies of the “Ashland Cable Television
Regulatory and Franchising Ordinance of 1995" pamphlet were distributed to the Common
Council members and official news media of the City of Ashland prior to adoption.
ADOPTED: 863 (1338) 12/13/1994
SECTION 1. ADDITION TO CODE. The following ordinance shall be added to the '
Licensing and Regulation Section of the Municipal Code of Ashland, Wisconsin.
SECTION 2. TITLE.
This ordinance of the Municipal-Code-of-Ashland,••Wisconsin, shall
be known and may be cited as the "Ashland Cable Television•Regulatory"and
Franchising Ordinance of 1995."
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS.
The following words shall have the meaning set forth in this Section unless the
context shall clearly require otherwise:
(a) Act or Cable Act shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984 (47 USC 521 et seq.) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992.
(b) Basic Cable Service shall mean any service tier which includes, at a
minimum, the transmission of local television broadcast signals, and any other over the air
television signals other than superstations.
(c) Basic Cable Equipment shall mean the equipment used by subscribers
to receive the basic service tier, including, but not limited to, converter boxes, remote controls,
connections for additional television sets and cable home wiring.
(d) Broadcast Services shall mean a broad category of programming which
is received from broadcast television, low-power television, and radio stations and is capable of
being received in the City.
(e) Cable Communication System or System, also referred to as Cable
Television System, Cable System, CATV System, or Community Antenna TV System shall
mean a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service, which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include:
(1) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
(2) A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any
public right-of-way;
(3) A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers; or
(4) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
(f) Cablecast Signal shall mean a nonbroadcast signal that originates
within the facilities of the Cable Communications System.
(g) Cable Service shall mean the total of the following:
(1) The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming
or other programming services; and
(2) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the
selection of such video programming or other programming service.
(h) Channel or Cable Channel shall mean a portion of the electromagnetic
frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a
television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
(i) Commence Construction shall mean the time and date when
construction of the Cable Communications System is considered to have commenced, which
shall be when the first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding of
cables is initiated, after preliminary engineering (strand mapping) and after all necessary permits
and authorizations have been obtained.
(j) Commence Operation shall mean that time and date when operation of
the Cable Communications System is considered to have commenced which shall be when
sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full services to
a dwelling unit located within the franchise area.
(k) Commercial Use Channel(s) shall mean the channel capacity
designated for commercial use as defined and required by federal law.
(1) Completion of Construction shall mean that point in time when all
distribution facilities specified in the Franchise Agreement have been installed by the Grantee so
as to permit the offering of cable service to all of the potential subscribers in the franchise area,
as well as the provision, in an operational state, of any facilities required by the Franchise
Agreement.
(m) Control or Controlling Interest Actual working control or ownership
of a Ashland cable system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption of the
existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or
indirectly, by any person or entity (except underwriters during the period in which they are
offering securities to the public) of 49 percent or more of a Ashland cable system or the
Franchise under which the system is operated. A change in the control or controlling interest of
an entity which has control or a controlling interest in a Grantee parent shall constitute a change
in the control or controlling interest of the Ashland cable system under the same criteria. Control
or controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or
entity.
(n) Converter shall mean an electronic device which converts signal
carriers from one form to another.
(o) Developed Parcel shall mean any area of the City where there are at
least thirty (30) occupied homes per mile to be served by either aerial cable plans or by cable
underground plans as measured from the closest cable television distribution facility.
(p) Dwelling Unit shall mean any individual or multiple residential place
of occupancy.
(q) FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission and any
legally appointed or elected successor.
(r) Franchise shall mean the right granted through a franchise agreement
between the Grantor and a person by which the Grantor authorizes such person to erect,
construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain a system in the City.
(s) Franchise Agreement shall mean a contractual agreement entered into
between the Grantor and any grantee hereunder which is enforceable by Grantor and said grantee
and which sets forth the rights and obligations between Grantor and said grantee in connection
with the franchise.
(t) Franchise Fee shall mean any assessment imposed hereunder by the
Grantor on a grantee solely because of its status thereas. The term "franchise fee" does not
include:
(1) Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including
any such tax for or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but
not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against grantee;
(2) Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred
by grantee for educational or governmental access facilities;
(3) Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or
enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, consulting or legal costs, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
(4) Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code,
(u) Grantee or Applicant shall mean any person granted a franchise
hereunder, its agents, employees, or subsidiaries.
(v) Grantor shall mean the City.
(w) Gross Revenues shall mean all cash, credits, property of any kind or
nature or other consideration derived directly or indirectly by a grantee, its subsidiaries, or any
other person in which the grantee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in the
grantee arising from or attributable to operation of the system, including, but not limited to:
(1) Revenue from all charges for services provided to subscribers
of entertainment and nonentertainment services including late fees, and downgrading charges;
(2) Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial
advertisements upon the system;
(3) Revenues from all charges for leased access or use of studios;
(4) Revenue from all charges for the installation, connection and
reinstatement of equipment for utilization of the system and provision of subscriber and other
services;
(5) Revenue from the sale, exchange or use or cablecast of any
programming developed on the system for community or institutional use; or
(6) Revenue from the sale or use of the system's subscriber list.
(7) Revenue from home shopping channels.
(8) Gross Revenues shall include in value at retail price levels, the
value of any goods, services, or other remuneration in nonmonetary form received by the grantee
or others described above in consideration of the performance of any advertising or other service
on the system, provided, however, that the value of joint promotions between the grantee and
other local media shall not be included.
(x) Initial Service Area shall mean the area of the City which will receive
service initially, as set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
(y) Installation shall mean the connection of the system from feeder cable
to subscribers, terminals, and the provision of service.
(z) Leased Access shall mean the use of the system by any business
enterprise or other entity whether profit, nonprofit or governmental to render services to the
citizens of the City, and shall include, without limitation, all use pursuant to Section 532 of the
Act.
(aa) Local Origination Channel shall mean any channel where the Grantee
or its designated agent is the primary programmer, and provides locally-produced video
programs to subscribers.
(bb) Normal Business Hours, as applied to the Grantee, shall mean those
hours during which similar businesses in the City are open to serve customers. In all cases,
Normal Business Hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week, and/or
some weekend hours.
(cc) Normal Operating Conditions shall mean those service conditions
which are within the control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages,
telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which
are ordinarily within the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the Cable System.
(dd) Person shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, joint venture or organization of any kind and the lawful trustee, successor, assignee,
transferee or personal representative thereof.
(ee) Public/Education/Government Access Facilities or PEG Access
Facilities shall mean the total of the following:
(a) Channel capacity designated for public, educational or
governmental use; and
(b) Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity,
(ff) Resident shall mean any person residing in the City as otherwise
defined by applicable law.
(gg) School shall mean any public or private elementary school, secondary
school, junior college, college or university which conducts classes or provides instructional
services and which has been granted a certificate of recognition by the State of Wisconsin.
(hh) Service Area or Franchise Area shall mean the entire geographic area
within the City designated in a franchise agreement to receive cable service.
(ii) Service Interruption shall mean the loss of picture or sound on one or
more cable channels.
(jj) Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any
public street, road, highway, freeway, easement, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway,
driveway or other public way now or hereafter existing as such within the City.
(kk) Subscriber shall mean any person who legally receives any one (1) or
more of the services provided by the system.
SECTION 4. INTENT.
The City finds that the development of cable communications systems has the
potential of great benefit and impact upon the residents of Ashland. Because of the complex and
rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City finds that the public
health, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing certain regulatory powers in
the City as this Article shall designate. It is the intent of this Article to provide for the means to
attain the best possible communication and developmental results in the public interest and for
such public purpose, in these matters; and any franchise granted pursuant to this Article shall be
deemed to include these findings as an integral part thereof.
SECTION 5. FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
A Franchise granted under this Ordinance is for the territorial limits of the City of
Ashland as they may exist now and in the future.
(a) Grantee shall offer service to all residents and public buildings within
the franchise territory, without regard to the race, religion, national origin, disability status, age,
or gender of the subscriber. Further, the Grantee may offer services to commercial areas within
the City.
(b) Grantee shall offer service at equal rates, and on an equal basis with
regards to deposits and service packages, to all residential subscribers. Grantee may, however,
discontinue or refuse service to subscribers and potential subscribers who have not paid
applicable charges. Further, the Grantee may offer special services or rates to senior citizens, or
services to commercial subscribers at rates different from those charged residential subscribers,
which shall include, but not be limited to, charging installation on a time and material basis. The
Grantee may also enter into separate contracts with multiple dwelling unit buildings and may
charge discounted rates for services based upon single point billing or other contractual
considerations.
This section does not preclude the grantee from offering promotional rates for
service introductions or temporary promotional discounts.
(c) Grantee shall provide a drop and basic service, at no charge, to all
current and future public buildings, including, but not limited to, City Hall, fire stations, public
works facility, water plant, public library, and public schools.
SECTION 6. POLICE POWERS.
Nothing in this Article or in any franchise agreement hereunder shall be construed
as an abrogation by the City of any of its police powers.
SECTION 7. GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
(a) Application. All applicants for a franchise under this Article shall
prepare and file a written application with the Grantor in such form as the Grantor shall
designate.
(b) Review of Application. Upon receipt of an application under this
Article, the Grantor shall review 'the same and make the application available for public
inspection at such places as the Grantor shall designate. A decision shall be made on the
application by the Grantor after evaluation thereof. The Grantor may grant one (1) or more
franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.
(c) Franchise required. Subject to federal and state law, no cable system
shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets in the franchise area or be allowed to operate
without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
(d) Franchise nonexclusive. Any franchise granted under this Article shall
be revocable and nonexclusive.
(e) Franchise requirements. Grantor may establish appropriate
requirements for new franchises or franchise renewals, and may modify these requirements from
time to time to reflect changing conditions and technology in the cable industry.
(f) Grant. In the event the Grantor shall grant to a Grantee a nonexclusive,
revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable system within the
franchise area or a renewal of an existing franchise, said franchise shall constitute both a right
and an obligation to provide the service of a cable system as required by this Article and the
terms of the franchise agreement.
(g) Conflict with federal or state laws. Any franchise granted under this
Article shall be consistent with Federal laws and regulations and State general laws and
regulations. In the event of a conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement and the terms and conditions of Federal or State law under which Grantor can grant a
franchise, except where the application of such Federal or State law would impose inconsistent
or additional material obligations or duties upon Grantee, such general law or requirements shall
control.
(h) Ordinance revisions. Any franchise granted under this Article, is
hereby made subject to any revisions of this Article or the general ordinances of the City,
provided that such revisions do not materially alter or impair the obligations of Grantee set forth
in any franchise agreement.
10
(i) Term. The term of any new or renewal franchise granted under this
Article, shall be established in the franchise agreement, provided that in no event shall any
franchise granted under this Article exceed the term of fifteen (15) years.
(j) Other licenses or permits. A Franchise granted under this Ordinance
shall not take the place of any other license or permit legally required of a Grantee.
SECTION 8. FRANCHISE ACCEPTANCE.
(a) To accept a Franchise granted under this Ordinance, a Grantee must
file any required bonds, funds and proof of insurance, as well as written notice of acceptance
with the City Clerk within 45 days of the offer of the Franchise being made by the Grantor.
(b) Such written notice shall include a certification that the Grantee:
(1) Will comply with this Ordinance, any Franchise Agreements
made pursuant to this Ordinance, and all applicable City, county, state and federal regulations in
regard to the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system;
(2) Accepts the Franchise relying on its own investigation and
understanding of the power and authority of the Grantor to grant the Franchise and the terms and
conditions thereof;
(3) Acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the
Franchise by any understanding or promise or by other statement, whether written or verbal, by
or on behalf of the Grantor or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the
Franchise or Ordinance not expressed herein;
(4) Shall have no recourse whatsoever against the Grantor for any
loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of a Franchise or the
enforcement thereof, or for the failure of the Grantor to have authority to grant any or all parts of
the Franchise;
(5) Agrees that, in the event of any conflict between the Ordinance
and the Franchise Agreement, the terms of the Franchise Agreement shall prevail.
11
(6) Will not at any time claim in any proceeding involving the
Grantor that any condition or term of the Franchise or Ordinance is unreasonable, arbitrary or
void, or that the Grantor had no power or authority to make any such term or condition, but shall
accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the Franchise and Ordinance in their entirety.
(c) A Grantee of a Franchise granted or transferred under this Ordinance
may, at the time of acceptance of the Franchise, provide an initial payment to the Grantor in the
amount of the Grantor's cost of granting or, in the case of a transfer, transferring the Franchise.
The amount of such payment may be considered as reimbursement for aclministrative, legal, and
other related costs incurred before the granting or transferring of the franchise.
SECTION 9. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.
(a) Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted under this Article shall be
a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Any franchise so granted cannot, in any event,
be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but not limited to, by forced or
voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or other means, without the prior written
consent of the Grantor, and then only under such reasonable conditions as the Grantor may
establish. Such consent as required by the Grantor, shall be given or denied no later than ninety
(90) days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. Prior consent shall not
be required when transferring, the franchise between wholly-owned subsidiaries of the same
entity.
(b) Ownership or control. The Grantee shall promptly notify in writing the
Grantor of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of
the Grantee. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the
acquisition or transfer by any person or group of persons of ten percent (10%) or more of the
beneficial ownership interest of the Grantee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of
the Grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the Grantor shall
have consented in writing thereto, which consent shall be given or denied no later than ninety
12
(90) days following any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of
determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the
Grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the Grantee
shall assist the Grantor in any such inquiry.
In seeking the Grantee's consent to any change in ownership or control, the
Grantee shall have the responsibility:
(1) To show to the satisfaction of the Grantor whether the proposed
purchaser, transferee, or assigns (the "proposed transferee"), which in the case of a corporation,
shall include all directors and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent (5%)
or more of the voting stock:
a. Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude
including, but not limited to, any violation of Federal, State or local law or regulations, or is
presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts;
b. Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any court of competent jurisdiction; or
c. Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding
arising out of or involving a cable system.
(2) To establish, to the satisfaction of the Grantor, the financial
solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed
transferee which the Grantee was required to submit in its franchise application, and such other
data as the Grantor may request. Financial statements shall be audited, certified and qualified by
a Certified Public Accountant.
(3) To establish to the satisfaction of the Grantor that the financial
and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and
operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing franchise
terms.
13
(c) The Grantor agrees that any financial institution having a pledge of the
franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the
franchise shall have the right to notify the Grantor that it, or its designee satisfactory to the
Grantor, shall take control and operate the cable system in the event of a Grantee default in its
financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation
that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the
term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not
exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one (1) year unless extended by the
Grantor in its discretion, but during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the
Grantor to transfer the franchise to another Grantee. Except insofar as the enforceability of this
subsection may be limited by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or
similar laws affecting creditors, rights generally, and further subject to applicable federal, state or
local law, if the Grantor finds that such transfer after considering the legal, financial, character,
technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant are satisfactory, the Grantor shall
transfer and assign the right and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The
consent of the Grantor to such transfer shall be given or denied no less than ninety (90) days after
any request, and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(d) The consent or approval of the Grantor to any transfer by the Grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the Grantor in and to the streets, and any
transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise.
(e) In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Grantor shall not
approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion of initial construction of
the cable system.
(f) In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without
the successor in interest becoming a signatory of the franchise agreement.
(g) The Grantor may approve the transfer, deny the transfer with cause, or
conditionally approve the transfer, provided that the Grantor shall not unreasonably refuse to
14
approve the transfer or condition the transfer upon unreasonable conditions. The conditions the
Grantor may attach to the transfer approval may include, but are not limited to: reimbursement
for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in evaluating the transfer request; remedy of any
existing or historical violations of City ordinances or the Franchise Agreement; payment of all
fees and penalties owed by the Grantee at the time of transfer approval; and a guarantee by the
prospective new Grantee to abide by any and all ordinances, agreements and conditions placed
upon the Franchise and system by the Grantor and existing Grantee, unless mutually removed by
the Grantor and Grantee.
(h) When the Grantee approves a transfer under this section, the new
Grantee shall indicate acceptance of the Franchise as specified in Section 8, including the filing
of all necessary bonds, funds, proofs of insurance and certifications.
SECTION 10. FRANCHISE RENEWAL
(a) The Grantor may decide to renew a Franchise granted under this
Ordinance if the Grantee files a written request for such a renewal. At the time of such request,
the Grantor may update this Ordinance and reevaluate the needs of the community for cable
service and the performance of the Grantee.
(b) To the extent applicable, Section 546 of the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984 shall govern the procedures and standards for renewal of any Franchise
awarded pursuant to this Ordinance.
(c) To the extent that Section 546 of the Cable Communications Act of
1984 is not applicable, the Grantor in its sole discretion and judgment shall have the right to
grant, deny or conditionally grant renewal of a Franchise, provided that the Grantor shall not
unreasonably refuse to renew the Franchise or unreasonably condition the renewal. The
conditions the Grantor may place on its approval shall include, but are not limited to:
reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred in evaluating the request for renewal, updating
the Ordinance and surveying community cable needs, remedy of historical or existing violations
15
of the Franchise or Ordinance; payment of all fees and penalties owed by the Grantee at the time
of the renewal; and acceptance of any updated Ordinance or Franchise Agreement.
(d) Unless otherwise agreed upon, any amended cable Ordinance or
provision thereunder adopted before the Franchise renewal shall take effect at the Franchise
renewal.
(e) When the Grantor approves a Franchise renewal, the Grantee shall
accept the renewed Franchise under the procedures set out in Section 8.
SECTION 11. FRANCHISE FEE.
(a) Quarterly franchise payment. A Grantee of a franchise hereunder shall
pay to the Grantor a fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement, which amount
shall not be less than five percent (5%) of Grantee's gross revenues or such other amount as
allowed by applicable law. Such payment shall commence as of the effective date of the
franchise or any renewal date. The Grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement
within one hundred twenty (120) days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and
certified by an independent Certified Public Accountant or certified by a financial officer of the
Grantee; reflecting the total amount of the revenue and all payments, deductions and
computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon ten (10) days prior written notice,
Grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of Grantee's records, in accordance
with Generally Accepted Accounting Procedures, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee
underpayment of five percent (5%) or more, the Grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of
such an audit.
(b) Acceptance by Grantor. No acceptance of any payment by the Grantor
shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the Grantor may have
for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Article or for the performance
of any other obligations of the Grantee.
16
(c) Failure to Make Required Payment. In the event that any franchise
payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, Grantee shall
pay an additional compensation:
(1) An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate
equal to the average rate of return on invested funds of the Grantor during the period for which
payment was due.
(2) If the payment is late by forty-five (45) days or more, a sum of money
equal to five percent (5%) of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and
costs incurred by the Grantor by reason of delinquent payment.
(d) Payment schedule. The Franchise fee shall be paid on a quarterly basis
according to the following schedule: revenues for January through March shall be reflected in a
May 15th payment; revenues for April through June shall be reflected in an August 15th
payment; revenues for July through September in an October 15th payment; and revenues for
October through December in a February 15th payment.
(e) Pass through. Any Grantee "pass through" or itemization of franchise
fee costs on subscribers, bills, shall be in accordance with Federal law.
SECTION 12. REVOCATION.
(a) Grounds for revocation. If the Grantee has been given due notice and a
reasonable opportunity to cure, the Grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted
hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the following
circumstances, each of which shall represent a default under this Article and a material breach of
the franchise.
(1) If the Grantee shall default in the performance of any of its
material obligations under this Article or under such documents, agreements and other terms and
provisions entered into by and between the Grantor and the Grantee, subject to the provisions on
cure.
17
(2) If the Grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force
and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages or the security fund or bonds as required
herein.
(3) If any court of competent jurisdiction, or any Federal or State
regulatory body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any material provision of the
franchise documents, including this Article, the franchise agreement and Grantee's proposal is
invalid or unenforceable prior to the commencement of initial system construction.
(4) If the Grantee ceases to provide service for a period exceeding
thirty (30) days for any reason within the control of the Grantee over the cable system, or
abandons the management and/or operation of the system.
(5) If the Grantee willfully violates any of the material provisions
of this Article or the franchise agreement or attempts to practice any fraud or deceit upon the
Grantor.
(6) If the Grantee becomes insolvent, or upon listing of an order for
relief in favor of Grantee in a bankruptcy proceeding.
(7) If the Grantee transfers a controlling interest of the franchise
without the prior approval or consent of the Grantor as required in Section 9.
(b) Procedure prior to revocation.
(1) The Grantor may make a written demand that the
Grantee comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or
correct any action deemed cause for revocation. Such written demand shall detail the exact
nature of the alleged non-compliance. In the event the stated violation is not reasonably curable
within ninety (90) days, the franchise shall not be terminated or revoked, or damages assessed, if
the Grantee provides within the said ninety (90) days a plan, satisfactory to the Grantor, to
remedy the violation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the Grantee continues for a period
exceeding ninety (90) days following receipt of such written demand by the Grantee, the Grantor
18
may place its request for termination of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda.
The Grantor shall cause notice to be served upon such Grantee, at least twenty (20) days prior to
the date of such meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time
and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least once, ten (10) days before
such meeting, in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area.
(2) The Grantor shall hear any persons interested therein,
and shall determine, within ninety (90) days, based upon the preponderance of the evidence,
whether the Grantee has committed a material breach of this Article or the franchise agreement,
and if so, whether such breach was willful.
(3) If the Grantor determines that the Grantee has willfully
committed a material breach, then the Grantor may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of
such Grantee shall be terminated and security fund and bonds forfeited, or the Grantor may, at its
option and if the material breach is capable of being cured by the Grantee, direct the Grantee to
take appropriate remedial action within such time and manner and upon such terms and
conditions as the Grantor shall determine are reasonable under the circumstances.
SECTION 13. PROCEDURES ON TERMINATION.
(a) Disposition of facilities. Subject to federal, state and local laws, in the
event a franchise expires, is revoked, or otherwise terminated, the Grantor may order the removal
of the above-ground system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable period of time
as determined by the Grantor or require the original Grantee to maintain and operate its cable
system for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months as indicated in (d) below.
(b) Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures, and
equipment, the Grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it
and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the
Grantee's removal of its plant, structures and equipment without affecting the electrical or
telephone cable wires, or attachments. The liability, indemnity and insurance, and the security
19
fund and bonds provided, shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and
until full compliance by the Grantee with the terms and conditions of this Section.
(c) Restoration by Grantor. Reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the Grantee to complete any work required by Subsection (a) above and/or Subsection
(b) above, or any other work required by Grantor by law or ordinance, within ninety (90) days
after receipt of written notice, and to the satisfaction of the Grantor, the Grantor may cause such
work to be done and the Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor the cost thereof within thirty (30)
days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the Grantor may recover such costs through
the security fund or bonds provided by Grantee. The Grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and
equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this Section.
(d) Extended operation. Subject to federal, state and local law, upon either
the expiration or revocation of a franchise, the Grantor may require the Grantee to continue to
operate the cable system for a defined period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) months from
the date of such expiration or revocation. The Grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in
interest, continue to operate the cable communications system under the terms and conditions of
this Article and the franchise agreement and to provide the regular cable service and any of the
other services that may be provided at that time.
(e) Grantor's right not affected. The tennination and forfeiture of any
franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the Grantor under any provision of law.
SECTION 14. RECEIVERSHIP. CONDEMNATION AND FORECLOSURE.
(a) Operation by receiver. Any franchise granted shall, at the option of the
Grantor,'cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver
or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the Grantee, whether in
a receivership, reorganization, condemnation, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless
such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one
hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
20
(1) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred
twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this Article and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees
within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise;
and,
(2) Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty
(120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term,
provision and limitation of the franchise agreement.
(b) Involuntary sale. In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale
of the plant, property and equipment of the Grantee, or any part thereof, the Grantor may serve
notice of termination upon the Grantee and to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the
franchise and rights and privileges of the Grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30)
days after service of such notice, unless:
(1) The Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise,
as and in the manner in this Article provided; and,
(2) Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed
with the Grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement.
SECTION 15. FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS.
(a) New franchises. For a new franchise award, the costs to be borne by
the Grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to, all costs of publication of notices prior to
any public meeting provided for pursuant to a franchise, development and publication of relevant
ordinances and franchise agreement, fees, and any cost not covered by the application fees,
incurred by the Grantor in its study, preparation of proposal solicitation documents, evaluation of
all applications, including, but not limited to, consultant and attorneys fees.
21
(b) Franchise renewal. For a franchise renewal, the Grantee shall
reimburse the Grantor all processing costs of such renewal as provided by the renewal of the
franchise agreement.
(c) Franchise transfer. For a franchise transfer, Grantee, and/or the
approved transferee, shall reimburse Grantor for its processing costs as provided by the
agreement approving the transfer.
(d) Other costs. The processing costs provided for in this Section shall be
in addition to any other inspection or permit fee or other fees due to Grantor under any other
ordinance.
SECTION 16. AUTHORITY FOR USE OF STREETS.
(a) Use of streets. For the purposes of operating and maintaining a system
in City, Grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over,
under, across and along the streets within the City lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and
equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the system, provided that all
applicable permits are applied for and granted, all fees paid and all other City codes and
ordinances otherwise complied with. However, no rights hereunder may be transferred by
Grantee to any other entity except Grantee's construction agents.
(b) Filing plans. Prior to construction or alteration, Grantee shall in each
case file plans with all appropriate City departments and receive written approval of such plans,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Grantee shall provide a monthly progress
report to Grantor through the completion of construction or alteration.
(c) Non-interference. Grantee shall construct and maintain the system so
as not to interfere with other uses of streets. Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other
facilities available to Grantee whenever practicable. Grantee shall individually notify all
residents directly affected by proposed construction prior to the commencement of that work.
22
(d) Denial of use by Grantor. Notwithstanding the above grant to use the
streets, no street shall be used by Grantee if Grantor in its sole opinion, determines that such use
is inconsistent with the conditions or provisions by which such street was created or dedicated, or
presently used.
SECTION 17. CONDITIONS ON USE OF STREETS.
(a) Limit Interference. All transmission and distribution, structures, lines
and equipment erected by Grantee within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets and other public places and the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets or other public places.
(b) Restoration of Streets. In case of disturbance of any street or public
place, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City
engineer, replace and restore such area in as good a condition as before the work involving such
disturbance was done.
(c) Tree trimming. The Grantee shall comply with the provisions of the
Ashland Tree Ordinance, as amended, being a part of the Municipal Code of Ashland,
Wisconsin. Each Grantee shall be responsible for, shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Grantor and its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all damages arising out
of or resulting from the removal, trirnming, mutilation of or injury to any tree or trees
proximately caused by the Grantee or its officers, agents, employees, contractors or
subcontractors.
SECTION 18. ERECTION OF POLES.
(a) Consent to erection of poles. No franchise shall be deemed to expressly
or impliedly authorize the Grantee to construct or install poles or wire-holding structures within
streets for the purpose of placing cables, wires, lines or otherwise without the written consent of
the Grantor. Such consent shall be given upon such terms and conditions as'the City engineer
23
may prescribe, which shall include a requirement that the Grantee perform, at its sole expense, all
tree trimmings required to maintain the poles clear of obstructions.
(b) Access to Poles. With respect to any poles or wire holding structures
which a Grantee is authorized to construct and install within streets, a public utility serving the
Grantor may, if denied the privilege of utilizing such poles or wire-holding structures by the
Grantee, apply for such permission to the City engineer. If the City engineer finds that such use
would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the Grantee's
operations, s/he may authorize such use subject to such terms and conditions as he deems
appropriate. Such authorization shall include the condition that the public utility pay to the
Grantee any and all actual and necessary costs incurred by the Grantee in permitting such use.
SECTION 19. UNDERGROUNDING.
(a) Underground installation required. Except as hereinafter provided, in
all areas of the City where the cables, wires and other like facilities of a pubic utility are placed
underground, each Grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities
underground. Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted terminal boxes may be placed aboveground
if existing technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so
located as not to be unsightly or unsafe, in any area of the City where there are certain cables,
wires and other like facilities of a public utility underground and at least one (1) operable cable,
wire or like facility of a public utility is suspended above the ground from poles, a Grantee may
construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from the same pole with permission of
the City engineer.
(b) Relocation underground. With respect to any cables, wires and other
like facilities constructed and installed by a Grantee aboveground, the Grantee shall, at its sole
expense reconstruct and reinstall such cables, wires, or other facilities underground pursuant to
24
any project under which the cables, wires or other like facilities of all like utilities are placed
underground within an area.
SECTION 20. RELOCATION.
If, during the term of a franchise, the Grantor, a public utility, a sanitary district or
any other similar special district elects to alter, repair, realign, abandon, improve, vacate, reroute
or change the grade of any street or to replace, repair, install, maintain, or otherwise alter any
aboveground or underground cable, wire, conduit, pipe, line pole, wire-holding structure, or other
facility utilized for the provisions of utility or other services or transportation or drainage,
sewage or other liquids, the Grantee, shall except as otherwise hereinafter provided, at its sole
expense, remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and any other facilities which it has installed. If such removal or relocation is required
within the subdivision in which all utility lines, including those for the system, were installed at
the same time, the entities may decide among themselves who is to bear the cost of relocating;
provided, that the Grantor shall not be liable to a Grantee for such costs. Regardless of who bears
the costs, a Grantee shall take action to remove or relocate at such time or times as are directed
by the agency undertaking the work. Reasonable advance written notice shall be mailed to the
Grantee advising the Grantee of the date or dates that the removal or relocation is to be
undertaken.
SECTION 21. PLACEMENT OF BUILDINGS.
Each Grantee shall, upon request by any person holding a building moving permit
or other approval issued by the Grantor, temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit
the movement of buildings. The expense of such removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by
the persons requesting same, and a Grantee shall be authorized to require such payment in
advance. A Grantee shall be given not less than • seventy-two (72) hours written
notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
25
SECTION 22. SYSTEM DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
(a) System design. A cable system shall be a minimum of 550 MHz
bandwidth or its functional equivalent.
(b) Coverage. Grantee shall design and construct the cable system in such
a manner as to have the capability to pass and service every dwelling and business, school or
public agency within the franchise area. Service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance
with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the franchise agreement. Cable system
construction and provision of service shall be non-discriminatory, and Grantee shall not delay or
deter service to any section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference.
(c) Cable casting facilities and channel capacity.
Grantee shall provide cable casting facilities and channel capacity in
accordance with the requirements of the franchise agreement.
(d) System construction schedule.
1. Grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction or upgrade schedule contained in the. franchise agreement.
2. Grantee shall provide a detailed construction or upgrade plan
indicating progress schedules, area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for adding
service. In addition, Grantee shall update this information on a monthly basis, by submitting a
copy of its normal internal progress reports, showing specifically whether schedules are being
met and the reason for any delays.
(e) Provision of service. After service has been established by activating
trunk and distribution cables for any area, Grantee shall provide service to any requesting
subscriber within the area within thirty (30) days from the date of the request.
SECTION 23. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
26
(a) Each Grantee shall construct, install and maintain its system in a
manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction
standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards equivalent to those established by
the FCC. Each Grantee shall provide to the Grantor written reports of the grantee's annual proof
of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements.
(b) Each Grantee shall at all times comply with the National Electrical
Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code; National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters; applicable FCC and other federal, state and local regulations; and codes and other
ordinances of the City.
(c) In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety
of persons or property within the City or other areas where the Grantee may have equipment
located.
(d) All working facilities, conditions, and procedures, used or occurring
during construction and maintenance of the system, shall comply with the standards of the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
(e) Construction, installation and maintenance of the system shall be
performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public and
private utilities serving the City, following accepted construction procedures and practices and
working through existing committees and organizations.
(f) All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
(g) Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply with
construction, marking and lighting of antenna structures required by the United States
Department of Transportation.
(h) RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio
services so as to prove no interference signal combinations are possible. Radiation shall be
27
measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation or communication radio sites to
prove no interference to air navigational reception.
SECTION 24. TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(a) Standards. The Cable Communications System shall meet all technical
and performance standards contained in the franchise agreement and those required by the FCC.
(b) Test and compliance procedure. The Grantee shall submit, within sixty
(60) days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a detailed test plan describing the
methods and schedules for testing the Cable System on an ongoing basis to determine
compliance with the provisions of the franchise agreement. The tests for Basic Cable Service
shall be performed at intervals no greater than twelve (12) months. The tests may be witnessed
by representatives of the Grantor, and written test reports shall be submitted to the Grantor. If
more than ten percent (10%) of the locations tested fail to meet the performance standards, the
Grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been taken, and the entire
test shall be repeated. A second failure in the same locations of more than ten percent (10%)
may be considered a breach of the franchise agreement.
(c) Special tests. At any time after commencement of service to
subscribers, the Grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test
procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Requests for such additional tests
will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved *. -
controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests shall be limited to the particular matter
in controversy. The Grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests for such special tests so as
to minimize hardship or inconvenience to Grantee or to the subscriber.
(d) Costs of tests. The costs of all tests required by (b) and (c) above, and
retesting as necessary, shall be borne by the Grantee, except that if Grantor requires the
utilization of outside consultants or test personnel, such costs shall be borne by the Grantor.
SECTION 25. STANDBY POWER.
28
Each system shall include the equipment capable of providing standby powering
which is specified in the franchise agreement. The system shall incorporate safeguards necessary
to prevent injury to linemen resulting from a standby generator powering a "dead" utility line.
SECTION 26. OVERRIDE CAPABILITY.
Each system shall include an emergency alert capability which will permit the
City, in times of emergency, to override by remote control the audio and/or video of all channels
simultaneously under the conditions and in the manner specified in the franchise agreement, and
including those capabilities for alternate broadcast so specified therein.
SECTION 27. INTERCONNECTION.
The system shall be interconnected with other systems within the City and
adjacent areas as may be specified in the applicable franchise agreement.
SECTION 28. SERVICES.
(a) Service provided. The Grantee shall provide, as a minimum, the initial
services listed in the franchise agreement. Services shall not be reduced without prior notification
to Grantor.
(b) Basic cable service. The "Basic Cable Service" shall include any
service tier which includes the retransmission of local television signals. This service shall be
provided to all subscribers at the established monthly subscription rates.
(c) Local origination channels. If local origination programming is
provided, the Grantee shall operate any cable casting studios on a high-quality, professional basis
for the purpose of providing cable cast programming responsive to local needs and interests.
(d) Public, Educational and government (PEG) access facilities. The
Grantee shall provide the PEG Access Facilities, including channel capacity, necessary interface
equipment and cabling to permit operation as specified in the franchise agreement.
29
(e) Cable channel for commercial use. The Grantee shall designate channel
capacity for commercial use as required by the Act and applicable law.
SECTION 29. CONSUMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent or prohibit: (i) the Grantor
and the Grantee from agreeing to exceed the customer service standards set forth herein; (ii) the
Grantor from enforcing, through the franchise term, pre-existing customer service requirements
that exceed the requirements set forth herein and are contained in current Franchise Agreements;
(iii) the establishment or enforcment of any State or municipal law or regulation concerning
customer service or consumer protection that imposes customer service or consumer protection
requirements that exceed, or address matters not addressed herein.
The Grantee shall maintain a local office to provide the necessary facilities,
equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer standards under normal
conditions of operation:
(a) Service standards. The Grantee shall render efficient service, make
repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Scheduled Service Interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum use of the system. A written log or an equivalent stored in computer
memory and capable of access and reproduction, shall be maintained for all Service Interruptions
and requests for cable service as required by this Ordinance.
(b) Telephone lines. Local toll-free or collect call telephone line capacity
shall be made available by grantee to customers 24 hours per day, seven days a week, including
holidays. The Grantee shall use best efforts under Normal Operating Conditions during Normal
Business Hours to ensure that a minimum average of ninety percent (90%) of all callers
(measured on a quarterly basis) for service will not be required to wait more than thirty (30)
seconds before being connected to a trained customer service representative, and shall receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time (measured on a quarterly basis). If the call
30
needs to be trasferred, the transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. Inquiries received
after Normal Business Hours may be answered by a service or an automated response system,
and such calls must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business
day.
(c) Local office. A business and service office, conveniently located, open
during Normal Business Hours, and adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments and
respond to service requests and complaints.
(d) Installation staff. An installation staff shall install service to any
subscriber located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system within seven (7) days after
receipt of a request. This Standard shall be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the
time, measured on a quarterly basis.
(e) Installation, Outages and Service call scheduling. Grantee shall
schedule, either at a specific time, or, at maximum, within a specified four (4) hour time period,
all appointments with subscribers for installation or service. Grantee may not cancel an
appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the
scheduled appointment. If a Grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a
customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be
contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for
the customer. These Standards shall be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time,
measured on a quarterly basis.
(f) Repair standards. The Grantee shall maintain a repair force of
technicians who, under Normal Operating Conditions, are capable of responding to subscriber
requests for service within the following time frames:
1. System Service Interruption: Under Normal Operating
Conditions, within two (2) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscribers calls which by
number identify a system Service Interruption of sound or picture on one (1) or more channels,
affecting all the subscribers of the system or two per cent (2%) thereof.
31
2. Isolated Service Interruption: Within twenty-four (24) hours,
including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated Service Interruption
(less than 2% of subscribers) of sound or picture for one (1) or more channels. This Standard
shall be met no less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
3. Inferior reception quality: Within forty-eight (48) hours,.
including weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture
or sound quality.
Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service
under the provisions of this Section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins
work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives,
response shall be deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of
arrival.
(g) Notification of Service Interruption to City Administrator.
The grantee shall promptly notify the City Administrator, in writing, or, if appropriate, by oral
communication, of any significant interruption in the operation of the system. For the purposes
of this section, a "significant interruption in the operation of the system" shall mean any
interruption of sound or picture on one (1) or more channels of a duration of at least twenty-four
(24) hours to at least five (5) percent of the subscribers.
32
(h) Subscriber Credit for Service Interruption. Upon Service
Interruption of subscriber's cable service, the following shall apply:
(1) For Service Interruptions of over four (4) hours and up to seven (7)
days, the Grantee shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a credit of one-thirtieth (l/30)of one
month's fees for affected services for each'" instance service' "is interrupted-"for four
(4) or more hours for all affected subscribers.
(2) For interruptions of seven (7) days or more in one month, the Grantee
shall provide, at the subscriber's request, a full month's credit for affected services for all affected
subscribers.
SECTION 30. PROOF OF COMPLIANCE.
(a) Compliance records. Upon reasonable notice, Grantee shall
demonstrate compliance with any or all of the standards required by this Ordinance. Grantee
shall provide sufficiently detailed information to permit Grantor to readily verify the extent of
compliance.
(b) Breach for non-compliance. A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance
with the consumer protection standards of Section 29, after Grantee's receipt of due
notice and an opportunity to cure, may be termed a breach of franchise, subject to any and all
remedies prescribed in this Ordinance, the Act and applicable law. The Grantee shall not be
required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone
answering standards in Section 29 (b) unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear
failure to comply.
SECTION 31. COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
(a) Complaints to Grantee. Grantee shall establish written procedures for
receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the Grantor.
The procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either
orally or in writing. At the conclusion of Grantee's investigation of a subscriber complaint, but in
33
no event more than ten (10) days after receiving the complaint, Grantee shall notify the
subscriber of the results of the investigation and its proposed action or resolution, if any. The
Grantee shall also notify the subscriber of the subscriber's right to file a complaint with the
Grantor in the event the subscriber is dissatisfied with the Grantee's decision.
(b) Complaints to Grantor. A subscriber who is dissatisfied with Grantee's
proposed decision, shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the Grantor. The
subscriber shall initiate the review by filing a complaint, together with the Grantee's decision, if
any, with the Grantor, and by the Grantor notifying the Grantee of the filing. The subscriber shall
make such filing and notification within twenty (20) days of receipt of Grantee's decision or, if
no Grantee decision has been provided, within thirty (30) days after filing the original complaint
with Grantee. The Grantor may extend these time limits for reasonable cause.
(c) Review by the Grantor. The Grantor shall determine, upon a review of
a subscriber complaint and the Grantee's decision, if any, whether further action is warranted. In
the event the Grantor does not initiate further proceedings within fifteen (15) days of the filing of
the complaint, the Grantee's proposed action or resolution shall be final. If the Grantor decides to
initiate further investigation, the Grantor shall require the Grantee and the subscriber to submit,
within ten (10) days of notice thereof, a statement of the facts and arguments in support of their
respective positions. The Grantor shall issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days of receipt
of the statements or, if a hearing is requested, within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the
hearing, setting forth the basis of the decision.
(d) Remedies for violations. The Grantor may, as a part of a subscriber
complaint decision issued under the provisions of this Ordinance, impose damages on the
Grantee. Damages may be imposed only if the Grantor finds that the Grantee has arbitrarily
refused or failed without justification, to comply with the provisions of this Section.
SECTION 32. SUBSCRIBER NOTICE.
34
(a) Operating policies. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the
cable system, and at least annually, and at any time upon request, and when Grantee's procedures
change, under Normal Operating Conditions, the Grantee shall provide each subscriber with
written information concerning products and services offered, prices and options for
programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services, •
installation and service maintenance policies, instructions on how to use the cable services,
channel positions of programming carried on the system, the procedures for billing and making
inquiries or complaints (including the name, address and local telephone number of the employee
or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed) and also furnish
information concerning the Grantor office responsible for administration of the franchise with the
name and telephone number of the office. The notice shall also indicate Grantee's business
hours, legal holidays and procedures for responding to inquiries after normal business hours.
The Grantee shall provide all subscribers and the Grantor written notice no
less than thirty (30) days prior to any proposed change in these policies.
(b) Rates, programming service and channel position. The Grantee, under
Normal Operating Conditions, shall provide all subscribers and the Grantor with notice of any
change in rates, programming services, or channel position at least thirty (30) days prior to the
change(s) through announcements on the Cable System and in writing.
(c) Billing. Bills will be clear, concise, understandable and shall include
the Granree's toll free or collect telephone number required by Section 29. Bills must be fully
itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and
equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee must
respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days. Refund checks will be
issued promptly, no later than either (i) the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of
the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or (ii) the return of the equipment supplied
by the Grantee if service is terminated. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the
35
customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. Interest at
prevailing rates must be credited to subscribers on all deposits required by the Grantee,
(d) Copies to Grantor. Copies of .. any notices provided to all
subscribers shall be filed concurrently with the Grantor.
SECTION 33. QUALITY OF SERVICE.
The overall quality of service provided by Grantee to subscribers may be subject
to evaluation by Grantor, not less often than once annually. In addition, Grantor may evaluate the
quality of service at any time, based upon the number of subscriber complaints received by the
Grantee, and the Grantor, and Grantee's response to those complaints. Grantor's evaluation that
service quality is inadequate may lead to direction to Grantee to cure the inadequacies. Grantee
shall commence corrective action within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice. Failure to
do so shall be deemed to be a breach of the franchise and subject to the remedies prescribed in
this Article. Grantor, after due process, may utilize the performance bond and/or security fund
provided for in this Article to remedy any such franchise breach.
SECTION 34. TENANT'S RIGHTS.
It is Grantor's intent that tenants not be discriminated against in the ability to
subscribe to cable service. Grantee shall be required to provide service to tenants in individual
units of a multiple housing facility with all services offered to other dwelling units within the
franchise area, so long as the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by Grantee, to
the following:
(a) To Grantee's providing the service to units of the facility,
(b) To reasonable conditions and time for installation, maintenance, and
inspection of the system on the facility premises;
(c) To reasonable conditions promulgated by Grantee to protect Grantee's
equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system; and
36
(d) To not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants
who receive cable service and those who do not.
SECTION 35. RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.
(a) Discrimination Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access,
or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG access channel users, or general citizens on
the basis of income, race, color, religion, national origin, age, gender, marital status or physical
or mental disability. Grantee shall comply at all times with the Act and all other applicable
Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating
to non-discrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this Ordinance by
reference.
(b) Equal employment. Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal
employment opportunity requirements of Federal, State and local law and regulations in effect on
the date of the franchise grant, and as amended from time to time.
(c) Personal information. The Grantee's policy with regard to personally
identifiable information shall be consistent with Federal law.
(d) Equal accessibility. The entire system of the Grantee shall be operated
in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities,
equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses,-public agencies and
other entities having a legitimate use for the system, and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded
from its use.
(e) Discontinuation of service
1. If a subscriber fails to pay any proper fee or charge for any
service, the Grantee may discontinue said service, provided that the subscriber has been given no
less than (15) days' prior, written notice of the intent to discontinue and such notice was given
not less than forty-five (45) days after the due date of said fee or charge.
37
2. If the Grantee receives payment of all outstanding fees and
charges, including any late charges, prior to the expiration of the fifteenth (15th) day after receipt
transmittal of said'notice from the Grantee, then the Grantee shall not discontinue said service.
After any service has been discontinued, upon request of the subscriber accompanied by payment
in full of all fees or charges due the Grantee and the payment of an appropriate reconnection
charge, if any, the Grantee shall promptly reinstate said service.
3. Subscribers and users shall retain the right to deactivate their
terminals, but shall continue to be responsible for charges until the Grantee is notified to
terminate service. The subscriber shall not be charged any fee for the cancellation or
downgrading of cable service.
SECTION 36. CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
(a) Right to continuous service. It shall be the right of all subscribers to
continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are
honored. In the event that the Grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or
the Grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the Grantee shall
act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service.
In the event of a change of Grantee, or in the event a new operator
acquires the system, the original Grantee shall cooperate with the Grantor, new Grantee or
operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, Grantee shall
be entitled to the revenue for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled
to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.
(b) Right of Grantor to operate system. In the event Grantee fails to
operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the Grantor or
without just cause, the Grantor may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator
until such time as Grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the Grantor or a
permanent operator is selected. If the Grantor is required to fulfill this obligation for the Grantee,
38
then during such period as the Grantor fulfills such obligation, the Grantor shall be entitled to
collect all revenues from the system, and the Grantee shall reimburse the Grantor for all
reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by the Grantor that are the result
of the Grantee's failure to perform.
SECTION 37. IDENTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
Every employee of the Grantee or its agents shall be clearly identified. All
employees of Grantee shall display proper identification upon request of a subscriber. Every
vehicle of the Grantee shall be similarly identified. .'. _. . . ._ ..
SECTION 38. RECORDS.
(a) Open books and records. The Grantee shall manage all of its operations
in accordance with a policy of totally open books and records. The Grantor, upon reasonable
notice, shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours, all books,
records, maps, plans, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of
the Grantee which relate to the regulation of the Franchise and are maintained at the local office
required by Section 29, provided that the Grantor shall maintain the confidentiality of any trade
secrets or other proprietary information in the possession of the Grantee and provided further,
that records shall be exempt from inspection pursuant to..this Section to the extent required by
applicable law regarding subscriber privacy and to the extent such records are protected by law
against discovery in civil litigation.
If any such books or records are not kept by the local office, or upon
reasonable request made available to the Grantor, and if the Grantor shall determine that an
examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of Grantor's
duties, then Grantee shall make such records available locally.
(b) Required records. In any event the Grantee shall at all times maintain:
A. The complaint file required by Sections 29 and 47 herein,
39
B. A full and complete set of plans, records, and "as-built" maps
showing the exact location of all Cable System equipment installed or in use in the franchise
area, exclusive of subscriber service drops.
SECTION 39. REGULATORY AUTHORITY
The Grantor shall exercise regulatory authority under the provisions of this
Article, the Act, and applicable law. If the franchise area served by the Cable System also serves
other contiguous or neighboring communities, Grantor may, at its sole option, participate in a
joint regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and related
communications.
SECTION 40. REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY.
The Grantor, acting alone or acting jointly with other Grantors, may exercise or
delegate the following regulatory responsibility:
(a) Administering and enforcing the provisions of the Cable
Communications System franchise(s),
(b) Coordinating the operation of Public, Educational and Government
(PEG) Access channel and facilities,
(c) Providing technical, programming and operational support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care institutions,
(d) Establishing jointly with the Grantee, or as otherwise specified in the
franchise agreement, procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated to public use and
sharing of public facilities, if provided for in any franchise agreement,
(e) Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services,
(f) Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, State or national telecommunications networks,
40
(g) Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications
policy.
SECTION 41. PUBLIC USAGE OF THE SYSTEM.
If so specified in the franchise agreement, the Grantor may utilize a portion of the
Cable Communication System capacity, and associated facilities and resources, to develop and
provide non-commercial cable services that will be in the public interest. In furtherance of this
purpose, the Grantor may establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to receive
and allocate PEG and institutional network facilities, support funds and other considerations
provided by the Grantor, the Grantee, and/or others. Such an entity, if established, may be
delegated the following responsibilities:
(a) Receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization, channel capacity,
facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for PEG and institutional network
usage of the Cable Communications System.
(b) Establish, jointly with the Grantee, operational procedures and
guidelines for PEG and institutional network usage.
(c) Review the status and progress of each service developed for public
benefit.
(d) Reallocate resources jointly with the Grantee on a periodic basis to
conform with changing priorities and public needs.
(e) Report to the Grantor and the Grantee annually on the utilization of
resources, the new public services developed and the benefits achieved for the Grantor and its
residents.
SECTION 42. RATES.
The Grantee shall establish rates for its services that must be applied on a
nondiscriminatory basis in the franchise area, except for commercial and bulk account rates,
which are negotiated individually. Pursuant to federal law, the Grantor reserves the right to
41
assume regulation of rales paid by cable subscribers; such rate regulation shall be performed by
the Ashland Cable Commission as advisory to the City Council in accordance with FCC Rules
and Regulations "Part 76; Subpart N." As specified by the FCCs Rules (Part 76, Subpart N),
such rate regulation shall cover Basic Service rates and customer premises Installations and
equipment rates (equipment shall include, but not be limited to: converter boxes, remote control
units, connections for additional television receivers and other cable home wiring). Grantor
reserves the right to further regulate rates pursuant to any additional powers granted it by either
the FCC or federal or state law.
SECTION 43. PERFORMANCE REVIEW
At Grantor's sole option, within ninety (90) days of the first anniversary of the
effective date of each franchise, and each year thereafter throughout the term of the franchise, the
Grantor may hold a public hearing at which the Grantee shall be present and shall participate to
review the performance and quality of service of the Cable System. The report required in this
Article regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests and the opinion survey
reports shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments
or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be
considered.
(a) Performance report. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the
public hearing, Grantor shall issue a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance
42
and quality of service. If inadequacies are found, Grantor may direct Grantee to correct the
inadequacies within a reasonable period of time.
(b) Breach upon failure to cure. Failure of Grantee, after due notice, to
correct the inadequacies, shall be considered a breach of the franchise, and Grantor may, at its
sole discretion, exercise any remedy within the scope of this Article considered appropriate.
SECTION 44. SYSTEM REVIEW.
To provide for technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the state of the
art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to promote the maximum degree
of flexibility in the cable system, and to achieve a continuing, advanced modern system, the
following system and services review procedures are hereby established:
(a) At Grantor's sole option, the Grantor may hold a public hearing on or
about the third anniversary date of the franchise agreement at which the Grantee shall be present
and shall participate, to review the cable communication system and service. Subsequent system
and services review hearing may be scheduled by the Grantor each three (3) years thereafter.
(b) Sixty (60) days prior to the scheduled system and service review
hearing, Grantee shall submit a report to Grantor indicating the following:
(1) All cable system services reported in cable industry trade
journals that are being commonly provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and
demonstrations, to communities in the State of Wisconsin with comparable populations, that are
not provided to the Grantor.
(2) Any specific plans for provision of such new services by the
Grantee, or a justification indicating why Grantee believes that such services are not feasible for
the franchise area.
(c) Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review
hearing shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided, feasibility of providing new
services, application of new technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber
43
complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding
processes, developments in the law, and regulatory constraints.
(d) Either the Grantor or the Grantee may select additional topics for
discussion at any review hearing.
SECTION 45. ANNUAL REPORTS.
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of Grantees, fiscal year, the
Grantee may be required to submit a written annual report, in a form requested by the Grantor,
including, but not limited to, the following information:
(a) A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial report
year, the initial' year's) activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited
to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for
each class of service.
(b) A revenue statement, audited by an independent Certified Public
Accountant, or certified by an officer of the Grantee;
(c) A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two (2)
years;
(d) A list of Grantee's officers, members of its council of directors, and
other principals of Grantee;
(e) A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent
(5%) or more of the voting interest in the Grantee and its parent, subsidiary and affiliated
corporations and other entities, if any, unless the parent is a public corporation whose annual
reports are publicly available.
SECTION 46. SYSTEM SURVEY REPORTS.
At the Grantor's request, Grantee shall submit to the Grantor an annual system
survey report which shall be a survey of the Grantee's plans and a report thereon. Said report
114
shall include, but not be limited to, a description and "as-built" maps of the portions of the
franchise area that have been cabled and have all services available, an appropriate engineering
test report or evaluation including suitable electronic measurements conducted in conformity
with such requirements. Said report shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Grantor to ascertain
that the service requirements and technical standards of the franchise are achieved and
maintained.
SECTION 47. COMPLAINT FILE AND REPORTS.
An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the Grantee of any and all
complaints regarding the cable system. A procedure shall be established by the Grantee by the
time of installation of the cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the
satisfaction of the Grantor. Complete records of Grantee's actions in response to all complaints
shall be kept.
(a) A summary of service requests, identifying the number and nature of
the requests and their disposition, upon Grantor request, shall be completed for each month and
submitted to the Grantor by the tenth day of the succeeding month.
(b) A log and summary of all major service outages.
(c) If requested by the Grantor, the results of an opinion survey •.
report which identifies satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable
communications services offered by the Grantee, shall be submitted to the Grantor no later than
two (2) months after the end of Grantee's fiscal year. The survey required to make said report
shall be in a form that can be transmitted to subscribers with one (1) or more bills for service,
such as postage-paid self-addressed post cards. At the Grantor's option and expense, the Grantor
may prepare the survey form and request its inclusion with a monthly bill to subscribers. The
survey shall request only information over which Grantor has lawful jurisdiction.
SECTION 48. OTHER REPORTS AND INSPECTIONS.
15
In addition to other reports or inspections provided by this Article, Grantee shall
provide the following reports to or permit the following inspections by Grantor:
(a) Copies of Federal and State reports. The Grantee may be required to
submit to the Grantor copies of all pleadings, applications, notifications, communications and
documents of any kind, submitted by the Grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions,
correspondence and actions by, any Federal, State and local courts, regulatory agencies and other
government bodies relating to its cable television operations within the franchise area. Grantee
shall submit such documents to the Grantor no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a
Grantor request.
(b) Public reports. A copy of each of Grantee's annual and other periodic
public financial reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporation and other
entities, as the Grantor requests, shall be submitted to the Grantor within thirty (30) days after
receipt of a request.
(c) Miscellaneous reports. Grantee shall submit to the Grantor such other
information or reports in such forms and at such times as the Grantor may reasonably request or
require.
(d) Inspection of facilities. The Grantee shall allow the Grantor to make
inspections of any of the Grantee's facilities and equipment during normal business -K. :
hours upon at least ten (10) days notice, or in case of emergency, upon demand without prior
notice, to allow Grantor to verify the accuracy of any submitted report."'
(e) Public inspection. All reports subject to public disclosure shall be
available for public inspection at a designated Grantor office during normal business hours.
(f) Failure to report. The willful refusal, failure or neglect of the Grantee to
file any of the reports reasonably required, or such other reports as the Grantor reasonably may
request, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise,' and may subject the Grantee to all
remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the Grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
46
(g) False statements. Any materially false or misleading statement or
representation made knowingly and willfully by the Grantee in any report required under the
franchise, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject the Grantee to all
remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the Grantor under the franchise or otherwise.
(h) Cost of reports. One (1) copy of all reports and records required under
this or any other Section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the Grantee.
SECTION 49. REMEDIES FOR FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS.
If the Grantee fails to perform any material obligation under the franchise, or fails
to do so in a timely manner, the Grantor may at its option, and in its sole discretion:
(a) Assess against the Grantee monetary damages up to the limits
established in the franchise agreement for material franchise violations, said assessment to be
levied against the security fund if such fund is required by the franchise agreement, provided in
this Article, and collected by Grantor after completion of the procedures specified in Section 50.
The amount of such assessment shall be deemed to represent liquidation of damages actually
sustained by Grantor by reason of Grantee's failure to perform. Such assessment shall not
constitute a waiver by the Grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise
or under applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from Grantee such
additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney fees, as may have been
suffered or incurred by Grantor by reason of or arising out of such breach of the franchise. This
provision for assessment of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from
Grantor's right to enforce the provisions of the construction and performance bonds provided for
in this Article and is intended to provide compensation to Grantor for actual damages.
(b) Terminate the franchise, for any of the causes stated in this Article.
(c) No remedy shall be imposed by Grantor against Grantee for any
violation of the franchise without Grantee being afforded due process of law, as provided for in
Section 50.
47
(d). The fine for certain violations of the franchise shall be as set forth
below and the Grantor may determine the amount of the fine for other violations which are not
specified in a sum not to exceed $500 per day.
(1) Failure to furnish, maintain, or offer all cable services to any
potential subscriber within the City upon order of the Grantor: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per day, per
violation, for each day that such failure occurs or continues;
(2) Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance,
construction bond, performance bond, or other required financial security: Two hundred dollars
($200.00) per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues;
(3) Failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports
to the Grantor as required: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, per violation, for each day
such failure occurs or continues;
(4) Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or
maintenance standards: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day, per violation, for each day
such failure occurs or continues.
(5) Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order: Five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, per violation, for each day such violation occurs or continues.
Grantor may impose any or all of the above enumerated measures against
Grantee, which shall be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under
the franchise or under any applicable law.
SECTION 50. PROCEDURE FOR REMEDYING FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS.
In the event that the Grantor determines that the Grantee has violated any material
provision of the franchise, the Grantor may make a written demand on the Grantee stating the
exact nature of the alleged violation, and requesting that Grantee remedy such violation. If the
violation is not remedied, or in the process of being remedied, to the satisfaction of the Grantor
48
within thirty (30) days following such demand, the Grantor shall determine whether or not such
violation by the Grantee was excusable, in accordance with the following procedures.
(a) An administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged violation.
If this hearing does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or the Grantee requests a public
hearing, then a public hearing shall be held, and the Grantee shall be provided with an
opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30) days written notice to the Grantee of the time and the
place of the hearing provided and the allegations of franchise violations.
(b) If, after notice is given and, at the Grantee's option, a full public
proceeding is held, the Grantor determines that such violation by the Grantee was excusable as
provided in Section 51 below, the Grantor shall direct the Grantee to correct or remedy the same
within such additional time, in such manner and on such terms and conditions as the Grantor may
reasonably direct.
(c) If, after notice is given and, at the Grantee's option, a full public
proceeding is held, the Grantor determines that such violation was inexcusable, then the Grantor
may impose a remedy in accordance with Section 49.
SECTION 51. EXCUSE OF NONPERFORMANCE.
In the event Grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or
requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable
control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused
and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided Grantee has notified
Grantor within a reasonable time after Grantee's discovery of the occurrence of such an event.
Such causes beyond Grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but
shall not be limited to, Acts of God and civil emergencies.
SECTION 52. CONSTRUCTION BOND.
. 49
(a) Requirement of bond Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a
new franchise, or a renewal which requires significant system construction, and prior to the
commencement of any construction work by the Grantee, the Grantee shall file with the Grantor
a construction bond in the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the Grantor
and any other person who may claim damages as a result of the breach of any duty by the.
Grantee assured by said bond.
(b) Form of bond. Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form
approved by the Grantor and shall, among other matters, cover the cost of removal of any
properties installed by the Grantee in the event said Grantee shall default in the performance of
its franchise obligations.
(c) No limitation on liability. In no event shall the amount of said bond be
construed to limit the liability of the Grantee for damages.
(d) Waiver of bond. Grantor, at its sole option, may waive this
requirement, or permit consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and
security fund specified, respectively in Sections 53 and 54.
(e) Release of bond. Upon completion of construction, any construction
bonds then in force shall be released.
SECTION 53. PERFORMANCE BOND.
(a) Requirement of bond. In addition to the construction bond set forth in
Section 50, Grantee may be required, at least thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of
operation, to file with the Grantor a performance bond in the amount specified in the franchise
agreement in favor of the Grantor and any other person who may be entitled to damages as a
result of any occurrence in the operation or termination of the Cable System operated under the
franchise agreement, and including the payment required to be made to the Grantor hereunder.
(b) Form of bond. Such bond as contemplated herein shall be in the form
approved by the Grantor.
50
(c) No limitation of liability. In no event shall the amount of said bond be
construed to limit the liability of the Grantee for damages.
SECTION 54. SECURITY FUND.
(a) Requirement of fund. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
the franchise, the Grantee may be required to deposit into a bank account established by the
Grantor, and maintain on deposit through the term of this franchise, the sum specified in the
franchise agreement, as security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the
franchise, and compliance with all the orders, permits' and directions of any agency of the
Grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this Article, and the payment by the
Grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the Grantor which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the system.
Subject to the provisions of (d) below, the security fund may be assessed
by the Grantor for purposes including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Failure of Grantee to pay Grantor sums due under the terms of
the franchise.
(2) Reimbursement of costs borne by the Grantor to correct
franchise violations not corrected by Grantee after due notice.
(3) Monetary remedies or damages assessed against Grantee due to
default or violation of franchise requirements.
(b) Form of fund. At Grantor's sole option, some portion of the security
fund may be provided in the acceptable form of an irrevocable letter of credit, in lieu of a cash
deposit.
(c) Deposits to fund. Within thirty (30) days after notice to it that any
amount has been withdrawn by the Grantor from the security fund, pursuant to Subsection (a) of
this Section, the Grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to
the amount required by the franchise agreement.
51
(d) Withdrawals from fund. If the Grantee fails, after thirty (30) days
written notice to pay to the Grantor any franchise fee or taxes due and unpaid; or, fails to pay to
the Grantor within such thirty (30) days, any damages, costs or expenses which the Grantor shall
be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the Grantee in connection with the
franchise; or fails, after thirty (30) days notice of such failure by the Grantee to comply with any
material provision of the franchise which the Grantor reasonably determines can be remedied by
an expenditure of the security fund, the Grantor may thereafter withdraw the amount thereof,
and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the Grantor shall
notify the Grantee of the amount and date thereof.
(e) Rights to fund. The security fund deposited pursuant to this Section
shall become the property of the Grantor in the event that the franchise is revoked for cause by
reason of the default of the Grantee in accordance with the procedures of this Article. The
Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as
remains on deposit no later than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the term of the franchise
provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the Grantee. The Grantee shall be
entitled to any interest accrued on the cash portion of the security fund.
(f) Rights of Grantor. The rights reserved to the Grantor with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the Grantor whether reserved by this Article or
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of. a right, with respect to such security
fund shall constitute an election of remedies or a waiver of any other right the Grantor may have.
SECTION 55. WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS
(a) The Grantee shall give prior.notice to the Grantor specifying the names
and addresses of any entity, other than the Grantee, that performs construction services in excess
of $10,000 per project pursuant to the Franchise, provided, however, that all provisions of the
Franchise remain the responsibility of the Grantee.
52
(b) All provisions of a Franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or others
performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing the transfer of
any rights or responsibilities of the Grantee without Grantor approval.
SECTION 56. GRANTEE INSURANCE.
(a) Insurance required. The Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of
the franchise, insurance in amounts at least as follows:
(1) Worker's Compensation Insurance. Workers' Compensation
with Coverage A at statutory limits and Coverage B at limits of $500,000/$500,000/
$500,000. Insurance shall cover the employees of the grantee in :cbmp"liance
with the State of Wisconsin and a l l other states having jurisdiction over each
employee.
(2) Comprehensive General Liability. Comprehensive General
Liability including Premises/Operations; Products/Completed Operations; Broad Form Property
Damage; Contractual Liability; Coverage for Explosion, Collapse and Underground Hazards;
and Pollution Control Liability. The limits shall not be less than . '$500,000 for'; bodily
injury (including death) and property damage for each occurrence and not less than .
$500,000 in the aggregate.
(3) Comprehensive Automobile Liability. Comprehensive
Automobile Liability including owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with limits of not less than
$500,000 for bodily injury (including'death) and property'.damage--for each
occurrence.
(4) Umbrella Liability. Umbrella Liability with limits of not less
than $8,000,000 with coverage subject to the following:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that despite anything to the contrary
where underlying insurance, as described herein, provides greater protection or indemnity to the
53
insured than the terms and conditions of this policy, this insurance shall pay on behalf of the
insured the same terms, conditions and coverages which apply to the basic underlying insurance.
Where no such broader underlying insurance exists, this policy shall pay on behalf of the insured
upon terms and conditions and limitations of the carrier's umbrella excess policy."
(b) Certificates to Grantor. The Grantee shall furnish the Grantor with
copies of such insurance policies or certificates of insurance.
(c) Grantor as additional insured. Such insurance policies provided for
herein shall name the Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees as
additional insured, and shall be primary to any insurance carried by Grantor, and shall contain
the following endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
canceled by the surety or the intention not to renew be signed by the surely until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Grantor by registered mail of written notice of such intention to cancel or not
to renew."
(d) No limitation on liability. The minimum amounts set forth in the
franchise agreement for such insurance shall not be construed to limit the liability of the Grantee
to the Grantor under the franchise issued hereunder to the amount of such insurance.
(e) Approved insurers. All insurance carriers providing coverage under (a)
above, shall be duly licensed to operate in the State of Wisconsin.
SECTION 57. INDEMNITY.
(a) Extent of indemnity. The Grantee shall, by acceptance of any franchise
granted, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Grantor, its officers, boards, commissions,
agents, and employees from any and all claims, suits, judgments, for damages or other relief,
costs and attorneys, fees in any way existing out of or through or alleged to arise out of or
through:
(1) The act of the Grantor in granting the franchise.
54
(2) The acts or omissions of Grantee, its servants, employees, or
agents including, but not limited to, any failure or refusal by Grantee, its servants, employees or
agents to comply with any obligation or duty imposed on Grantee by this Article or the franchise
agreement.
(3) The exercise of any right or privilege granted or permitted by
this Article or the franchise agreement.
Such indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, all claims
arising in tort, contract, infringements of copyright, violations of statutes, ordinances or
regulations or otherwise.
(b) Defense of claims. In the event any such claims shall arise, the Grantor
or any other indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the Grantee. Provided,
however, that the Grantor in its sole discretion may participate in the defense of such claims at its
expense, and in such event, Grantee shall not agree to any settlement of claims without Grantor
approval.
(c) Grantor's negligence. The Grantee shall not be required to indemnify
the Grantor for negligence or willful misconduct on the part of Grantor's officials, boards,
commissions, agents or employees.
SECTION 58. ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
No provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed to bar the right of the Grantor to
seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the franchise or any rule,
regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other
remedies identified in this Ordinance, nor the exercise thereof, shall be deemed to bar or
otherwise limit the right of the Grantor to recover monetary damages, (including all dispute
related expenses such as attorneys' fees and except where liquidated damages are otherwise
prescribed) for such violation by the Grantee, or judicial enforcement of the Grantee's
obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or any other judicial
55
remedy available at law or in equity. All judicial action sought for a violation of any provision
of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirementor or directive promulgated thereunder shall
be commenced in the Ashland County Circuit Court.
SECTION 59. NONENFORCEMENT.
Subject to the provisions of the Act, a grantee shall not be relieved of any
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the franchise or any rule, regulation,
requirement or directive promulgated thereunder by reason of any failure of the Grantor or its
officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt compliance nor shall such be considered a
waiver thereof.
SECTION 60. COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary, the Grantee
shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the State and Federal government or
any administrative agencies thereof. Provided, however, if any such State or Federal law or
regulation shall require the Grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the Grantee to
perform any service, or shall prohibit the Grantee from performing any service, in conflict with
the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation of the Grantor, then as soon as possible
following knowledge thereof, the Grantee shall notify the Grantor of the point of conflict
believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the Grantor or the
franchise.
SECTION 61. UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION. USE OR SALE OF CABLE
SERVICES.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to lawfully obtain any cable signal
or service from a Grantee of the Grantor and to resell such cable signal or service without the
prior written consent of such Grantee.
56
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to intercept, descramble, decode, or
receive or assist in the interception, descrambling, decoding or receiving of any cable signal or
service of a Grantee of the Grantor without the prior written consent of such Grantee. As used in
this subsection "assist in interception, descrambling, decoding or receiving" shall include the
manufacture or distribution of equipment intended by the manufacturer or distributor for .
unauthorized reception of cable signal or service.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage any cables,
lines or equipment of any Grantee of the Grantor used in or for the purpose of transmitting cable
signals or service.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain cable signals or service
from any Grantee of the Grantor by means of fraud, deceit or theft.
SECTION 62. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This ordinance shall repeal Ordinance 863 (748).
57
SECTION 63. SEVERABILITY.
Any section or provision of this ordinance that is construed to be invalid or void,
shall not affect the remaining sections or provisions which shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 64. WAIVER OR EXEMPTION.
The Grantor reserves the right to waive provisions of this ordinance, or exempt a
Grantee from meeting provisions of this ordinance, if the Grantor determines such waiver or
exemption is in the public interest.
SECTION 65. SECTION TITLES.
The underlined section titles appearing in this ordinance are used solely for
convenience and are not intended to affect the meaning of the ordinance.
SECTION 66. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall be effective upon the passage, approval and publication in
pamphlet form as provided by law.
58
Page 864-1
CHAPTER 864. PAWNBROKERS.
864.01. Adoption of state statutes. The provisions of sec. 134.71 and 138.10, Wis. Stats., and
all subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
If any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with either statute, the provisions of the
statute shall prevail; however, any and all other non-conflicting provisions in this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect.
864.02. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a
pawnbroker business or pawnshop in the city without first having procured a city license
therefore as hereinafter provided.
864.03. Application for license.
(a) The application shall state the name of the person, and, in case of a firm or corporation,
the names of all of the partners in such firm, or of the directors, officers and stockholders of such
corporation; also the place, street and number where such business is to be carried on, and shall
specify the amount of capital proposed to be used by the applicant in such business, and shall be
signed by at least ten citizens of the city, of good reputation, certifying to the good reputation
and moral character of the applicant.
(b) At the time of filing such application, the applicant shall deposit an amount of money
equal to at least one-half year’s, and not more than one year’s charge for the license applied for.
This sum of money shall be refunded to the applicant, upon demand, in case the license applied
for shall not be granted and if granted, the deposit shall be applied to the license fee.
864.04. Issuance of licenses. No license shall be issued to any person, corporation, copartnership,
or association other than the real and actual proprietor of the business and place of
business for which it is issued. The fee for a pawnbroker’s license shall be as required by Sec.
134.71 (10) (a), Wis. Stats., said fee to be paid prior to the issuance of the license.
864.05. Investigation by Chief of Police. All applications for pawnbroker??s licenses or
renewals thereof shall be presented to the City Council at a regular meeting thereof. No
application shall be acted upon until a recommendation for or against the application is received
from the Chief of Police, provided that the City Council shall not be bound by the Chief??s
recommendation.
864.06. Bond. The applicant shall file, with the application, a bond running to the city,
conditioned for the faithful observance of all provisions of this ordinance respecting
pawnbrokers, during the continuance of such license, and any renewal thereof, for not more than
one year. This bond shall be in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with a corporate
surety or two or more individual sureties. To such bond shall be attached a justification to the
effect that the sureties are residents within the county and each is worth the amount specified in
such bond, over and above all just debts and liabilities, and exclusive of property exempt from
execution. In lieu of the bond required above, the applicant may file a form of security approved
by the City in an amount not less than $500.
Page 864-2
846.07. License requirements. The license issued under this ordinance shall state the name of
the person to whom issued, the place of business and street number where such business is
located and the amount of capital employed. Such license shall entitle the person receiving it to
do business at the place designated in such license.
864.08. Non-use and transfer of license. If a pawnbroker shall not conduct said business for a
period of ninety (90) days, the license shall be null and void. Pawnbroker’s licenses shall not be
transferable to any other person, except by a majority vote of the City Council, and the filing of
an application and a new bond by the person to whom such license is, or may be, transferred or
assigned. It shall be unlawful for any person to do business, or attempt to do business, under a
license transferred to him without such approval of the City Council.
864.09. Posting. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker business
in the City unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business the license
certificate therefor, and a copy of all ordinances relating to pawnbrokers.
864.10. Pawn ticket to be furnished.
(a) Each pawnbroker shall furnish to the pledgor a printed receipt clearly showing the amount
loaned with a specific, detailed description of the pledged property pawned or received, date of
receipt thereof, time for redemption, the name of the pledgee. The reverse side of said receipt
shall be marked in such a manner that the amounts of principal and interest and any other
charges paid by the person securing the loan can be clearly designated thereon. Each payment
shall be entered upon the reverse side of said receipt and shall designate how much of the
payment is being credited to principal, how much to interest, and how much to any other charge,
with the date of said payment shown thereon. The pawnbroker shall affix to each article or thing
a tag upon which shall be inscribed a number, of legible characters, which shall correspond to the
number on the pawn ticket and be entered in the book required to be kept by paragraph 15
hereof. The pawnbroker shall furnish all information required by law to be given to borrowers
by state law and federal law.
(b) The following information shall be printed on the front or back of each pawn ticket
required to be given the pledgor: In the event of failure to pay the loan within ______ days from
the date hereof or within _____ days after maturity, or within _______ days after payment of any
monthly interest when due, whichever period of time is the greater, you shall thereby forfeit all
right and title unto such pledged and pawned property to the pawnbroker who shall thereby
acquire an absolute title to the same.
864.11. Memorandum of Entry. Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan, deliver to the
person pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things, a memorandum or note signed by him,
containing the substance of the entry required to be made by him in such record book, and an
estimated value of the goods, articles or things pledged; and no charge shall be made or received
by any pawnbroker for any such entry, memorandum or note.
864.12. Receipt for payment to be furnished. Upon redemption of any pledge, the pawnbroker
Page 864-3
shall furnish to the pledgor at the time of redemption a written signed receipt indicating the exact
amount paid on principal and interest in order that said pledgor may have the benefit of said
receipt for income tax purposes and other matters. Said written receipt shall be either printed or
stamped with the name of the pawnbroker and the address, and shall be legibly written so that the
figures thereon are clearly discernible.
864.13. Separate pawn ticket for each item. Every pawnbroker shall prepare and deliver to the
pledgor at the time of the pledge a separate pawn ticket for each and every item pledged.
864.14. Sign to be posted showing interest and service charge. Each and every pawnbroker
shall post and maintain, in a prominent location within the confines of said pawnshop and
maintain, in a prominent location within the confines of said pawnshop, a printed sign not less
than fifteen by twenty inches with clearly discernible red lettering on a white background in not
less than two-inch size, the following words: Maximum legal interest percent per month plus one
dollar ($1.00) service charge.
864.15. Records. Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be entered and legibly
written in ink, at the time of each loan or receipt of personal property, an accurate amount and
description of the goods, articles or things pawned, or received, the amount of money loaned or
advanced thereon, the number of the pawn ticket given to the pledgor, the time when
redeemable, the time both day and hour, of pawning or receiving such goods, articles or things,
and the name, residence, age, sex, color and description as near as possible of the person
pawning or delivering the goods, articles or things. No entry made in such book shall be erased,
obliterated or defaced. The book, as well as every article or thing pawned, pledged or deposited,
shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or any officer directed
by the chief.
864.16. Safekeeping of pledges. Every pawnbroker licensed under the provisions hereof shall
provide a safe place for the keeping of the pledges received by him and shall have sufficient
insurance on the property held on pledges, for the benefit of the pledgors, in case of destruction
by fire.
864.17. Revocation of license. The City Council may revoke any pawnbroker’s license for
repeated violations of the provisions of this ordinance. Any licensee shall have the opportunity
for a hearing before such revocation.
864.18. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this ordinance shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
ADOPTED: 864 (1004) 4/12/1983
AMENDMENTS: 864 (1291) 7/13/1993; 864 (1324) 7/13/1994
Page 865-1
CHAPTER 865. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
865.01. Purpose. The City of Ashland is required by Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 98 to either
create a department of weights and measures to enforce the statutory provisions contained
therein or contract with the Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection for such
services. Wisconsin Statutes Section 98.04(2) authorizes cities electing to contract with the state
for enforcement services to recover the contract costs from those persons who receive services
under the weights and measures program. The City of Ashland hereby elects to recover the costs
of the state mandated weights and measures program from those persons who receive the service.
865.02. Fee Assessment. A fee will be charged by the City of Ashland to each person or entity
that receives weights and measures services under Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 98 provided by
the City, or for which the City is billed by the state or other contracted entity. Fees shall be
charged based on the number of devices each person or entity has that is subject to services
provided under Wisconsin Statutes Chapter 98. The total fees assessed shall not exceed the
actual costs of the inspection or other services provided to the City as shown by the Department
of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection Weights and Measures Census Report, plus a 2%
administrative fee.
865.03. Notice of Invoice. A notice of invoice shall be mailed to any person inspected or who
received any service under the weights and measures program. The notice shall be considered
served when mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the person’s last known address.
865.04 Fee Payment. Fees shall be paid in full to the city within 30 days of notice. If the
assessed fee is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of mailing of the invoice, an additional
administrative collection charge of 1% per month will be added to the balance owed until the fee,
plus administrative fee, is paid in full. Fees properly assessed under this section shall be
enforceable against any person or business entity and against any owner or person in charge of
any business entity as a personal action for debt. If the owner or person in charge is also the
owner of the real estate on which the weights and measures devices are located, any delinquent
fee may be placed upon the tax roll as a charge for current services as provided in Section
66.0627, Wisconsin Statutes.
ADOPTED: 865 (2016-1886) 11/15/2016
AMENDMENTS: 865 (2017-1889) 03/14/2017; 865 (2019-1921) 11/19/2019
Page 871-1
CHAPTER 871. MOBILE HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES
(MOBILE HOME PARKS), AND CAMPGROUNDS.
871.01. Intent. The intent is to establish and enforce by ordinance, reasonable standards and
regulations to protect and promote the public health, morals and welfare of its citizens. In
accordance with Sec. 66.0435, Wis. Stats., the City of Ashland has also been granted authority
to equitably defray the cost of municipal and educational services required by persons and
families using manufactured home communities (mobile home parks) for living, dwelling, or
sleeping purposes.
871.02. Definitions.
(a) Campground. Any parcel or tract of land owned by any person, individual, partnership,
firm, company, corporation or governmental unit designed, maintained, used or intended to be
used for the purpose of supplying accommodations for nonpermanent overnight use by a
camping unit.
(b) Camping Site. A defined area located within a campground designated for a single
camping unit or multiple camping units (also referred to as group camping sites).
(c) Camping Unit. Any portable device used as a temporary dwelling, including but not
limited to, a recreational vehicle, bus, van or tent.
(d) Field Office. A transportable structure used as a temporary headquarters such as at a
construction site.
(e) Mobile Home. A vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976, designed to
be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor vehicle and equipped and
used, or intended to be used, primarily for human habitation, with walls of rigid, uncollapsible
construction, which has an overall length in excess of forty-five (45) feet. This term includes the
mobile home structure, its plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems, and all
appliances and all other equipment carrying a manufacturer’s warranty.
(f) Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park). Any plot or plots of ground
owned by an individual, partnership, firm, company or corporation upon which two (2) or more
units, occupied for a dwelling or sleeping purposes regardless of mobile home ownership, are
located and, whether or not a change is made for such accommodation. This term does include a
farm where the occupants of the mobile/manufactured homes are the father, mother, son,
daughter, brother, or sister of the farm owner or operator, or where the occupants of the
mobile/manufactured homes work on the farm. This definition does not apply to any plot or
plots of ground owned by the City of Ashland.
(g) Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) Management. The owner or
person/s legally responsible for the operation of the community/park.
(h) Occupancy (Permanent). For the purpose of this ordinance, permanent occupancy shall
mean the use of, or intended use of, all or a portion of a building, recreational vehicle or
structure for thirty (30) days or more in a calendar year.
Page 871-2
(i) Person. An individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, whether tenant, owner,
lessee, licensee or their agent, heir or assign.
(j) Premises. A lot, plot, or parcel of land including a manufactured home community (mobile
home park), and including the building or structures thereon, including a recreational vehicle or
mobile home.
(k) Recreational Vehicle (RV) - Recreational vehicle means any of the following:
(1) Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and on wheels;
that is between ten (10) and thirty-six (36) feet long, including the hitch and eight (8) feet
or less in width; designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation,
vacation or other uses and towed by a car, station wagon or truck. It includes so-called
fifth wheel units.
(2) Pick-up coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as
a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, vacation or other uses.
(3) Motor-home means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation,
vacation or other uses, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
(4) Camping trailer means a canvas or folding structure mounted on wheels and designed
for travel recreation, vacation or other uses.
(l) Sanitary Station. A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from a recreational
vehicle holding tank.
(m) Service Building. A structure housing toilet, lavatory, and such facilities as required by
the Wisconsin Department of Health Services.
(n) Site. A plot or plots of ground within a manufactured home community (mobile home
park) of not less than one-thousand (1000) square feet complete with a concrete pad, designed
for placement of one mobile home unit and space for the parking of one vehicle. A concrete pad
shall be defined as a full length runner or 2' x 2' concrete pads installed for support of the mobile
home per manufacturer recommendations.
(o) Tent. A portable lodge or, canvas or strong cloth, stretched and sustained by poles.
(p) Unit. A mobile home excluding hitch, awnings, storage unit, non-winterized porch or
similar appurtenant structures.
871.03. Permanent Occupancy.
(a) Parking. No mobile home may be parked outside of an approved, licensed manufactured
home community (mobile home park).
(b) Double-Wide Mobile Homes. Double-wide mobile/manufactured homes may be parked
outside of manufactured home communities (mobile home parks) if they are attached to a
foundation and meet the requirements of the State Uniform Dwelling Code, Federal HUD
Page 871-3
Codes, and the requirements set forth in the City of Ashland’s Unified Development Ordinance.
(c) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational Vehicles (RVs) shall not be used for permanent
occupancy.
871.04. Temporary Occupancy.
(a) Permits. Permitting of on-site or off-site mobile homes used as a field office or for
temporary occupancy of a mobile/manufactured home by a college or other educational
institution is regulated under the City of Ashland’s Unified Development Ordinance.
(b) Occupation for Over 24 hours. Parking and occupying recreational vehicles or other
camping units for more than twenty-four (24) hours shall be prohibited in areas other than
campgrounds or private residences. The purpose of this subsection is to prohibit camping on
City streets or parking lots in the City of Ashland. This subsection is not intended to prohibit
overnight parking of semi-trucks at locations approved by owners, such as, truck stops and
industrial parking lots. This subsection shall not take away the right of a parking lot owner to
prohibit parking on their lot.
(c) Occupation for More Than 30 Days. A recreational vehicle (RV), tent, or other camping
unit may not be occupied at a residence for more than thirty (30) days.
871.05. License for Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Parks) and
Campgrounds: Applications and Issuance.
(a) Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain or permit to
be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned, leased or controlled by that
person, a manufactured home community (mobile home park) or campground within the limits
of the City of Ashland without having first obtained all necessary approvals and/or permits from
the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services (Safety and Buildings Division),
the Department of Health Services and/or Ashland County Health & Human Services (in
accordance with Wisconsin State Statute 254.47), the City of Ashland, and any other applicable
local, state or federal agency.
(b) Licenses. A license for each such manufactured home community (mobile home park) or
campground shall be obtained from the Office of the City Clerk pursuant to this ordinance.
Such license shall expire on June 30th of each year, but may be renewed, under the provisions of
this ordinance for additional periods of one year. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to prorate
license fees from the date of original licensing until June 30th of the licensing year.
(c) Required Information. It shall be the duty of any person intending to operate a
manufactured home community (mobile home park) or campground to report to the County
Health and Human Resources and the City Clerk the following information: Name of the mobile
home park or campground, name and address of owner, agent, or operator, number of persons
that may be accommodated and location of the manufactured home community (mobile home
park) or campground.
(d) Application for License. The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be
filed with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee as identified in the City of
Page 871-4
Ashland’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule for each space in the existing or proposed court or
campground, and a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000). This bond shall
guarantee the collection of the monthly parking permit fee provided for in Section 871.14 and
the payment of such fees to the City Treasurer, the payment by the license of any fine or
forfeiture including legal costs imposed upon or levied against said licensee for a violation of
the ordinances of the City of Ashland, and shall also be for the use and benefit of others who
may be prosecuted and recovery had thereon by any person who may be injured or damaged by
reason of the licensee violating the provisions of this ordinance. A fee as identified in the City
of Ashland’s Comprehensive Fee Schedule, shall be paid for each transfer of a license.
(e) Number of Licenses. The Common Council may limit the number of licenses for
communities in any common school district, if the development of a community would cause
the school costs to increase above the state average or if an exceedingly difficult or impossible
situation exists with regard to providing adequate and proper sewage disposal in the particular
area.
871.06. Inspection and Enforcement.
(a) Inspections. No manufactured home community (mobile home park) or campground
license shall be issued until upon notification by the City Clerk, the Planning & Development,
Fire and Police Departments or their authorized agents have inspected each application and the
premises on which mobile homes or camping units will be located to ensure compliance with the
regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. No license shall be renewed without a reinspection
of the manufactured home community or campground. For the purposes of making
inspections and securing enforcement, such officials or their authorized agents shall have the
right and are hereby empowered to enter on any premises on which a mobile home or service
building is located, or about to be located, and to inspect the same and all accommodations
connected thereon with at any reasonable time. All mobile homes, manufactured home
community (mobile home parks), and campgrounds shall be open to inspection at all reasonable
hours by the County Health and Human Services Department, City Building Inspector, Parks &
Recreation Director, Police and Fire Chiefs, or their authorized agents.
(b) Moving mobile homes. Each manufactured home community (mobile home park)
licensee and/or its managing agent shall apply for and receive a Building Permit before a mobile
home is moved out of a manufactured home community (mobile home park) and another mobile
home is moved in to take its place. The purpose of this notice is to permit the Building Inspector
to make inspections to determine that newly placed mobile homes have been placed in
compliance with this ordinance and to permit proper fair market value assessment of the newly
placed mobile home.
871.07. Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park) and Campground Plans.
(a) Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Parks) And Sites.
(1) Every mobile home and manufactured home community (mobile home park) shall be
located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent
the accumulation of storm or other waters.
(2) Each community and site shall be clearly defined or delineated and shall be consistent
Page 871-5
with the standards and regulations pursuant to Section 5.1, G.: Mobile Home and
Mobile/Manufactured Home Communities of the City of Ashland Unified Development
Ordinance.
(3) For every new, or changes to an existing, manufactured home community (mobile
home park), five sets of site plans, which indicate where mobile homes and other
structures will be placed in the community (park) with a numbering system for the
mobile homes, will be distributed to the Fire Department, Police Department, Public
Works Director, City Assessor and Planning & Development Department for review and
approval as required by the Unified Development Ordinance. The placement of new
mobile homes shall also comply with the Unified Development Ordinance.
(b) Campgrounds And Sites.
(1) Every campground and every camp site and provided facility shall be located on a
well-drained area not subject to intermittent flooding. The premises shall be properly
graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or other waters that may create hazards
to the property or the health and safety of the occupants.
(2) Every campground shall comply with the following:
(A) Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every parking area shall be
constructed with a durable, hard compact surface or otherwise protected to
prevent soil erosion and eliminate objectionable dust.
(B) Camping sites shall be separated from each other and from other structures by
at least fifteen (15) feet.
(C) All camping sites shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any
public street or highway right-of-way line.
(D) Principal and accessory buildings shall comply with all applicable building
codes and zoning requirements, including but not limited to, setbacks and
building height.
(E) Access to camp spaces shall be designed to mitigate congestion and hazards
at their entrance or exit to allow free movement on adjacent streets.
(F) Surfaced roadways shall be adequate width to accommodate anticipated
traffic and maintained so as to be free from potholes and ruts.
871.08. Mobile Home Additions and Accessory Structures. Additions, attachments, utility
sheds and garages are allowed if permitted by the mobile home park owner or designated park
manager and comply with the requirements of the City of Ashland’s Unified Development
Ordinance. Dimensional and setback requirements apply to all new, rebuilt, or enlarged
additions, accessory buildings and garages in the mobile home park pursuant to Section 4.7:
MHC Manufactured Home Community District of the Unified Development Ordinance.
871.09. Water Supply.
Page 871-6
(a) Access to Water. An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution
system connected with the public water main or if public main is not available at the property
line, a Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources approved well shall be furnished for
drinking and domestic purposes in all mobile home communities and campgrounds. The
applicable requirements of the State Plumbing Code, the State Department of Health and Social
Services, and the Department of Natural Resources shall apply.
(b) Water Service. A separate valved water service shall extend to each mobile home site.
(c) Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants in mobile home courts shall be maintained in proper working
order as determined by the Public Works Director or designated authorized agent at the owner’s
expense, and no mobile home shall be installed unless a hydrant is available within fourhundred
(400) feet.
(d) Metered Water. Water shall be metered at the property line. If a private well is used, it
too shall be metered for the purpose of determining sewage billing.
871.10. Service Building and Accommodations.
(a) Service Buildings. Campgrounds shall have a central service building, which complies
with Wisconsin Department of Health Services requirements for service buildings, located
within a radius of one-thousand (1000) feet to the spaces to be serviced.
(b) Fire Extinguishers. Service buildings shall be provided with at least two (2) fire
extinguishers placed so they are easily accessible.
871.11. Sewage and Garbage Disposal.
(a) Manufactured Home Communities (Mobile Home Parks).
(1) When public sewage facilities are available at the property line, connection and use is
required. If public sewage facilities are not available, a treatment system approved by
the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services (Safety and Buildings
Division) shall be used.
(2) Every site designed for the use of a mobile home shall be provided with sewer
connections which comply with the State Plumbing Code. The sewer connection shall be
provided with the suitable fittings so that a water-tight connection can be made, such
connections shall be so constructed so that they can be closed when not connected and
trapped in such a manner as to be maintained in an odor-free condition.
(3) All garbage which is not disposed of through a garbage disposal unit connected with
the sewerage system shall be kept in separate, leakproof, metal or plastic garbage
containers. The requirements of applicable City ordinances, refer to Ordinance 750:
Property Maintenance, which govern garbage disposal shall apply.
(b) Campgrounds.
Page 871-7
(1) Every campground containing camping sites for recreational vehicle use shall
provide a sanitary station, at the owner’s expense, for removing and disposing of wastes
from recreational vehicle holding tanks. For City owned campgrounds, a fee may be
charged as identified in the City’s Fee Schedule.
(2) Campground garbage and refuse shall be stored in covered containers which are
durable, easily cleanable, and insect, rodent and water resistant. One (1) container,
which complies with City of Ashland Ordinance 905, shall be provided by the
campground’s owner for every two (2) camp sites. The contents of the can shall be
removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner by the camp custodian as often as
necessary to prevent an excessive accumulation, but not less than twice weekly. If a
properly operated and maintained central collection point system is established, one (1)
container shall be provided for every five (5) sites.
871.12. Limitations on Length of Stay and Number of Occupants.
(a) Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any mobile home within the City
of Ashland for permanent occupancy unless such mobile home is located in a manufactured
home community (mobile home park) licensed and permitted under this ordinance and the
Unified Development Ordinance.
(b) Number of Occupants. The City Council or Plan Commission may, in its discretion, and
by a uniform rule, limit the number of occupants in any mobile home occupying a space in a
licensed court, for reasons of health and public welfare.
871.13. Management.
(a) Office. In every manufactured home community (mobile home park) or campground there
shall be located at the office of the owner, attendant or person in charge of said mobile home
park or campground, a copy of the manufactured home community (mobile home park) or
campground license, a copy of this ordinance and a register that complies with subparagraph (b)
(1) below.
(b) Duties of Owner/Manager. It is hereby made the duty of the owner, attendant or person in
charge together with the licensee to:
(1) Keep a register of all guests, on-site and to be open at all times to inspections by state
and federal officers and by authorized agents of Ashland’s Fire or Police Departments,
Public Works Director, City Assessor and Planning & Development Department which
shall show for all guests the following:
(A) Names and addresses;
(B) Number of children of school age;
(C) State of legal residence;
(D) Dates of entrance and departure;
Page 871-8
(E) License number of all trailers and towing or other vehicles; and
(F) States issuing such license.
(2) Maintain the community or campground in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at
all times.
(3) Ensure that the provisions of this ordinance are complied with and enforce and report
promptly to the proper authorities any violations of law which may come to their
attention.
(4) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Chief or authorized agent, hand
fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each six mobile home units or camping sites.
(5) Collect the monthly parking permit fee as provided in Section 871.14 of this
ordinance. A book shall be kept current showing the names of the persons paying said
service charge and the amount paid, which monies are the property of the City of
Ashland.
(6) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. All campfires or burning shall
comply with City of Ashland Ordinance 978.
871.14. Application of Plumbing, Electrical and Building Ordinances. All plumbing,
electrical, building, and other work done on or at any manufactured home community (mobile
home park) or campground shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Ashland
and the requirements of the state board of health. Licenses issued under this ordinance grant no
right to erect or repair any building or structure, or allow any plumbing or electrical work.
871.15. Monthly Parking Fee.
(a) Monthly Fee. There is hereby imposed on each owner of a nonexempt, occupied mobile
home in the City of Ashland a monthly parking fee as listed in the City’s Comprehensive Fee
Schedule and as determined in accordance with Sec. 66.0435 (3), Wis. Stats., which is hereby
adopted by reference and made part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. It shall be the
full and complete responsibility of the licensee to collect the proper amount from each mobile
homeowner. Licensees and owners of mobile homes permitted to be located on land outside a
manufactured home community (mobile home park) shall pay to the City Treasurer such parking
permit fees on or before the 10th of the month following the month for which such fees are due
in accordance with the terms of this ordinance and such regulations as the treasurer may
reasonable promulgate.
(b) Reporting. Licensees of manufactured home community (mobile home parks) and owners
of land on which are parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish information to
the City Clerk and City Assessor on such homes added to their community (park) or land within
five (5) days after arrival of such home on forms furnished by the City Clerk in accordance with
Sec. 66.0435 (3), Wis. Stats.
(c) Penalty. Any manufactured home community (mobile home park) operator who fails to
comply with the reporting requirements of Sec. 66.0435 (3), Wis. Stats., shall be liable for a
Page 871-9
forfeiture of twenty-five ($25.00) per violation and each day the violation continues. Each
failure to report shall be regarded as a separate offense.
871.16. Revocation and Suspension. The City Council is hereby authorized to revoke any
license or permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter in accordance with Sec. 66.0435,
Wis. Stats..
875.17. Penalties for Violation of Ordinance. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a forfeiture of not less than
fifty- dollars ($50.00) nor more than five-hundred ($500.00) per offense plus the actual costs of
prosecution, including attorney fees. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
ADOPTED: 871 (1767) 1/10/2012
Page 882-1
CHAPTER 882. ARCADES.
882.01. Definitions.
(a) “Arcade” for the purposes of this chapter shall be defined as any premises where four or
more coin operated amusement devices are made available to members of the public. The term
“arcade” shall not include any premises which is licensed for the sale of intoxicating liquors or
fermented malt beverages.
(b) License Fee. The license fee for each arcade shall be charged in accordance with
Chapter 165, the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule. In no case shall any portion of
said license be repaid to the licensee. Licenses will be issued for the fiscal year beginning July 1
and ending June 30 of each year.
882.02. License Required.
(a) License required. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of owning or
operating an arcade as the term is herein defined without first having obtained the proper license
therefor.
(b) License Fee. The annual license fee for each arcade as herein defined shall be charged in
accordance with the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule. All licenses will be issued
for the fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each year. In no case shall any portion
of said license fee be repaid to the licensee.
(c) Application for License. Application for license hereunder shall be filed in writing with
the City Clerk, on a form to be provided by the City, and shall specify:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or
association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses.
(2) The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to be operated,
together with the character of the business as carried on at such place.
(3) The proper license fee shall accompany the application.
(4) The application shall be referred to the Common Council for review and in its sole
discretion either approval or denial of the license. If the license is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
(d) Expiration, posting, transfer. All licenses under this article shall expire on June 30th
following their issuance. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the arcade. Such
license shall be non-assignable and nontransferable and shall apply only to the premises for
which such license was issued, unless approval is granted by the Common Council. No
additional fee shall be charged.
Page 882-2
882.03. Restrictions and Limitations.
(a) It shall be unlawful to consume or possess or permit the consumption or possession of
intoxicating liquors, fermented malt beverages, or controlled substances in any arcade or
amusement center.
(b) No arcade may be operated, kept or maintained in any disorderly or riotous, indecent or
improper manner.
882.04. Revocation or Suspension of License. Licenses issued under the provisions of this
ordinance may be suspended or revoked by the Common Council after notice and hearing for
any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for
license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his/her
business;
(c) Any violation of this chapter, or permitting or condoning the violation of any other
ordinance of the City of Ashland or law of the State of Wisconsin in any arcade;
(d) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
882.05. Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a license shall
be given by the City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his/her
last known address at least 72 hours prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a
police officer in the same manner as a court summons.
882.06. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall forfeit not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense, plus the cost of prosecution. Each day’s violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
ADOPTED: 882 (991) 8/10/1982
AMENDMENTS: 882 (1781) 3/13/2012; 882 (2020-1927) 02/11/2020
Page 889-1
CHAPTER 889. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, SOLICITATION IN RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS, AND MOBILE CONCESSION STREET VENDORS.
889.01. Registration and License Required. It shall be unlawful for any Transient Merchant or
Mobile Concession Street Vendor to engage in sales within the City of Ashland without being
registered and licensed for that purpose as provided herein. It shall be unlawful for any
Transient Merchant or any Permanent Merchant to solicit in residential neighborhoods without
being registered and licensed for that purpose as provided herein.
889.02. Definitions.
(a) “Transient merchant” means any individual who engages in the retail sale of merchandise
at any place in this state temporarily, and who does not intend to become and does not become a
permanent merchant of such place. For purposes of this section, sale of merchandise includes a
sale in which the personal services rendered upon or in connection with the merchandise
constitutes the greatest part of value for the price received, but does not include a farm auction
sale conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used on the farm, or the sale of
produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a resident of this state.
(b) “Permanent Merchant” means any person who, for at least six months prior to the
consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchant: (1) has continuously operated
an established place of business in the local trade area among the communities bordering the
place of sale, or (2) has continuously resided in the local trade area among the communities
bordering the place of sale and now does business from his/her residence.
(c) “Door-to-Door Solicitor” means any person, whether a permanent or transient merchant,
who attempts to sell merchandise directly to residents by physically calling upon their dwelling
place.
(d) “Merchandise” shall include personal property of any kind, and shall include
merchandise, goods, or materials provided incidental to services offered or sold. The sale of
merchandise includes donations required by the seller for the retention of goods by a donor or
prospective customer.
(e) “Mobile Concession Street Vendor” shall include individuals and organizations that
engage in the sale of concessions from motor vehicles, self-propelled vehicles, manually
propelled vehicles, and trailers. Concessions are defined foods and beverages intended to be
consumed at the point of purchase.
(f) “Charitable Organization” shall include any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such.
(g) “Clerk” means the City Clerk.
889.03. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:
Page 889-2
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular
customers on established routes;
(b) Any person selling merchandise directly to other established businesses within the City of
Ashland;
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which the person has grown or any fish which
the person has caught;
(d) Any person who has an established place of business where the merchandise being sold is
offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and
specifically requested, a home visit by said person;
(e) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for
sale of merchandise;
(f) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court; any person
conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law; any person conducting a garage sale, yard
sale, or estate sale at a private residence;
(g) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in direct sales or
solicitation of donations for or on behalf of said organization, provided that there is submitted to
the clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered under sec. 202.12, Wis. Stats., and
provided such organization shall comply with the provisions below
(1) Before any direct sales or solicitation for donations can take place, each such
charitable organization must file a sworn application, in writing, on a form furnished by
the City Clerk, which shall provide the following information:
(A) Name of organization.
(B) Names and addresses of officers of the organization.
(C) Description and approximate dates of the solicitation event(s).
(D) Names of individuals to be involved in solicitation.
(E) Proof of charitable status.
(2) Upon being satisfied that such organization, association or corporation is a bona fide
group within the parameters of this chapter, the Clerk shall issue a permit without
charge to such organization to solicit in the City. The clerk shall also issue to such
organization, an official card for each individual to be involved in the solicitation, upon
which shall be inscribed the name of each member. The card shall also contain the name
of the organization and dates and purpose of the solicitation. This permit can be applied
for on an annual basis and shall expire June 30 of each year.
Page 889-3
(h) Any individual licensed by an examining board as defined in s. 15.01(7), Wisconsin
Statutes.
(i) Any persons or organizations operating a concession authorized by a non-profit
association in connection with a fair, festival or celebration which is being held under the
direction of that non-profit association. Persons or organizations are prohibited from operating a
concession or selling products or services within the defined fair, festival or celebration area
without authorization from the non-profit association sponsoring the event. The entity
sponsoring the event shall submit a description of the defined festival area to the Police Chief or
his designee for approval.
(j) Any person 15 years old or under who is operating a stand to sell lemonade or similar
beverages at the person’s home or in the public right of way adjacent to the person’s home, and
any person 15 years old or under assisting that person, provided that the police department may
order such stand closed if there is reason to believe the stand poses a threat to health or safety, in
which case the person may apply for a license under this chapter.
889.04. Transient Merchant & Door-to-Door Solicitor Applications
(a) Applicant Information. Applicants for a transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor
license must complete and return to the clerk an application form furnished by the clerk
which shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number, and temporary address, if any;
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation
that the transient merchant represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being
sold;
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if
any;
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the merchandise, and
any services offered;
(6) Proposed methods of delivery of merchandise, if applicable;
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the
conduct of his/her business;
(8) Most recent cities, villages, towns, not to exceed three, where applicant conducted
his/her business;
Page 889-4
(9) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving this city;
(10) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance
violation related to applicant’s transient merchant business within the last five years,
and the nature of the offense and the place of conviction.
(b) Required Documents. Applicants for a transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor license
shall present to the clerk for examination:
(1) A driver’s license or some other proof of identify as may be reasonably required;
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and
measures where applicant’s business requires use of weighing and measuring devices
approved by state authorities;
(3) A state health officer’s certificate where applicant’s business involves the handling
of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to
state that applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated
not more than 90 days prior to the date the application license is made.
(c) Fee. At the time the transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor application is returned, a
fee shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 165, the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee
Schedule, to cover the cost of processing said application. If said application is approved, the
application fees will be charged as provided for in the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee
Schedule for each day that business is carried on in the City of Ashland. The Clerk shall issue an
official card for each individual to be involved in the solicitation, upon which shall be inscribed
the name of each solicitor. The card shall also contain the dates and purpose of the solicitation.
(d) Agent for service of process. The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the clerk
his/her agent to accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant arising
out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection with the direct sales activities
of the applicant, in the event the applicant cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally.
889.05. Mobile Concession Street Vendors Applications. A Mobile Concession Street Vendor
shall not operate within the City without first securing a license from the City. Applications
shall be made to the City Clerk and acted upon by the Common Council. Licenses shall be for a
term of one year and shall expire June 30. The fee for a Mobile Concession Street Vendor shall
be charged in accordance with Chapter 165, the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
The fee shall be waived for non-profit organizations.
889.06. Investigation
(a) Referral to Police. Upon receipt of each application, the clerk may refer it immediately to
the Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such
registration.
Page 889-5
(b) Denial of license. The clerk shall refuse to license the applicant if it is determined,
pursuant to the investigation above, that: the application contains any material omission or
materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been received against the
applicant by authorities in the most recent cities, villages and towns, not exceeding three, in
which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory
violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related
to the applicant’s fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any
applicable provision of this chapter.
889.07. Appeal. Any person refused or denied a license may appeal the denial through the
Common Council.
889.08. Prohibited Practices.
(a) A transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor shall be prohibited from: calling at any
dwelling or other place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment;
calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words “No Peddlers,”
“No Solicitors” or words of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or
remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person
having authority over such premises.
(b) A transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor shall not misrepresent or make false,
deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity, or characteristics of any
merchandise offered for sale, the purpose of his/her visit, his/her identity or the identity of the
organization he/she represents. A charitable organization transient merchant shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of the merchandise being offered will actually be used for
the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said portion shall be expressed as
a percentage of the sale price of the merchandise.
(c) No transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor shall sell or offer for sale any goods,
wares, merchandise or produce of any kind from a stand or vehicle while the same is placed or
parked upon any public street except to make deliveries from house to house or to places of
business. No signs or goods, wares, merchandise or produce of any sort shall be set, placed or
displayed within any portion of the right-of-way for any City of Ashland street.
(d) No transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares,
merchandise or produce of any kind in any City of Ashland park premises, including parking lots
associated therewith without the prior written approval of the City of Ashland Park Board.
(e) No licensee nor any person in his behalf, shall use any sound amplifying device for the
broadcasting of words upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the City or
upon private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places, for
the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which such licensee
proposes to sell.
Page 889-6
(f) No licensee shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which
he/she is conducting business.
889.09. Disclosure Requirements
(a) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective
customer, a transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor shall expressly disclose his/her name, the
name of the company or organization he/she is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of
merchandise or services he/she offers to sell.
(b) If any sale of merchandise is made by a transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor, or
any offer for the later delivery of merchandise is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the
right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or is a cash transaction of
more than $25, in accordance with the procedure as set forth in sec. 423.203, Wis. Stats.; the
seller shall give the buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice shall
conform to the requirements of secs. 423.203(1)(a)(b) and (c), (2) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(c) If the transient merchant or door-to-door solicitor takes a sales order for the later delivery
of merchandise, he/she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written
statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount paid in advance whether full,
partial, or no advance payment is made, the name, address, and telephone number of the seller,
the delivery or performance date, and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the
terms thereof.
889.10. Mobile Concession Street Vendors.
(a) Mobile Concession Street Vendors shall be allowed to sell from public streets, but shall
not impede the free use of streets or sidewalks by vehicles or pedestrians. All traffic and parking
regulations shall be observed. If an on-duty officer of an authorized law-enforcement agency
determines that a safety problem exists related to the selling activities at a specific location(s) by
a Mobile Concession Street Vendor, the officer shall have the right to order the vendor to cease
selling at that location(s). Mobile Concession Street Vendors shall not remain in one location,
either on a city street, street right-of-way, or in a public park, for a period of longer than six (6)
hours.
(b) Licensed Mobile Concession Street Vendors shall be allowed to operate only between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9 10:00 p.m. No sales shall be permitted with 300 feet of an established,
operating concession stand operated by a non-profit or charitable organization, such as Little
League, school groups, or other similar organizations, or other existing permanent food uses.
889.11. Food Vendors in Parks. The Public Works Director and/or Parks and Recreation
Director may waive the six-hour limit and authorize food vendors to sell food items intended for
on-site consumption in City parks for a period of five consecutive days or less during a specified
event. Said food vendors will be required to complete an application and pay a fee equal to the
amount charged to transient merchants.
Page 889-7
889.12. Exhibition of License. Licensed transient or permanent merchants soliciting in
residential neighborhoods must wear their identification license card in a conspicuous place on
their clothing. Transient merchants selling from a fixed location must exhibit their certificate of
license in a conspicuous place at the site where they are selling. Mobile Concession Street
Vendors shall display their license in a window of their vehicle.
889.13. Records. The Chief of Police shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation of this
ordinance and the clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the registrant convicted.
889.14. Revocation of License. Licenses issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be
revoked by the Common Council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his/her
business as a solicitor, or transient merchant;
(c) Any violation of this ordinance;
(d) Conducting the business of solicitor, mobile concession street vendor or transient
merchant, as the case may be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public;
(e) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
889.15. Notice of Hearings. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by
the City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his/her last
known address at least 72 hours prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police
officer in the same manner as a court summons.
889.16. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall forfeit not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense, plus the cost of prosecution. Each day’s violation of the
provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
ADOPTED: 889 (1536) 3/12/2002
AMENDMENTS: 889 (1779) 3-13-2012; 889 (2016-1876) 7/12/2016; 889 (2020-1929)
3/10/2020;
Page 900-1
CHAPTER 900. RECYCLING.
900.01. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote recycling, composting, and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as provided in
Sec. 287.11, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 544, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
900.02. Statutory authority. This ordinance is adopted as authorized under Sec. 287.09 (3) (b),
Wis. Stats.
900.03. Definitions.
(a) Aluminum Container shall mean any container constructed of aluminum.
(b) Bi-Metal Container shall mean any container constructed of both aluminum and steel.
(c) City shall mean the City of Ashland, Wisconsin.
(d) Contractor shall mean the service provided, retained, or hired by the City or a private
entity including a property owner, business owner, developer, tenant, or other organization to
collect and properly dispose of solid wastes.
(e) Corrugated Cardboard/Container Board shall mean container board that contains a waffled
(accordion style) section, alone or in some combination with flat sheets of cardboard.
(f) Driveway/Private Road Service Agreement shall mean an agreement between a property
owner or the property owner’s authorized representative or agent and the Contractor granting the
Contractor permission to travel the driveway or private road with its recyclable collection
equipment and vehicles.
(g) Foam Polystyrene Packaging shall mean packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
(1) Is designed for serving food and beverages;
(2) Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the packaged article in a
shipping container; and,
Page 900-2
(3) Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged article in a
shipping container.
(h) Glass Container shall mean any container constructed of Blue, Brown, Clear, or Green
glass.
(i) Grayboard/Chipboard shall mean cereal boxes, soda cases, cartons, shoe boxes, etc.
(j) Magazines shall mean paper products with glossy finish on their covers and/or pages.
Magazines do not include hard or soft cover books.
(k) Newsprint shall mean newspapers and any similar type of printed materials including
brown paper grocery bags.
(l) Office/Mixed Papers shall mean high grade printing or writing papers.
(m) Plastic Container shall mean any container constructed of the following:
(1) SPI Code 1, PETE (Polyethylene Terephthalate)
(2) SPI Code 2, HDPE (High Density Polyethylene)
(3) SPI Code 3, PVC (Polyvinyl Chloride)
(4) SPI Code 4, LDPE (Low Density Polyethylene)
(5) SPI Code 5, PP (Polypropylene)
(6) SPI Code 6, PS (Polystyrene)
(7) SPI Code 7, Other resins or multiple resins container
(n) Processor shall mean an enterprise that handles recyclable materials for reuse.
(o) Recyclable Materials shall mean the materials that are listed in Sec. 287.07 (1m) to (4),
Wis. Stats.
Page 900-3
(p) Responsible Unit shall have the meaning established in Chapter 287, Wisconsin Statutes
for units of government managing effective recycling programs.
(q) Steel Container shall mean any container constructed with ferrous materials.
(r) Yard Wastes shall mean grass, sod, leaves, vines, stalks, and branches or trunks smaller
than six inches in diameter.
900.04. Abrogation, greater restrictions and interpretation.
(a) This chapter shall not repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules,
regulations, ordinances other than Codification Ordinance 979, or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to law.
(b) However, whenever this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
ordinance shall apply.
(c) Where any terms or requirements of this ordinance may be inconsistent or conflicting, the
more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of this ordinance
is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard in Chapter NR 544, Wisconsin
Administrative Code, and where the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be
interpreted in light of the language found in Wisconsin Statutes and/or the standards contained
within Chapter NR 544 Wisconsin Administrative Code.
900.05. Applicability. The requirements of this ordinance apply to all persons and entities
located within the City’s corporate limits.
900.06. Administration. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the City’s
Public Works Department.
900.07. Responsible unit designation. Under Sec. 287.09(1), Wis. Stats., the City is designated
as the responsible unit for the management of the solid waste generated within its corporate
limits as prescribed by Sec. 287, Wis. Stats., and Chapter NR 544 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code. However, if the County adopts a resolution designating the County as the
responsible unit, the City has 90 days to adopt a resolution retaining the City’s status as a
responsible unit.
Page 900-4
900.08. Responsible unit duties.
(a) Provide curbside recycling service for those individuals and entities described in Section
900.13 and provide drop off locations for the materials not collected curbside as listed in
Section 900.15.
(b) Establish an information and education program.
(c) Assist the non-residential sector when problems arise regarding the collection,
preparation, processing, and marketing of recyclable materials.
(d) Ensure all entities within our corporate limits are in compliance with the State’s and the
City’s recycling requirements. This will be enforced with inspections, reminders, warnings and
citations.
(e) Maintain records of the quantity of materials recovered and materials disposed of.
900.09. Preparation of recyclables.
(a) Recyclables shall be prepared in such a manner that quality of materials are maintained
and that their marketability is ensured.
(b) The residents who shall receive the City’s recycling services shall prepare their
recyclables as listed in the most current recycling pamphlets or book, or by any additional
published, delivered, or mailed notices.
(c) All parties who are not provided City recycling services shall be required to provide for
the separation and collection of recyclable materials as required by Sec. 287.11, Wis. Stats., and
the processor’s requirements.
(d) Intentional destruction of recyclables is prohibited.
(e) Materials that have become saturated by water will be regarded as still recyclable, but
must be sufficiently dried before collection. Sufficiently dried shall mean what the processor
and market shall tolerate without affecting the materials value.
900.10. Mobile home park owners. Mobile home park owners shall be required to notify their
tenants in writing on what and how to recycle at the time of renting or leasing, and semi-annually
thereafter about the established recycling program.
Page 900-5
900.11. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of multiple family dwelling.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings greater than four residential
units shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in Section 900.15 (g).
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials;
(2) Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling and at least
semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling programs;
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by the
tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility;
(4) Notify tenants of the reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which materials are
collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet the processing requirements,
collection methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or
company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated agents or
multiple-family dwellings if the post-consumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at
a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling
the materials specified in Section 900.15 from solid waste in as pure a form as it technically
feasible.
900.12. Responsibilities of owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and
properties.
(a) Owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties shall do all of the
following to recycle the materials specified in Section 900.15.
(1) Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
(2) Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and occupants of the
properties about the established recycling program.
(3) Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid waste by users,
tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
(4) Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle, which
materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet the processing
requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of operation, and a contact
Page 900-6
person or company, including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated agents of nonresidential
facilities and properties if the post-consumer waste generated within the facility or
property is treated at a processing facility licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that
recovers for recycling the materials specified in Section 900.15 from solid waste in as pure a
form as is technically feasible.
900.13. Extent of recycling services.
(a) Municipal Collection. The City shall provide recycling collection services to single
family through four (4) unit residential dwellings, churches, and mobile home parks.
(1) This service will involve curbside and alleyway collection, drop off site(s) and direct
residents as to how to handle materials that are not required to be collected, but yet
cannot be disposed of by land disposal or incineration.
(2) A building containing a business or organization, with rental units is a commercial
operation and will not be provided City recycling services.
(3) In-home occupations as defined in the Uniform Development Code) will not be
considered a commercial operation, and thus will receive City recycling services.
(4) Schools attached to churches will not be provided City recycling services.
(b) Those Not Provided With City Collection. Those who do not receive City collection will
be required to handle their recyclables privately.
(c) Drop-Off Facilities. In the event the City establishes drop-off facilities for certain
materials, everyone will be permitted their use, however, nominal material fees might be charged
to those who are not provided regular recycling services as stated in Section 900.13 (a).
Page 900-7
900.14. Placement of recyclables for collection.
(a) Recyclables placed for collection shall be located on the public right-of-way of the street,
alley, or highway, adjacent to the resident’s property as instructed by the most recent outreach
materials provided in conformance with Section 900.09 (b) with the following exceptions:
(1) Residents who are not eligible for City collection of recyclables.
(2) Residents who have entered into driveway/private road service agreements with the
Contractor.
(3) Residents within mobile home parks, condominium developments, planned unit
developments, or any other plat of land containing a driveway or private road can place
their recyclables adjacent to the private road fronting their living unit in accordance with
the instructions of the Contractor provided the property owner(s) or property owner’s
authorized representative or agent enters into a driveway service agreement with the
Contractor.
(b) Recyclables shall not be placed on that portion of the right-of-way that is improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
900.15. Recyclable materials. Sec. 287.07, Wis. Stats., requires the following materials to be
removed from the post-consumer waste stream and recovered as recyclable materials. Not all
these materials are required to be collected by the City as part of an effective recycling program.
(a) Lead Acid Batteries.
(1) Lead acid and vehicle batteries shall be recycled as required by Section 287.18 (1m),
Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) The City as a Responsible Unit managing a recycling program, is not required to
provide for the collection of lead acid or automotive batteries.
(b) Waste Oil.
(1) The comingling of waste oil in solid waste; disposal of waste oil on the ground, into
a drain, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer; or into water is prohibited.
(2) Oil filters are to be drained of their oil before being placed in the garbage. This is
accomplished by either crushing, or punching a hole through the top of the filter and
Page 900-8
drain in a pan until completely drained.
(3) Waste oil is to be recycled with retailers who accept waste oil as provided by Section
287.15, Wisconsin Statutes.
(4) The City, as a Responsible Unit managing an effective recycling program, will not
provide for the collection of waste oil.
(c) Waste Tires
(1) The disposal of waste tires in a manner not provided for by statute is prohibited.
Waste tires are to be taken to a retailer or collection site for disposal.
(2) The City, as a Responsible Unit managing an effective recycling program, will not
provide for the collection of waste tires.
(d) Major Appliances. The following appliances, both commercial and residential, are to be
separated from the post-consumer waste stream and recycled. All these appliances must remain
in their original and undamaged condition.
(1) Stoves
(2) Ovens
(3) Microwave Ovens
(4) Refrigerators
(5) Freezers
(6) Dishwashers
(7) Air Conditioners
Page 900-9
(8) Dehumidifiers
(9) Clothes Washers
(10) Clothes Dryers
(11) Water Heaters
(12) Furnaces
(13) Boilers
(e) Fluorescent Lamps.
(1) Businesses must recycle fluorescent lamps or treat them as hazardous waste.
(2) Households are exempted by State Law.
(3) Organizations and business entities required by statute to recycle fluorescent lamps
are to contact a transporter, processor, or Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for
their proper disposal.
(f) Yard Wastes.
(1) Comingling of yard waste with the solid waste stream is prohibited.
(2) Yard waste is to be composted on-site or delivered to a public or privately operated
composting or disposal facility.
(3) Bagged yard waste disposed of at a composting or disposal facility operated by the
City shall consist of 2-3 ply brown kraft paper bags not to exceed a volume of
approximately 30 gallons. Disposal of bagged yard waste in a plastic bag at a City
facility is prohibited.
(g) Containers. The following types of containers shall be recycled:
(1) Aluminum
(2) Bi-metal
(3) Steel
(4) Glass
(5) Plastic, inclusive of containers with SPI Codes 1 – 7
Page 900-10
(6) Newsprint
(7) Paper brown bags
(8) Magazines
(9) Office/Mixed Papers
(10) Corrugated Cardboard/Container Board and Grayboard/Chipboard
(11) Foam Polystyrene Packaging
900.16. Separation requirements exempted. The separation requirements of Section 900.15 do
not apply to the following:
(a) Occupants of single family and two to four unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and
non-residential facilities and properties that send their post-consumer waste to a processing
facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources for the recovery of the
materials specified in 900.15 from the solid waste stream in as pure a form as is technically
feasible.
(b) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than 30% of the
heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified in Section 900.15 for which a variance has been granted
by the Department of Natural Resources under Sec. 287.11(2m) Wis. Stats., or NR 544.14,
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
900.17. Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated for recycling. No person
or other entity may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste treatment
facility any of the material specified in Section 900.15 which have been separated for recycling,
except waste tires may be burned with energy recovery in a solid waste treatment facility.
900.18. Refusal of service.
(a) Recyclables will not be collected from single family through four (4) family dwelling
units if the resident does not pay the solid waste collection fee as listed in the City’s
Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
(b) The Contractor shall refuse to furnish collection service to any household not complying
with, or refusing to comply with this ordinance for the separation and collection of recyclable
materials as listed in Section 900.15.
900.19. Collection by unauthorized persons.
Page 900-11
(a) From the time recyclable materials are placed at the collection point for collection by the
City or its authorized Contractor or agent(s) in accordance with the terms herein, recyclable
materials shall be and become the property of the City or its authorized Contractor or agent(s).
(b) It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person not authorized by the City of
Ashland to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials.
900.20. Enforcement. For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the City may inspect recyclable
materials separated for recycling, post consumer waste intended for disposal, recycling
collection sites and facilities, collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings
and non-residential facilities and properties, and any records related to recycling activities,
which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary information. No person
may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or authorized representative of the City
who requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No
person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an inspection.
900.21. Penalty.
(a) Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be issued a citation by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee or the Ashland Police Department. The issuance of
a citation shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or
any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other
matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this section.
(b) Each collection in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as provided herein.
(c) When determining a penalty, the following schedule shall be followed:
(1) First Violation - Except for a violation of Section 900.19, a reminder on the proper
preparation of recyclables is to be sent to the resident who is violating this chapter. For a
violation of Section 900.19, the violator shall be subject to a forfeiture of $50 plus
restitution of the amount received for the materials unlawfully collected, or their value,
whichever is greater.
(2) Second Violation - Except for a violation of Section 900.19, $50 citation, plus court
costs. For a violation of Section 900.19, the violator shall be subject to a forfeiture of
$100 plus restitution of the amount received for the materials unlawfully collected, or
their value, whichever is greater.
(3) Third Violation - $200 citation, plus court costs. For a violation of Section 900.19,
the violator shall also be subject to restitution of the amount received for the materials
unlawfully collected, or their value, whichever is greater.
Page 900-12
(4) Fourth and Subsequent Violations – Not less than $200 citation but not more than
$2,000 plus court costs. For a violation of Section 900.19, the violator shall also be
subject to restitution of the amount received for the materials unlawfully collected, or
their value, whichever is greater.
(d) Violations spaced more than three years apart shall be regarded as the first violation.
ADOPTED: 900 (1820) 1/14/2014
AMENDMENTS: 900 (1835) 10/28/2014
Page 905-1
CHAPTER 905. SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL.
905.01. Purpose and authority. It is the intent of the City to maintain the designation of
“Responsible Unit” of government for the purposes of management of solid waste and
recyclables generated within the corporate limits of the City as defined within Chapter 900 and
Sec. 287.3, Wis. Stats. To that end, the City has established the following solid waste
management goals, listed in order of priority, as its measure of an effective solid waste
management program:
(a) Reduce.
(b) Reuse.
(c) Recycle.
(d) Compost.
(e) Incinerate with energy recovery.
(f) Land disposal.
(g) Incinerate with no energy recovery.
905.02. Definitions.
(a) Cart shall mean the solid waste collection container provided by the Contractor to those
households eligible for municipal solid waste collection services. Carts will be provided in a
number of sizes depending upon the level of service that is selected by the household.
(b) City shall mean the City of Ashland, Wisconsin.
(c) Clean Wood shall mean those wood products that do not contain glues, adhesives, or any
type of finish or coating.
(d) Construction Material and Demolition Debris shall mean those materials that typically are
used for the construction of structures and include, but are not limited to, brick, concrete, stone,
lumber,
Page 905-2
roofing, windows, doors, toilets, sinks, showers, tubs, cabinets, carpeting, flooring, wallboard,
and unblown insulation.
(e) Contractor shall mean the service provided, retained, or hired by the City or a private
entity including a property owner, business owner, developer, tenant, or other organization to
collect and properly dispose of solid wastes.
(f) Portable shall mean to be either capable of being carried or wheeled by a single person.
(g) Residential Dwelling shall mean any building containing one through four residential
units with no commercial operations in that building other than in-home occupations.
(h) Solid Waste shall mean all waste that readily rots and decomposes, along with those
materials that do not readily rot or decompose which no longer serve their original purpose and
have no remaining function or value and are to be discarded. Solid waste does not include those
materials described as being recyclable, listed as a banned material, or hazardous waste.
(i) Yard Wastes shall mean grass clippings, yard and garden debris, brush, trees, tree
branches, stumps and clean woody vegetative material.
905.03. Recyclable and banned materials. Materials collected within the corporate limits of
the City that are defined as a recyclable material, or a banned material as found in Section
900.15, Ashland City Ordinances, chapter 287, Wisconsin Statutes, or NR 544 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code as amended from time to time; or any other rule, law, or mandates issued
by the State of Wisconsin shall not be disposed in any landfill, or burned without energy
recovery.
905.04. Municipal solid waste collection service.
(a) Those Served.
(1) Municipal Solid Waste Collection Services shall be provided to all residents of single
through four unit residential dwellings, including home occupations, as defined in the
Uniform Development Code; mobile home parks; churches (excluding their schools); city
parks; and the following public facilities:
(A) City Hall;
(B) Bretting Center;
(C) Vaughn Library;
(D) Parks Garage;
(E) Public Works Garage;
(F) Wastewater Plant;
(G) Water Plant;
(H) City Fire Halls,
Page 905-3
(I) Marina;
(J) Airport; and,
(K) Other municipal facilities as necessary.
(b) Those Not Served. Municipal Garbage Collection Services shall not be provided to any
business, school, commercial or industrial establishment, or residential condominium development
consisting of five or more units.
905.05. Volume based fees. Those residential households eligible for municipal solid waste
collection services will be provided options of several cart sizes depending upon the volume of
solid waste generated by the household.
(a) Households will be required to utilize the carts provided by the Contractor for solid waste
collection.
(b) The amount of solid waste collected will be limited to the volume that will fit within the
confines of the container size selected.
(c) Solid waste that is not contained within the cart will not be collected. Households that
consistently generate more waste than can fit within the level of cart service subscribed will be
required to subscribe for a larger volume service level requiring a larger cart.
(d) Fees for Municipal Solid Waste Collection service will be dependent upon the volume of
service subscribed to - the larger the cart size, the higher the monthly cost to the household.
(e) Solid waste that cannot be confined within the cart will be required to be dropped off at
the Contractor’s collection site/transfer station by the household at the household’s cost.
905.06. Solid waste container placement.
(a) Solid waste carts placed for collection shall be located on the public right-of-way of the
street, alley, or highway adjacent to the resident’s property as instructed by the most recent
outreach materials provided in conformance with Section 900.09 (b), Ashland City Ordinances,
with the following exceptions:
(1) Residents who are not eligible for City collection of solid waste.
(2) Residents who have entered into driveway/private road service agreements with the
Contractor.
(3) Residents within mobile home parks, condominium developments, planned unit
developments, or any other plat of land containing a driveway or private road can place
their recyclables adjacent to the private road fronting their living unit in accordance with
the instructions of the Contractor provided the property owner(s) or property owner’s
Page 905-4
authorized representative or agent enters into a driveway service agreement with the
Contractor.
(b) Solid waste carts shall not be placed on that portion of the right-of-way that is improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
905.07. Monthly fee for service. The monthly fee for Municipal Solid Waste Collection
Service shall be as determined as part of the annual review of the Comprehensive Fee Schedule
contained within Ordinance 165.
905.08. Those not receiving municipal solid waste collection services.
(a) Solid Waste Containers. Solid waste or rubbish stored outside is required to be confined
within containers constructed of substantial metal or plastic construction, and must have tight
fitting covers or lids. Containers utilized for the outside storage of solid waste or rubbish must be
properly maintained and repaired, and be in sufficient quantity and capacity for the solid waste
produced.
(b) Collection Requirements. Containers shall be emptied when any of the following
conditions occur:
(1) When full.
(2) Litter occurs.
(3) Odors are produced.
(4) Birds are attracted.
(5) Animals or rodents are attracted.
(6) Insects or larvae are attracted or produced.
(c) Overflow and other conditions. Should overflowing conditions or any of the above occur,
the owner shall either increase the frequency of collection, and/or upgrade their garbage
containers to a greater capacity to meet the needs of the property owner, tenant, or property
occupant.
905.09. Yard waste. Comingling of yard waste, brush, trees, tree branches, stumps or clean
wood within the solid waste stream is prohibited.
(a) Yard waste, brush, trees, tree branches, stumps, or clean wood is to be composted on-site
or delivered to a public or privately operated composting or disposal facility.
(b) Bagged yard waste disposed of at a composting or disposal facility operated by the City
shall consist of 2-3 ply brown kraft paper bags not to exceed a volume of approximately 30
gallons per bag. Disposal of bagged yard waste in a plastic bag at a City facility is prohibited.
905.10. Construction material and demolition debris. Construction Material and Demolition
Debris other than in amounts that can be contained within the confines of the cart service
Page 905-5
subscribed for shall be disposed of at a licensed demolition landfill, or as directed by city
personnel.
(a) Construction Material and Demolition debris considered recyclable shall not be disposed
of as rubbish. Disposal of these items shall be coordinated with the local recycling center.
(b) Asbestos containing materials can be accepted at the Solid Waste Transfer Station
provided asbestos handling regulations are followed and prior arrangement have been made.
Asbestos containing materials can be roofing; siding, tar paper and slate; ceiling and floor tiling;
pipe and heating insulation.
905.11. Hazardous wastes.
(a) Materials classified as being household hazardous wastes shall be disposed of as directed
or provided for by the City of Ashland.
(b) Materials classified as being hazardous wastes but not as household hazardous wastes
must be handled according to local, state, and federal regulations.
905.12. Furnishings. Furniture, furnishings, carpets and carpet paddings shall be disposed of at
the Contractor’s Solid Waste Transfer Station.
905.13. Refusal of service.
(a) Solid Waste Not Placed In Cart. Solid waste will not be collected unless placed within a
cart of the volume chosen by the household service provided by the Contractor.
(b) Solid Waste In Excess of Cart Size.
(1) Solid Waste in excess of the cart size subscribed for will not be collected.
(2) Solid Waste placed outside of and next to a cart will not be collected.
(3) Carts with solid waste stacked or placed on top of them will not be collected.
(c) Comingling of Solid Waste & Recyclables. Solid Waste will not be collected if
recyclables or banned materials listed in Sec. 900.15, Ashland City Ordinances, are contained
within the solid waste.
905.14. Collection by unauthorized persons. From the time of placement of Solid Waste at
the collection point for collection by the City or its authorized Contractor or agent(s) in
accordance with the terms herein, the Solid Waste shall be and become the property of the City,
its Contractor, or its authorized agent(s). It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person
not authorized by the City to pick through, sort, collect, or pick up or cause any Solid Waste to
be picked through, sorted, collected, or picked up. Any and each such collection shall constitute
Page 905-6
a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
905.15. Unauthorized disposal prohibited. Dumping or disposal of garbage, trash, or other
waste materials is prohibited in any place within the corporate limits of the City of Ashland
except as provided by this chapter and Chapter 905, Ashland City Ordinances.
905.16. Use of Ashland Sanitary Landfill Site. The Public Works Director may use the site of
the former Ashland Sanitary Landfill for the processing of recyclable materials such as compost,
and the authorized burning of wood wastes.
905.17. Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be issued a citation by the
Director of Public Works or his/her designee or the Ashland Police Department. The issuance of
a citation in violation of this chapter shall not preclude proceeding under any other ordinance or
law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding under any other ordinance or law
relating to the same or any other matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this
section.
(b) Each collection in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as provided herein.
(c) When determining a penalty, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1) First Violation – The Public Works Director or his designee shall issue a reminder on
the proper preparation of Solid Wastes inclusive of a warning that citations will be issued
for further violations.
(2) Second Violation - $50 citation, plus court costs
(3) Third Violation - $200 citation, plus court costs.
(4) Fourth and Subsequent Violations – Not less than $200 citation but not more than
$2,000 plus court costs.
(d) Violations spaced more than three years apart shall be regarded as the first violation.
ADOPTED: 905 (1821) 1/14/2014
AMENDMENTS: 905 (1836) 10/28/2014; 905 (2016-1866) 01/26/2016
Page 911-1
CHAPTER 911. TAXICABS.
911.01. Definition of Taxicab. The term “Taxicab” shall include all vehicles transporting
passengers for remuneration for which patronage is solicited publicly by hailing, phone, email,
internet, or otherwise. This ordinance shall not be applicable to:
(a) Vehicles operating on established routes which are regulated by the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin;
(b) Vehicles rented to be driven by the renter or his agent, commonly known as rental cars;
(c) Vehicles operated solely as funeral cars or ambulances.
911.02. Taxicab License. No person, firm, association, or corporation shall for remuneration
transport passengers in a taxicab within the City of Ashland without first having obtained a
taxicab license.
911.03. Application for Taxicab License. Application for a taxicab license to operate one or
more taxicabs or an application to operate additional taxicabs under an existing license shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk upon forms furnished by the City Clerk, giving the address
from which the business is conducted and signed by the owner of the business or his duly
authorized agent. The application must also state for each vehicle to be operated the maker,
model and year of manufacture, the engine number, serial number, and capacity for passengers,
and the Wisconsin state certificate of title number and license number. The Police Chief shall
review and approve the application and the taxicab will be inspected and approved by the Police
Department.
911.04. Meeting. The application shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the Common Council
which shall examine the public convenience and necessity of granting such license. The City
Clerk shall notify the applicant of the time and place set for the meeting at which such
examination shall occur. The Common Council may hold such further meetings and procure
such additional information as it may deem necessary or advisable in making a determination.
911.05. License Fee. Taxicab license fees shall be at the rate established by the Comprehensive
Fee Schedule. The license year shall commence July 1 and end June 30.
911.06. Insurance. No taxicab license shall be issued until the applicant deposits with the City
Clerk a policy of liability insurance covering all vehicles to be included under the license. Such
policy shall describe each vehicle by maker, model and serial number, number of passengers
capable of being accommodated therein at one time, and the number of the state motor vehicle
license. Such insurance policy shall be issued by a company licensed to do business in the State
of Wisconsin, and shall insure the licensee against loss from liability bodily injury or death or
because of injury to or destruction of property of others, with the same limits of liability as are
contained in the then-current policies held by the City for its vehicles.
Page 911-2
911.07. Approval of Insurance. The policy of insurance shall be approved by the City Clerk,
and shall contain a provision that the same may not be cancelled before the expiration of its term,
except upon 10 days written notice to the City of Ashland.
911.08. Termination of Insurance Policy. The cancellation or other termination of any
insurance policy issued in compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and terminate
all licenses issued for the vehicles covered by such insurance policy, unless another policy shall
have been filed and approved pursuant to this section, and shall be in effect at the time of such
cancellation or termination.
911.09. Issuing Licenses. After approval as provided in Section 911.04, and upon filing with
the City Clerk a receipt of the City Treasurer showing payment of the required license fees, and
the policy of insurance as hereinafter provided, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a
taxicab license. Each license granted shall be numbered, and shall show the owner’s name and
place of business, and the number of vehicles which may be operated thereunder.
911.10. Transfer of Taxicab Licenses. A taxicab license may be transferred from one vehicle to
another under the same licensee by the City Clerk, upon application by the licensee and
inspection of the vehicle by the Police Department. The fee for a license transfer from one
vehicle to another shall be established by the Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
911.11. Renewal. Taxicab licenses may be renewed by the City Clerk upon the payment of the
fees and filing of policies of insurance as required for the original license.
911.12. Revocation. A taxicab license may be revoked at any time by the Common Council for
violation of any provision of this chapter, or for violation of any statutory provision affecting
taxicabs and their operation, or for violation of any statute or any such statutory provision
incorporated in a municipal ordinance. Such revocation may be for all vehicles or any vehicles
included under a license. When any taxicab license is revoked, it shall be the duty of the City
Clerk to immediately notify the licensee to cease immediately to operate the taxicab for which
the license has been revoked.
911.13. Condition of Vehicles. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep each taxicab in a clean
and sanitary condition, well painted, and equipped and maintained.
911.14. Transfer of Drivers. A taxi driver may not transfer from one taxicab licensee to another
licensee until such transfer has been recorded in writing with the Chief of Police.
911.15. Taxicabs to be Marked. The outside of the taxicab shall be conspicuously marked with
lettering indicating that it is a taxicab service or passenger shuttle service. A card containing the
name of the licensee, taxicab license number and rate of fares printed thereon shall be kept in a
conspicuous place inside of such vehicle at all times.
911.16. Seating of Passengers. No person operating a taxicab shall carry any passengers or
permit any passengers to ride on the running boards or anywhere except on the seats of the
Page 911-3
taxicab.
911.17. Passenger Limit. No taxicab will carry more passengers than can comfortably be seated
therein except that children five years of age or under may be carried by said passengers.
911.18. Front Passenger Seat. Only one passenger shall be permitted to ride in the seat with the
driver besides the driver or chauffeur of such taxicab.
911.19. In Motion. No taxicab shall take on or discharge passengers while in motion.
911.20. Curbside. All passengers shall be received or discharged at the curb or as near thereto as
the motor vehicle can approach. Passengers shall be allowed to alight or board a taxicab on the
right hand side only.
911.21. Speed. No taxicab shall travel faster than the limitation placed thereon by the laws of the
State of Wisconsin and by the ordinances of the City of Ashland.
911.22. Driver behavior. No driver of any taxicab shall engage in unnecessary conversation
with the passengers nor smoke a pipe, cigar, or cigarette while driving such taxicab containing
passengers, nor shall the driver solicit passengers by motion, calling by voice, or sounding horn
for the purpose of attracting the attention of such prospective passengers. No driver of a taxicab
shall operate a taxicab with a prohibited alcohol concentration, as defined in Wisconsin Statutes,
or while under the influence of an intoxicant, nor consume any alcohol or any controlled
substance except in conformity with a physician’s prescription, during the hours in which he or
she is engaged in operating a taxicab. No licensee shall permit a person who has been convicted
within the past five years of either a civil or criminal offense of operating a motor vehicle with a
prohibited alcohol concentration, as defined in Wisconsin Statutes, or while under the influence
of an intoxicant, to serve as a taxicab driver. Except while the taxicab is stationary, no driver
shall text message. Except while the taxicab is stationary, no driver shall engage in any cell
phone conversation except as is necessary for the conduct of the taxicab business.
911.23. Penalty. Any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than one dollar nor more than two hundred
dollars for each offense. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
ADOPTED: 911 (2016-1871) 6/14/2016
Page 912-1
CHAPTER 912. AMBULANCES.
912.01. Ambulance Defined. The term “ambulances” as used herein shall include all vehicles
used for carrying sick or injured persons for hire for which public patronage is solicited. This
chapter shall not apply to ambulances owned and operated by the City of Ashland.
912.02 Ambulance License Required. No ambulance for hire shall be operated upon the streets
of this City until a license shall have been obtained from the City Council therefor. Such
licenses shall be issued as of January 1st of each year and shall be effective for the period of one
year from such date unless sooner suspended, canceled or revoked as provided in this chapter
Any license taken out in any part of the year after January 1st. 1948 shall have to pay the full
license fee for the whole year. A separate license fee shall be paid for each ambulance used by
any person, firm or corporation, but application can be made for more than one license in the
same application.
912.03. Application for License. Application for license for ambulances shall be made by the
owner thereof upon blank forms to be furnished by the City Clerk. Such applications shall
contain the full name and address of the owner, the make, model and year of manufacture, and
Wisconsin State License number for the current year, engine number and factory number of the
motor vehicle.
912.04 Insurance.
(a) No license to operate an ambulance shall be issued unless and until the owner shall have
filed with the City Clerk an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of Wisconsin with which policy or policies shall insure said owner against
legal liability for damage to the property of others, including baggage, but excluding property of
the insured or property hired or leased by the insured and for the bodily injury or death of others,
except to employees of the insured engaged in the course of their employment resulting from the
accident or collision, for which said owner or the operator of said vehicle would be liable on
account of the liability imposed upon said owner or upon the operator of said vehicle for any acts
of negligence of the said owner or of his agents or servants or of any person operating said
vehicle with the permission and consent of said owner. Limits of liability shall be the same as
those contained in the then current policies of insurance held by the City for its own vehicles.
(b) Said policy shall further provide that it cannot be canceled until twenty days notice of
such cancellation shall have been given by registered mail to the City Clerk. The cancellation or
other termination of any insurance policy issued in compliance with subsection (4) of this
ordinance shall automatically revoke and terminate all licenses issued for the ambulance covered
by such insurance policy, unless another policy, as provided in subsection 912.04(a) shall be
provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination.
(c) The owner of any such ambulance, at the time of filing with the City Clerk said insurance
policy, shall also file a receipted bill from the insurance company issuing said policy showing
that the premium for said policy for one year has been paid in full.
Page 912-2
912.05. Inspection. No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully
examined by the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee, and found to be in a thoroughly
satisfactory and safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, of good appearance,
well painted and varnished, and that said vehicle complies with all the other provisions of this
chapter. Such examination shall be made and a report filed with the City Clerk before the
license is issued. If such examination and inspection shows that such vehicle does not comply
with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter no license shall be issued.
912.06. City Clerk Duties. The City Clerk shall keep a register of the name of each person
owning or operating any vehicle licensed under this ordinance together with the license number
and description, make, and the name and address of the insurance companies and the date of
expiration of such insurance and furnish the Chief of Police with a copy thereof. The records
shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times.
912.07. Revocation.
(a) Licenses granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked at any time by the City
Council for any violations of any of the provisions of this chapter and also if the vehicle for
which said license was issued shall not be of good appearance, clean, and safe. Licenses
suspended or revoked because the vehicle is not of good appearance, clean, or safe shall not be
reissued until the vehicle shall be put in good condition for use by the public to the satisfaction
of the City Council.
(b) When an ambulance license is revoked or canceled, as herein provided, it shall be the duty
of the City Clerk to immediately notify the owner to cease at once to operate the vehicle, for
which the license has been revoked, as an ambulance.
912.08. Fees. A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per vehicle shall be the license fee for the
license year or any fraction thereof, and shall be paid in advance.
912.09. Unlicensed Ambulance. No hearse or unlicensed ambulance shall be used or operated
as an ambulance except in cases of emergency when authorized by a member of the police force
of the City and in such instances such vehicle shall not be subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
ADOPTED: 912 (480) 1/13/1948
Page 921-1
CHAPTER 921. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL AT THE BAND SHELL.
921.01. Restrictions. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to consume intoxicating
liquors or fermented malt beverages without a permit in that area of the City of Ashland
commonly known as Band Shell Park or Memorial Park and adjacent areas, the legal description
of which is as follows:
Block 68 and Lots 21, 22, 23, and 24, Block 67, Vaughn’s Division; and
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24, Block 67 of Ellis Division, all
being located in the City of Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin.
921.02. Violation. Any violation of this chapter shall result in a forfeiture of not less than $25.00
nor more than $100.00.
921.03. Permits. Permits shall be available from the City Clerk for a 24 hour period for a fee of
$1.00 and each permit shall include the name of the group to whom the permit is issued and the
permit shall only cover those members making up that group.
ADOPTED: 921 (891) 7/12/1977
Page 922-1
CHAPTER 922. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES REGULATION.
922.10. Adoption of state statutes. The provisions of Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes and
all acts amending or supplementing the above cited statutes are adopted, so far as applicable,
except as otherwise provided by this ordinance. Any conflict between the provisions of this
chapter and Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be resolved in favor of the statutory
provision and the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
922.20 License fees.
(a) Class “A” Fermented Malt Beverage. The fee for a Class “A” fermented malt beverage
license shall be one hundred ($100) dollars per year.
(b) “Class A” Cider. There is no fee for a “Class A” Cider license.
(c) “Class A” Intoxicating Liquor. The fee for a “Class A” intoxicating liquor license shall
be five hundred ($500) dollars per year.
(d) Class “B” Fermented Malt Beverage. The fee for a Class “B” fermented malt beverage
license shall be one hundred ($100) dollars per year.
(e) “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor. The fee for a “Class B” intoxicating liquor license shall be
five hundred ($500) dollars per year.
(f) Reserve “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor. The initial issuance fee for a Reserve “Class B”
intoxicating liquor license shall be ten thousand ($10,000) dollars, plus the annual “Class B”
intoxicating liquor license fee. The $10,000 fee is a one-time fee, however, a reissuance of a
Reserve Class B intoxicating liquor license to a new licensee shall be subject to the ten thousand
($10,000) issuance fee. Bona fide clubs and lodges situated and incorporated in the state for at
least six years that apply for Reserve “Class B” licenses are exempt from paying the minimum
$10,000 initial issuance fee.
(g) “Class C” Wine. The fee for a “Class C” wine license shall be one hundred ($100) dollars
per year.
(h) Wholesaler’s Licenses for Fermented Malt Beverages. Effective July 1, 2011, the City of
Ashland will no longer issue wholesale fermented malt beverage (FMB) licenses. The
Wisconsin Department of Revenue will issue wholesale permits as established by 2011
Wisconsin Act 32.
(i) Special Six-month Licenses. The fee for a Special Six-Month “Class A” intoxicating
liquor, “Class B” intoxicating liquor, or Class “B” fermented malt beverage license shall be onehalf
the annual fee set for said license.
Page 922-2
(j) Provisional Licenses. Individuals who apply for the following licenses may be issued a
provisional retail license by the Clerk’s office: provisional Class “A” fermented malt beverage,
“Class A” Cider license, “Class A” intoxicating liquor, Class “B” fermented malt beverage,
“Class B” intoxicating liquor license or “Class C” wine license. The application will be
reviewed and approved by the Police Department. The fee for a provisional license shall be
$15.00 each with the exception of no fee for a “Class A” Cider license. The provisional license
will expire 60 days after its issuance or when the applicant receives a regular license, whichever
is first. The Clerk’s office may revoke the provisional license if the Clerk discovers the holder
made a false statement on the application. The City of Ashland will not issue a provisional
license for a “Class B” liquor license if the quota has been met. The City of Ashland will not
issue a provisional license for a “Class A” cider license if the applicant does not have a Class
“A” fermented malt license for the same location. No person may hold more than one
provisional retail license for each type of license applied for by the holder each year.
(k) Temporary Licenses. The fee for a Temporary Class “B” fermented malt beverage
(picnic) license shall be ten ($10) dollars per day. The fee for a Temporary “Class B” wine
license shall be ten ($10) dollars per day. If both a temporary Class ”B” fermented malt
beverage license and a temporary “Class B” wine license are obtained for the same event, only
one ten ($10) dollar fee shall be charged.
(l) Operator’s Licenses. Applicants for an operator’s license shall have the option of
applying for a one-year license or a two-year license. The fee shall be established in the City of
Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule. Licenses shall be issued for the fiscal year beginning
July 1 and ending June 30 of each year.
(m) Provisional Operator’s License. Individuals who apply for an operator’s license may be
issued a provisional operator’s license by the Clerk’s office pending action from the Common
Council and pending completion of State-mandated training requirements. The application must
be reviewed and approved by the Police Department. The provisional license shall expire sixty
(60) days after its issuance or when the applicant receives a regular operator’s license, whichever
is first. There shall be no additional fee for a provisional Operator’s License.
(n) Temporary Operator’s License. A temporary operator’s license to serve at a special event
may be issued to an individual employed by, or donating their services to, a nonprofit
organization. The license shall be valid for any one period from one day to fourteen days. No
person may hold more than one temporary license per year. The fee for a temporary license shall
be five ($5) dollars.
922.30. Quotas.
(a) “Class A” Intoxicating Liquor. The quota for “Class A” intoxicating liquor licenses in the
City shall be three (3) licenses.
Page 922-3
(b) “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor/Reserve “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor. The quota for
“Class B” intoxicating liquor licenses shall be determined by the provisions of Sec. 125.51(4),
Wis. Stats., which created a quota of twenty-six (26) regular “Class B” intoxicating liquor
licenses and twelve (12) Reserve “Class B” intoxicating liquor licenses. Under the provisions of
State Statute 125.51(4)(br)2., one additional Reserve “Class B” intoxicating liquor license may
be created for each increase of 500 population or fraction thereof to the population total of 8,797
(eight thousand, seven hundred ninety-seven).
(1) It is specifically provided that 1 of the 26 licenses described in this section
shall be reserved for granting to bona fide clubs, state, county, or local fair
associations, or agricultural societies, lodges, or societies that have been in
existence for not less than six months prior to the date of application.
(c) Unissued Licenses. If any “Class B” intoxicating liquor license within the above-stated
quotas is allowed to expire without an accepted request by the licensee that it be re-issued to
another licensee for the same premises, it shall be retired and shall reduce the quota for regular
“Class B” intoxicating liquor licenses by one. The Council may continue to retire licenses until
the number of 16 licenses available is reached to equal that of one for every 500 persons,
corresponding to a population of 8000. The initial issuance of a Reserve “Class B” intoxicating
liquor license shall require an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the entire membership of the
City Council.
(1) Exceptions: The Council may vote to issue extra licenses if circumstances are
such that the applicant:
(a) Is a full service restaurant with a seating capacity of 300 or more, or;
(b) Is a hotel with 50 or more rooms and a restaurant with a seating capacity of
150 or more, or;
(c) Is a banquet hall with a seating capacity of 400 or more.
922.40. Local options.
(a) Adoption of Off-Sale Provisions for “Class B” Intoxicating Liquor Licenses. The City of
Ashland elects to come under Sec. 125.51(3)(b), Wis. Stats., and provides that a retail “Class B”
license authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor to be consumed by the glass only on the
premises where sold and also authorizes the sale of intoxicating liquor in the original package or
container, in multiples not to exceed four (4) liters at any one time, and to be consumed off the
premises where sold. Wine, however, may be sold for consumption off the premises in the
original package or otherwise in any quantity.
(b) Licenses for Non-Intoxicating and Soda Water Beverages. Class “B” fermented malt
beverage licensees may also sell beverages containing less than one-half of one per centum
alcohol by volume without obtaining a special license to sell such beverages pursuant to Section
66.053(1) of the Wisconsin State Statutes.
Page 922-4
(c) Restrictions Related to Other Uses. No Class A or Class B intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage license shall be issued for any premise which is used as a laundromat;
or for any premise which is not used primarily for the sale of gasoline, groceries and/or bait, as a
restaurant, or for the sale of intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages.
(d) Excessive Number of Licenses Not Permitted. No more alcohol-related licenses than are
legally necessary to conduct the alcohol-related business shall be issued for a single, contiguous
premise.
(e) Delinquent Taxes and Fees. No license shall be granted or renewed for the operation of
any premises upon which real estate taxes, personal property taxes, assessments, or other
financial claims or forfeitures are delinquent or unpaid.
(f) Temporary Expansion of Premises Description. The Chief of Police, or the Chief’s
designee, shall be given authority to grant a temporary change to the licensed premise
description to accommodate special events.
(g) Failure to do Business. Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the initial issuance of
a Class A or Class B intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage license, a licensee shall be
open for business with adequate stock and equipment or the license shall be revoked by the
Common Council following a revocation hearing. If any Class A or Class B intoxicating liquor
or fermented malt beverage licensee shall suspend or cease doing business for a period of 180
days, the license shall be revoked by the Common Council following a revocation hearing. For
the purposes of this subsection, the licensed premises must be open for business a minimum of
twenty (20) hours per week or the license will be subject to the failure to do business provisions.
The 180 days shall not necessarily need to be successive to impose the provisions of this
subsection. This subsection shall not apply to the licenses held for the Bay Area Civic Center
premises, Chapel on Third Event Center, or for bona fide clubs, state, county, or local fair
associations, or agricultural societies, lodges, or societies that have been in existence for not less
than six months prior to the date of application.
922.41. Drinking in Public Places
Except as provided in Sections 922.42 and 501.06(e), it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to sell, serve, or consume, or possess an open container containing any type of
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage on any public street or sidewalk or public parking
area within the City.
922.42. Licensed Premises may include public rights-of-way.
(a) An applicant for a license under this Chapter who is qualified to obtain a permit under Sec.
508.41(c) may include in the description of the “premises” to be licensed a portion of public
right-of-way as described in Sec. 501.06(e).
Page 922-5
(b) No licensee may sell, serve, or allow the consumption of any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage on any public-right-of-way without a permit under Sec. 501.06(e). The
issuance of license under this chapter for premises including a public right-of-way does not grant
any right to the issuance, renewal, or non-revocation of a permit under Sec. 501.06(e).
(c) Any licensee who sells, serves, or allows the consumption of any intoxicating liquor or
fermented malt beverage on any public-right-of-way under a permit issued pursuant to Sec.
501.06(e), shall clearly demarcate for its customers the limits of the licensed premises, by means
such as but not limited to appropriate signage, stanchions or planters, as approved by the
Department of Planning and Development under the licensee’s permit issued pursuant to Sec.
501.06(e).
922.50. Revocation of licenses. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Council of the City of Ashland after notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his/her
business;
(c) Any violation of this ordinance;
(d) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
922.51. Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by
the City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepared to the licensee at his/her last
known address at least 72 hours prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a Police
Officer in the same manner as a court summons.
922.60. Penalty for violation of ordinance. Any person, firm, or corporation that shall violate
any of the provisions of this ordinance shall forfeit not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, plus the cost of prosecution.
Each day’s violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
922.611 Severance Clause
The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable and if any section, sentence, clause,
or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this ordinance, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this ordinance
shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
Page 922-6
922.612 Effective Date
This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and publication.
ADOPTED: 922 (1488) 1/25/2000
AMENDMENTS: 922 (1516) 6/26/2001; 922 (1644) 12/12/2006; 922 (1688) 9/30/2008;
922 (1780) 3/13/2012; 922 (1784) 4/17/2012;
922 (2015-1850) 8/25/2015; 922 (2015-1857) 9/29/2015;
922 (2016-1870) 5/31/2016; 922 (2017-1898) 9/26/2017;
922 (2018-1904) 6/12/2018; 922 (2019-1923) 12/03/2019
Page 923-1
CHAPTER 923. ALL TAXES, ASSESSMENTS, UTILITY CHARGES,
INDEBTEDNESS, AND FORFEITURES BE PAID BEFORE ANY LICENSE OR
CONTRACT IS GRANTED BY THE CITY OF ASHLAND.
923.10. Payments Required. No person, partnership, or corporation shall be issued a license or
have renewal of a license previously held or be granted a contract of any sort if that person,
partnership or corporation or any person, partnership or corporation owning the real estate or
personal property used in the licensed activity has any delinquent real or personal property taxes
on the real or personal property involved in the licensed activity, any outstanding assessments,
forfeitures, utility charges, or indebtedness owed to the City of Ashland.
923.20. Refusal of Contract. For those persons, partnerships, or corporations subject to refusal
to grant a license or renewal thereof or a contract of any sort, pursuant to this chapter, said
person, partnership, or corporation shall have opportunity to be heard as follows:
(a) The Committee of the Whole of the City of Ashland shall conduct a hearing on the
issues.
(b) Written Notice of the hearing shall be served not less than three (3) days or more than ten
(10) days from the date of the hearing.
ADOPTED: 923 (1748) 6/14/2011
Page 925-1
CHAPTER 925. CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
925.01. Adoption of State Statutes. The provisions of Sec. 134.65 and 134.66, Wis. Stats., and
all acts amending or supplementing the above cited statutes are adopted, so far as applicable,
except as otherwise provided by this chapter. Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter
and Sec. 134.65 and 134.66, Wis. Stats., shall be resolved in favor of the statutory provision and
the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
925.02. License Required. No person may sell, expose for sale, or possess with intent to sell,
any cigarettes or tobacco products in the City of Ashland without first obtaining a license from
the City of Ashland.
925.03. License Period/Annual License Fee. The annual fee for a license to sell cigarettes
and/or other tobacco products in the City of Ashland shall be charged in accordance with the
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule. All licenses will be issued for the fiscal year
beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each year.
925.04. Revocation of License. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Common Council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his/her
business;
(c) Any violation of this ordinance;
(d) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
925.05. Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the
City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place
of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepared to the licensee at his/her last known
address at least 72 hours prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a Police Officer
in the same manner as a court summons.
925.06. Penalty for Violation of Ordinance. Any person, firm, or corporation that shall violate
any of the provisions of this ordinance shall forfeit not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, plus the cost of prosecution.
Each day’s violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
ADOPTED: 925 (1443) 7/28/1998
AMENDMENTS: 925 (1782) 3/13/2012
Page 926-1
CHAPTER 926. IMPLEMENTATION OF WISCONSIN’S SMOKE-FREE LAW.
926.01. Smoking Ban Adopted. The City hereby adopts by reference the provisions of Sec.
101.123, Wis. Stats., “Smoking prohibited,” pertaining to the statewide smoking ban.
926.02. Definitions. For purposes of enforcing the smoking ban in the City of Ashland, the
following definition shall apply instead of the definition found in state statutes:
(a) Enclosed Place. Shall mean all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded by
walls, doors, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than 50 percent of the
combined surface area of the vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall
includes a retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or
permanent. A 0.011 gauge screen with an 18 by 16 mesh count is not a wall.
(b) Inspection and Enforcement. The City Police Department shall have the power to enter
any premises subject to the smoking ban under state law to ascertain whether the premises are in
compliance with this section and take appropriate enforcement action pursuant to Sec. 101.123,
Wis. Stats.
(c) “Electronic smoking device” means any device that may be used to deliver any
aerosolized or vaporized substance to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not
limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, or e-hookah.
(d) “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar,
cigarette, pipe, hookah, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for
inhalation, including marijuana, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form, or
the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking
in this Article.
926.03. Penalties. Penalties for violation shall be as prescribed in Sec. 101.123, Wis. Stats.
ADOPTED: 926 (1729) 7/13/2010
AMENDED: 2020-1927 (02/25/2020)
Page 931-1
CHAPTER 931. BICYCLES.
931.01. Licensing. No person shall ride or use a bicycle upon any public street, highway,
boulevard, or alley in the City of Ashland unless the same shall have been licensed and
registered as herein provided.
931.02. Registering. Every owner of a bicycle shall list and register with the Chief of Police his
or her name and address, the name of the manufacturer of his or her bicycle, its number, style
and general description.
931.03. License Tags and Records. The Chief of Police shall provide and keep at police
headquarters a suitable record of license applications and registrations. The Chief shall provide
suitable identification tags which shall be stamped with a distinguishing Ashland, Wisconsin
number. The owner shall affix and keep affixed this tag to the bicycle for which it is issued.
The tag must be kept clean and visible at all times and upon demand of any member of the Police
Department, the owner shall exhibit such tag for the purpose of identification with proof of
ownership.
931.04. License Fee. The fee for such license and tag shall be $1.00 payable at the City of
Ashland Police Department. Bicycles must be licensed and registered before they are operated
in the City. Once obtained, a license shall be valid until the person obtaining the license no
longer owns the bicycle. The issuance of the tag and the official record thereof shall be the only
evidence of the license and registration of the bicycle. No written license certificate shall be
issued.
931.05. Tags Not Transferable. Tags may not be transferred. No person shall affix to any
bicycle a tag which was not issued for that bicycle. Should a tag be lost, the owner is
responsible for purchasing a new tag.
931.06. Interference with Rights. No person shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any part of
any public street, highway, boulevard or alley in such manner as to interfere with the rights of
other persons using such streets, highways, boulevard or alley.
931.07. Riding Manners. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public street,
highway, boulevard or alley except in the careful and prudent manner nor shall any person
propel or operate a bicycle upon any public street, highway, boulevard or alley while carrying
thereon another person upon such bicycle.
931.08. Speed Limits. No bicycle shall be ridden upon any public street, highway, boulevard or
alley at a speed faster than is reasonable and proper under traffic conditions at the same time and
every bicycle shall be operated with due regard to the safety of the operator and other persons
upon the streets, highways, boulevards and alleys of the city.
931.09. Traffic Signs. Persons riding or propelling bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and
signals and stop when and as required by such signals and signs.
Page 931-2
931.10. Headlights. No bicycle shall be operated on any street, highway, boulevard or alley
during any period of time from one half hour after sunset to one half hour before sunrise without
headlights visible from the front of such bicycle for not less than 200 feet which light device
shall be firmly attached to said bicycle and properly lighted nor without an adequate lighted red
tail light or in lieu thereof an adequate reflector attached to and visible from the rear of such
bicycle for a distance of not less than 200 feet.
931.11. Age Restrictions. No person under the age of twelve years shall operate a bicycle upon
any public street, highway, boulevard or alley between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M.
931.12. No Riding Abreast. No person shall operate a bicycle upon any public street, highway,
boulevard or alley abreast of or to the left of another person operating a bicycle except while
passing such bicycle.
931.13. Traffic Rules. Every person riding a bicycle upon any public street, highway, boulevard
or alley shall observe all traffic rules and regulations of the city and shall turn only at
intersections as permitted by such rules and regulations, signal for all turns and stops, ride at the
right hand side of the street or highway as near as may be to the street curb as to the left when
passing vehicles, or bicycles that are slower moving and on the right side when meeting. It shall
be unlawful to do any trick riding on any street, highway, boulevard or alley or to operate a
bicycle without both hands on the handlebars.
931.14. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall upon
conviction thereof pay a forfeiture of not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and the costs of
prosecution. In addition to said forfeiture, previously provided, the Court may, upon conviction,
suspend the operator from the use of the registered bicycle for such reasonable period as it may
determine.
ADOPTED: 931 (402) 1/11/1938
AMENDMENTS: 931 (698) 4/11/1961; 931 (1194) 6/13/1989; 931 (1245) 12/11/1990;
931 (1463) 3/09/1999
Page 933-1
CHAPTER 933. BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER BLADES, AND ROLLER
SKATES.
933.01. Prohibited Areas. No bicycles, skateboards, roller blades or roller skates shall be
operated upon any sidewalk in any portion of the downtown business district in the area
described as follows: bounded on the east by the center line of Stuntz Avenue, on the west by the
center line of 9th Avenue West, on the north by the center line of Lake Shore Drive and on the
south by the north right-of-way line of Third Street (Third Street sidewalks are not included).
933.02. Pedestrian Right of Way. Bicycles, skateboards, roller blades and roller skates may be
operated on the sidewalks in public parks and in residential districts, but in single file only.
Under all circumstances, the users shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians using the
sidewalks, and due and proper care shall, at all times, be exercised by the users for the
pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on a sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle or skate board
shall be reduced to a speed which is no greater than necessary to continue the operation of the
bicycle or skateboard without the rider dismounting, and shall not be increased until the
pedestrian has passed. When approaching a pedestrian, roller blade and roller skate users shall
yield the right-of-way to the pedestrian and slow to a speed which allows for safe, controlled
passing of the pedestrian.
933.03. Violations. Violations of this ordinance shall be enforced in the same manner and in
accordance with the provisions as Chapter 504, Ashland City Ordinances, adopting Sec. 346.77 -
346.95, Wis. Stats.
ADOPTED: 933 (1315) 4/12/1994
Page 934-1
CHAPTER 934. NEWSPAPER RACKS.
934.01. Selling Newspapers. It shall be unlawful for any person to display, exhibit, offer for sale
or sell any newspaper on any street, sidewalks or other public place within the City except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
934.02. Racks required; exception. No newspaper shall be displayed, exhibited, offered for
sale or sold in, on, or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the City except from
newspaper racks constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of Section 934.03,
below; provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to sales of newspapers made by
vendors who are present at the time of such sale.
934.03. Rack specifications.
(a) As used in this ordinance, the words newspaper racks mean racks or holders for the
exhibition, display and sale of newspapers without any vendor being present at the time of sale,
which are constructed and installed in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Newspaper racks shall be fabricated completely of metal and shall contain no sign or
lettering other than the names of the newspapers sold therefrom and a suitable marking for coin
receptacles.
(2) Newspaper racks shall have displayed in a conspicuous place the name and address
of the person or corporation responsible for the placement and maintenance of the rack.
(3) The height of any rack shall not exceed four (4) feet above the grade of the sidewalk
on which the same is placed and the overall width of any newspaper rack shall not exceed forty
(40) inches.
934.04 Notice to Building Inspector. No newspaper rack shall be installed or maintained on any
street, sidewalk or public place within the City without the owner thereof first filing a written
notice with the office of the Building Inspector, specifying the exact location of such rack.
934.05. Location of Rack.
(a) No newspaper rack shall be located where it would endanger the safety of persons or
property, obstruct the vision of motorists, or unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the ingress into and egress from any building.
(b) No newspaper rack shall be located:
(1) Within six (6) feet of any fire hydrant, fire or police alarm box, or other emergency
facility.
(2) By attaching it in any manner to any fire alarm box shaft, ornamental street light pole,
traffic signal or any stop sign post;
Page 934-2
(3) Where it projects beyond any curb line onto the roadway;
(4) Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk:
(5) Within three (3) feet of the curb return at any intersection;
(6) Within three (3) feet of the curb return of any driveway;
(7) Within fifteen (15) feet of the approach to any sign marking a designated bus stop, or
three (3) feet forward of such sign;
(8) Where it restricts access to a bus shelter or a bus bench.
(9) Where it interferes with loading or unloading at the front and rear doors of buses;
(10) In any handicap access ramp;
(11) In such a manner as to reduce the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians to
less than six (6) feet;
(12) On any boulevard or other place planted with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees.
(c) Newspaper racks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building.
Newspaper racks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen (18) inches nor more
than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of the curb. Newspaper racks placed adjacent to the
wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and no more than six (6) inches from the
wall.
934.06. Use and Appearance. All newspaper racks shall be used solely for the distribution of
newspapers, magazines and other printed materials and shall be maintained by the applicant in a
state of good repair and neat appearance.
934.07. Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the City of Ashland Police
Department or Building Inspector through the issuance of citations.
934.08. Violation. Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a forfeiture of not less
than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 plus all costs and prosecution including reasonable
attorneys fees.
ADOPTED: 934 (1135) 6/14/1988
Page 950-1
CHAPTER 950. SYNTHETIC DRUG ESTABLISHMENTS.
950.01. Findings. The Common Council of the City of Ashland finds as follows:
(a) Synthetic drugs have become a serious public health problem in the City of Ashland. By
some reliable accounts, the drug abuse problem represented by synthetic drugs is second only to
the problem of alcohol abuse.
(b) The effects of synthetic marijuana use, in particular, are seen by health care providers,
mental health care providers, and law enforcement officers, far more frequently than the effect of
the abuse of other “legal” substances such as paint, glue, or aerosols.
(c) The use of synthetic marijuana can result in headaches, vomiting, confusion, agitation,
anxiety, aggressive behavior, paranoia, inability to speak, dystonia, short-term memory deficits,
seizures, hallucination, and loss of consciousness.
(d) For some individuals, the use of synthetic marijuana can be seriously destabilizing to
their mental health. The effects of synthetic drug use can sometimes be long-term.
(e) Members of the Ashland community have been incarcerated as a result of their behaviors
stemming from synthetic drug use, causing expense to them, their families, and the criminal
justice system, and causing heartache to their family members and friends.
(f) In one period of less than a year, the Behavioral Health Services unit of Ashland’s
Memorial Medical Center, managed 80 patients who admitted to the use of synthetic drugs.
(g) During the same period, eight patients were seen at Memorial Medical Center whose
primary reason for seeking hospital services was synthetic drug use. The cost of hospital care in
these eight cases ranged from $3,652.36 to $64,458.80. The total hospital cost for the eight cases
was $181,978.92, for an average per-patient average cost of $22,747.37. The hospital charges
represent only a portion of the total costs of care for each of these individuals.
(h) The Ashland Police Department reports that, even though it has only recently started
formally tracking synthetic drug cases, it has estimated that during the period from January 1,
2012, to September 12, 2013, no fewer than 26 cases requiring approximately 322 hours of
police time were attributable or partly attributable to the use of synthetic drugs. These cases
involve emergency (mental health) detentions, theft, operation while intoxicated, drug calls,
traffic accidents, fraud, bail jumping, probation hold, sexual assault, and warrants.
(i) At least some of the synthetic drugs used in the City of Ashland have been purchased
from local commercial sources.
(j) The Ashland City Council has received numerous oral and written statements, at two
separate City Council meetings, from individuals who have been negatively affected by synthetic
Page 950-2
drugs, and has received a petition bearing several hundred signatures seeking the control of their
sale.
950.02. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meaning hereinafter ascribed to them:
(a) Synthetic drug. The term synthetic drug means one or more of the following:
(1) A substance that a reasonable person would believe is a synthetic drug; or
(2) A substance that a reasonable person would believe is being purchased or sold
synthetic drug; or
(3) A substance that a person knows or should have known was intended to be consumed
by injection, inhalation, ingestion, or any other immediate means, and consumption was
intended to cause or simulate a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant,
depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of a controlled
substance on Schedule 1. Synthetic drug does not mean food and drug ingredients,
alcohol, legend drugs, tobacco, or dietary supplements.
(b) Synthetic drug establishment. Synthetic drug establishment means any business
establishment where any person engages in the sale of synthetic drugs.
950.03. License required. No person shall engage in the business of operating a synthetic drug
establishment either exclusively or in connection with any other business enterprise without first
obtaining a license for each synthetic drug establishment.
950.04. Application for license. Application for a synthetic drug establishment license shall be
made to the City Clerk on forms supplied by the city containing the following information:
(a) A description of the business.
(b) A description of the location of the premises to be licensed.
(c) The full name and addresses of the property owner, business owner, lessee and manager,
operator and the date of birth of each.
(d) If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners
including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address
of the synthetic drug establishment.
(e) Whether any of the aforementioned individuals have ever been convicted of any crime or
offense other than a traffic offense, and if so, a description of the offense as to time, place, date
and disposition.
Page 950-3
950.05. Annual license.
(a) The annual license fee shall be $100.
(b) A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business.
(c) The licensee shall display the license in a prominent place on the licensed premises at all
times.
(d) A license, unless revoked, shall be effective July 1st through June 30th annually.
950.06. Issuance.
(a) No license under this chapter shall be issued unless it is approved by the City Clerk upon
advice from the police department and unless the establishment has passed fire and health
inspections. The City Clerk shall not approve any license if he or she has reasonable grounds to
believe:
(1) That the granting of said license would result in violations of the law;
(2) That the license application contains false and misleading statements;
(3) The establishment is a public nuisance under Codification Ordinance 450; or
(4) That other good cause exists for denying the license.
(b) If the Chief of Police or the City Clerk finds that they do not have adequate information
to evaluate the license application, they may direct the applicant, manager or agent to appear at
any reasonable time and place to give under oath information concerning the application. No
license shall be granted to any applicant who refuses to appear and cooperate with the
investigation.
950.07. Prohibited acts. No synthetic drug establishment shall:
(a) Remain open between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day.
(b) Sell synthetic drug products that do not include the name, phone number and address of
the manufacturer, packer and distributor of the product.
(c) Sell synthetic drug products that do not identify all commodities within the package.
including organic and non-organic, chemically synthesized substances and compounds.
(d) Sell synthetic drug products to any individual under the age of 21.
Page 950-4
(e) Sell synthetic drug products that do not comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations, including those related to packaging, labeling and weights and measures.
(f) Be located within 500 feet of any park, school, day care facility or area zoned residential
or mixed-use neighborhood. This restriction shall not apply to a synthetic drug establishment
that was conducting business at the location indicated in the application and making sales of
synthetic drugs at that location on or before the effective date of this Ordinance.
950.08. Suspension and revocation of licenses. The City Clerk may revoke or suspend any
license issued pursuant to the chapter, if, after giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard on
the matter, the City Clerk finds:
(a) The licensee has violated a provision of this Ordinance or any other law relating to the
conduct of its operation including, but not limited to state, federal or local laws; or
(b) The licensee secured the license through misrepresentation or fraud or misstated any
material fact in the application; or
(c) Failure of the licensee to cooperate with the police, fire or health officers in any
investigation relating to their operations or failure to admit police officers into the establishment
at any time when people are present in the establishment; or
(d) The establishment is operated in such a way as to endanger public health or safety as
evidenced by one or more incidents involving serious health effects or law enforcement
involvement resulting from the sale of synthetic drug products; or
(e) The establishment is operated in such a way as to constitute a public nuisance under
Chapter 450, Ashland City Ordinances.
950.09. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a licensing decision of the City Clerk under this
chapter may appeal such decision to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the
City Clerk within 15 days after such decision is rendered. The decision of the City Council is the
final administrative decision of the city.
950.10. Other applicable laws. This chapter is intended to complement state and federal laws
regulating synthetic drugs.
ADOPTED: 950 (1817) 9/23/2013
Page 950-5
Page 971-1
CHAPTER 971. JUKE BOXES, PIN BALL MACHINES, AND OTHER SIMILAR
MUSICAL MECHANISMS AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
971.01. Proper Permits. No person, organization, or agency shall operate and maintain within
the limits of the City of Ashland juke boxes or similar coin operated musical mechanisms, pin
ball machines or other similar mechanical amusement devices without first securing a license for
the same as hereinafter described.
971.02. Application for Licenses. Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk
upon such forms as required by the Clerk, and the said Clerk is authorized to issue the same
upon the payment of the required annual fee.
971.03. License Fees. The fee for such licenses shall be as follows: each juke box, coin
operated musical mechanism and pin ball machine or similarly operated amusement device shall
be charged a yearly fee in accordance with the City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
All licenses shall be issued for the fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each year.
With each license, there shall be issued by the City Clerk such stamp or label as can be attached
to the machine showing that a license fee has been paid.
971.04. Stamp. Such stamp as may be attached to any pin ball machine or other similarly
operated amusement device, pursuant to license, may be transferred to other pinball machine or
other similarly operated amusement device during any fiscal year by surrendering the stamp
issued for such machine and obtaining in lieu thereof a new stamp, and by payment to the City
Clerk of transfer fee of One Dollars ($1.00).
971.05. Violations. Any person or agency violating the provisions of this chapter upon
conviction thereof shall forfeit the sum of not less than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) nor more
than Fifty Dollars ($50.00), and upon failure to pay the same shall be confined to the County Jail
of Ashland County until such forfeiture is paid, not to exceed, however, a period of thirty (30)
days.
971.06. Revocation of Licenses. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Common Council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on his/her
business;
(c) Any violation of this ordinance;
Page 971-2
(d) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
971.07. Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the
City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepared to the licensee at his/her last known address
at least 72 hours prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a Police Officer in the same
manner as a court summons.
ADOPTED: 971 (488) 7/13/1948
AMENDMENTS: 971 (932) 1/08/1980; 971 (1778) 3/13/2012
Page 978-1
CHAPTER 978. BURNING OF GRASS, LEAVES, AND GARBAGE.
978.01. Purpose. This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and
to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of and
visitors to the City of Ashland due to the air pollution and fire hazards of open burning, outdoor
burning, and refuse burning.
978.02. Applicability. This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and refuse burning within the
City of Ashland, except as provided below
(a) This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or
natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
(b) This chapter does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating
device within a building used for human or animal habitation unless the material being burned
includes refuse as defined in Section 978.04.
(c) This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or
kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities.
(d) This chapter does not apply to an outdoor wood fired furnace as defined in Section
978.04.
(e) Sec. 978.08 does not apply to:
(1) The fire area located on the Northland College campus west of Wheeler Hall; and
(2) Campfires built within 20 feet of the Lake Superior shore on snow or ice or, before
June 1, on sand, provided such fires are not built on Maslowski Beach, Sixth Avenue Beach,
Kreher Park beach, or Bayview Park beach west of the pier, as such parks and beaches are
designated under Section 463.04, Ashland City Ordinances.
978.03. Reserved.
978.04. Definitions.
(a) "Campfire" means a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking not including a
fire intended for disposal of waste wood or refuse.
(b) "Clean Wood" means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished, or coated with a
similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives, and does not contain resins or
glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
(c) “Confidential papers” means printed material containing personal identification or
financial information that the owner wishes to destroy.
Page 978-2
(d) “Extinguished” in relation to a fire means that there are no flames, glowing embers,
smoke, or steam, and that all combustible materials are cold to the touch.
(e) "Fire Chief" means the Chief of the Ashland Fire Department or other person authorized
by the Fire Chief.
(f) "Outdoor Burning" means open burning or burning in an outdoor wood-fired furnace.
(g) "Open Burning" means kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion
are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or a chimney.
(h) "Outdoor Wood-fired Furnace" means a wood-fired furnace, stove or boiler that is not
located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals.
(i) "Refuse" means any waste material except clean wood.
978.05. General prohibition on outdoor burning and refuse burning. Open burning, outdoor
burning, and refuse burning are prohibited in the City of Ashland unless the burning is
specifically permitted by this chapter.
978.06. Materials that may be burned. Unless a specific written approval has been obtained
from the Fire Chief or the Department of Natural Resources, only the following materials may be
burned in an open fire, incinerator, burn barrel, furnace, stove or any other indoor or outdoor
incineration or heating device. *
(a) Clean wood.
(b) Brush.
(c) Weeds, as allowed under Section 978.07 and papers as allowed under Section 978.11.
978.07. Burning brush, clean wood, and weeds. Open burning of weeds, brush, stumps, and
clean wood is allowed only in accordance with the following provisions
(a) All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance free manner, when wind
and weather conditions are such as to minimize adverse effects and not create a health hazard or
a visibility hazard on roadways, railroads, or airfields. Open burning shall be conducted in
conformance with all local and state fire protection regulations.
(b) No open burning shall be undertaken during periods when either the Fire Chief or the
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources has issued a burning ban applicable to the area,
except for barbecue gas, and charcoal grills, unless such fires are included in the burning ban.
(c) Grass, leaves, weeds, brush, and tree trunks, stumps, and limbs may be burned in areas
zoned for agricultural use, upon receiving permission from the Fire Chief, provided that the
Page 978-3
burning is for agricultural purposes only. Prior to the actual start of burning, the permittee shall
notify the Fire Department and the Dispatch Center for the Ashland Police Department. The
permittee and the property owner where the burning occurs shall be responsible for any damage
caused by the fire. Refuse other than grass, leaves, weeds, brush and tree trunks, stumps, and
limbs, may not be burned pursuant to this section.
(d) Grass, leaves, weeds, brush, and tree trunks, stumps, and limbs may be burned in areas
zoned for industrial use, upon receiving permission from the Fire Chief, provided that the
burning is for the purpose of site development for new construction only. Before issuing any
permit under this section, the Fire Chief shall perform an on-site inspection of the area where the
burning is to occur and may impose conditions on the permit, including but not limited to
requirements for on-site fire suppression equipment and personnel, and time and weather
requirements. Prior to the actual start of burning, the permittee shall notify the Fire Department
and the Dispatch Center for the Ashland Police Department. The permittee and the property
owner where the burning occurs shall be responsible for any damage caused by the fire. Refuse
other than grass, leaves, weeds, brush and tree trunks, stumps, and limbs, may not be burned
pursuant to this section.
(e) Fires set for forest, prairie or wildlife habitat management are allowed with the approval
of the Department of Natural Resources.
(f) Bonfires are allowed only if approved by and in accordance with provisions established
by the Fire Chief.
(g) Burning of trees, trunks, stumps and limbs, brush, or weeds is allowed only when snow
cover is present at the burn site, or if it is not, then only if approved by the Fire Chief and if in
accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
(h) In emergency situations such as natural disasters burning that would otherwise be
prohibited is allowed if specifically approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
(i) Except for barbecue gas, and charcoal grills, open burning under this section shall only be
conducted at a location at least 10 feet from the property line.
(j) Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person of at
least eighteen (18) years of age until the fire is extinguished, as defined in Section 978.04(d).
The person shall have readily available for use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be
necessary for the total control of the fire.
(k) No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk.
(l) Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no burning shall be undertaken within 25 feet
of any combustible material, combustible wall or partition, exterior window opening, exit access
or exit unless authorized by the Fire Chief.
(m) No open burning may be conducted on days when the Fire Chief issues a burning ban.
Page 978-4
(n) Any otherwise lawful fire may be prohibited, or if already in progress, may be ordered
extinguished, by the Fire Chief or any law enforcement officer of the City of Ashland, if the
atmospheric conditions are such as to make the fire a hazard to public health or safety or to
public or private property, or if the fire is producing excessive flame or smoke so as to endanger
public health or safety or public or private property.
978.08. Backyard fire rings. Outdoor campfires and small bonfires for cooking, ceremonies, or
recreation are allowed provided:
(a) The fire is confined by a control device or structure such as an enclosure, fire ring, or fire
pit, no more than three feet wide at its widest point.
(b) All other provisions contained in this chapter are followed.
(c) No complaints related to such fires are received. If a complaint is received while a fire is
burning, the Fire Chief or any law enforcement officer may order the fire extinguished. The Fire
Chief may also prohibit all outdoor campfires and small bonfires at the address based on safety,
health, or nuisance concerns, or may place specific conditions on allowing outdoor campfires
and small bonfires at the address. The Fire Chief shall inform the complainant of any action
taken as a result of the complaint. Any party aggrieved by the Fire Chief’s response to a
complaint may have that response reviewed by the City Council’s Committee of the Whole.
Upon review, the Committee of the Whole shall determine if safety, health, or nuisance concerns
make it advisable to prohibit, limit, or condition outdoor campfires and small bonfires at the
address. The decision of the Committee of the Whole shall be the final decision of the City.
978.09. Burn barrels. No person shall use or maintain a burn barrel in the City of Ashland.
978.10. Fire department practice burns. The Ashland Fire Department or Wisconsin
Indianhead Technical College may burn a standing building if necessary or useful for firefighting
practice upon compliance with any applicable requirements of the Department of
Natural Resources.
978.11 Exemption for burning certain papers.
(a) Notwithstanding Section 978.06, paper and cardboard products may be used as a starter
fuel for a fire that is allowed under this ordinance.
(b) Small quantities of confidential papers from a residence may be burned if necessary to
prevent the theft of financial records, identification or other confidential information.
(c) Confidential papers from a commercial enterprise shall be shredded or destroyed in a
manner other than burning.
(d) A fire set for burning of a small quantity of confidential papers shall be subject to and
comply with all other requirements of this ordinance.
Page 978-5
978.12 Burning permits.
(a) The Fire Chief is authorized to issue burning permits under subsections 978.07(c), (d),
and (f).
(b) A burning permit issued under this chapter shall require compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and any additional special restrictions deemed necessary to protect
public health and safety.
(c) Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. Any violation of this chapter or the burning permit shall void the permit.
(d) A permit shall only be issued upon payment of the permit fee as established in the City’s
Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
978.13. Sky lanterns.
(a) Definition. A “sky lantern” is a small hot air balloon made of paper or other fabric with
an opening at the bottom where a small fire is suspended.
(b) Prohibition. No person shall light, launch, or allow to become airborne any sky lantern.
978.14. Liability. A person starting, using, or maintaining an outdoor fire; or lighting,
launching, or allowing to become airborne a sky lantern; shall be responsible for all fire
suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
978.15. Right of entry and inspection. The Fire Chief or law enforcement officer or Building
Inspector of the City of Ashland may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the owner or occupant of the premises denies
access to the property for this purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained in
accordance with Sec. 66.0199 Wis. Stats.
978.16. Enforcement and penalties.
(a) The Fire Chief and any law enforcement officer of the City of Ashland are authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(b) The penalty for violation of any portion of this chapter shall be a forfeiture of not less
than $50 or more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution. Penalties are doubled for second and
subsequent offenses.
______________________
* Materials such as those listed below (but not limited to those listed below) are banned because
burning them can cause adverse effects to human health and the environment or because they can
be recycled.
Page 978-6
(a) Rubbish or garbage including but not limited to food wastes, food wraps, packaging,
animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or
demolition debris or other household or business wastes.
(b) Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating device for energy
recovery subject to the restrictions in Chapter NR 590, Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(c) Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
(d) Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood, composite wood products
or other wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with preservatives.
(e) Any plastic material including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or
urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers.
(f) Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
(g) Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and other materials that
must be recycled in accordance with the recycling ordinance.
ADOPTED: 978 (1831) 8/19/2014
AMENDMENTS: 978 (2015-1844) 5/26/2015; 978 (2016-1866) 01/26/2016
Page 983-1
CHAPTER 983. CHANGING THE CITY BASE OR PLANE OF REFERENCE FOR
ELEVATIONS AND FIXING THE ELEVATION OF PRIMAL BENCH MARKS.
983.01. Official City Base. The official City Base, or Plane of Reference for elevations in the
City of Ashland, Wisconsin is hereby changed and fixed at the Sea-Level Datum of 1929
established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey or at a plane which is five hundred
ninety and seven hundred eighty-nine thousandths (590.789) feet below the City base, or Plane
of Reference for elevations established by Ordinance No. 151 passed by the City Council on
September 20, 1897.
983.02. Benchmarks Description. The following described bench marks established by the
United States and Geodetic Survey are hereby declared to be primal Bench Marks of the City of
Ashland, Wisconsin and that the adjusted elevations established by said United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey for said Bench Marks are hereby declared to be the true and correct elevation
with reference to the official City Base or Plane of Reference:
(a) Chiseled Square. At Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin, at the southeast corner of the
Post Office building (Old Post Office), and on the center of the cast iron drain pipe in the stone
wall. A chiseled square, marked by the chiseled letters B.M. on the wall. Elevation 651.032 feet.
(b) 650 (U.S.G.S.). At Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin, in the east face of the Post
Office (Old Post Office), and at the northeast corner. A United States Geological Survey
standard disk, stamped ?650 Wis. 1919" and set vertically. Elevation 649.283 feet.
(c) D-16. At Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin, in the south brick wall of the Chicago
and Northwestern Railway Station, 6 feet from the southeast corner of the building, 8 feet east of
the waiting room door, and above 30 inches above platform. A standard disk, stamped ?D 16
1934" and set vertically. Elevation 670.776 feet.
(d) A 17. At Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin, on the Chicago and Northwestern
Railway, at Minneapolis, St. Paul and Sault Saint Marie Railway overpass bridge 1318, and in
the top of the north end of the bridge seat of the east concrete abutment. A standard disk
(U.S.C.G.), stamped ?A 17 1934". Elevation 682.453 feet.
983.03. Future Descriptions. All official elevations hereafter established in the City of Ashland,
Wisconsin shall be described with reference to their elevations as compared with the official base
in feet with decimal parts of a foot. No grade or official elevation shall be established other than
by Ordinance and in the manner described in this ordinance.
983.04. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. Ordinance No. 151, in so far as it related to the
establishment of a City Base or Plane of Reference for elevations is hereby repealed. All grade
elevations given in reference to said ordinance will be determined with reference to the City
Base
Page 983-2
established in this ordinance without making any change in the grade by adding 590.789 feet to
the figures given in the ordinance. The same applies to other ordinances passed previous to the
passage of this ordinance.
ADOPTED: 983 (459) 6/11/1946
Page 987-1
CHAPTER 987. ESTABLISH A BULKHEAD LINE ON CHEQUAMEGON BAY
BETWEEN TENTH AVENUE WEST AND EIGHTEENTH AVENUE WEST IN THE
CITY OF ASHLAND, WISCONSIN.
987.01 Establishment of Bulkhead Line. A bulkhead line is hereby established on
Chequamegon Bay as follows: Commencing at a point on the presently established shoreline
north 32° 26' west a distance of 300 feet from the intersection of the west line of Tenth Avenue
West and the north line of Front Street in the City of Ashland; thence continuing north 32° 26'
west on said course a distance of 150 feet to a point; running thence south 57°?34' west a distance
of 366 feet to a point; running thence south 65° 21' west a distance of 369.4 feet to a point;
running thence north 64° 46' west a distance of 178.6 feet to a point; running thence north 32°
26' west a distance of 678.5 feet to a point; running thence south 57° 34' west a distance of 1040
feet to a point located on the extended west line of 15th Avenue West; running thence south 32°
26' east a distance of 706.9 feet along said extended west line of 15th Avenue West to a point;
running thence south 57° 34' west a distance of 781.4 feet to a point on the westerly edge of the
pier presently in place and formerly owned by the Charcoal Iron Company of America; running
thence 18° 30' east a distance of 380 feet, more or less, to the shoreline.
987.02. Purpose of Establishment. Said bulkhead line is established in the public interest to
establish a practical shore line connecting existing land, to provide for the elimination of
unsightly, undesirable mud and marsh areas and to provide for the protection and improvement
of the shoreline and existing land and structures along Chequamegon Bay. The owners of lands
abutting on said shore are authorized to fill and improve their property up to said bulkhead line.
987.03. Placement of Bulkhead Line on Map. The City Clerk is directed to cause the bulkhead
line hereby established to be delineated on maps which shall be submitted to the Public Service
Commission of Wisconsin for its approval under Section 30.11(3), Wisconsin Statutes and to file
copies of said map and this ordinance as provided in this section.
ADOPTED: 987 (733) 11/10/1964
Page 990-1
CHAPTER 990. AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A BULKHEAD LINE ON
CHEQUAMEGON BAY BETWEEN 10TH AVENUE WEST AND APPROXIMATELY
150’ E OF EAST LINE OF MACARTHUR AVENUE IN THE CITY OF ASHLAND,
WISCONSIN.
990.01. Establishment of Bulkhead Line. A bulkhead line along that part of the sore of Lake
Superior as set forth in the following description and attached map is hereby established and
determined, subject to approval of the Department of Natural Resources
990.02. Legal Description. A bulkhead line located in blocks 96, 97, and 98, Ashland Proper,
City of Ashland, Ashland County, Wisconsin, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Northeast corner of Block 27, Ashland Proper, which is marked
by a 1” iron pipe: thence S 89 degrees 51’ 59” E, assumed bearing, 33.00 feet; thence
N 00 degrees, 00’ 31” E along the centerline of 10th Avenue West, 1011.99 feet to a
two (2) inch inside diameter iron pipe located at the Ordinary High Water (O.H.W.M.)
of elevation 602.00 feet Inter-national Great Lakes Datum 1955 (IGLD), which is the
point of beginning of said bulkhead line; thence N 00 degrees 00’ 31” E, 471.80 feet;
thence N 89 degrees 52’ 56” E, 100.25 feet; thence S 11 degrees 13’ 29” W, 31.10 feet
to a two (2) inch inside diameter iron pipe located at the O.H.W.M. of elevation 602.00
feet (IGLD), which is the end of said bulkhead line; thence S 83 degrees 32’ 45” W,
913.65 feet to the point of beginning.
990.03. Public Interest. Said bulkhead line is established in the public interest to establish a
practical shoreline connecting existing land, to provide for the elimination of unsightly,
undesirable mud and marsh areas and to provide for the protection and improvement of the
shoreline and existing land and structures along Chequamegon Bay. The owners of lands
abutting on said shore are authorized to fill and improve their property up to said bulkhead line.
990.04. Certified Copies. Three certified copies of this ordinance, together with three true and
correct copies of such map, be submitted to the Department of Natural Resources for its
approval, furthermore than upon the return and receipt of such approved maps, the same be filed
as follows: one (1) copy in the office of Department of Natural Resources, one (1) copy in the
office of Ashland City Clerk, one (1) copy in the Register of Deeds for and in Ashland County,
Wisconsin.
ADOPTED: 990 (980) 3/9/1982
Page 991-1
CHAPTER 991. REPEAL ORDINANCE 538 ESTABLISHING AND GOVERNING THE
EQUIPMENT AGENCY.
991.01. Repeal of Ordnance 538. Ordinance 538 is hereby repealed.
991.02. Equipment Assigned. All equipment assigned to the equipment agency is hereby placed
under the control of the Public Works Department and use thereof shall be accounted for in the
Operation and Maintenance portion of the Public Works budget.
ADOPTED: 991 (1030) 5/08/1984
Page 992-1
CHAPTER 992. AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A BULKHEAD LINE ADJACENT
TO THE SO-CALLED COMMERCIAL DOCK IN CHEQUAMEGON BAY IN THE
CITY OF ASHLAND, ASHLAND COUNTY, WISCONSIN.
992.01. Establishment. A bulkhead line is hereby established adjacent to the so-called
Commercial Dock in Chequamegon Bay, which is situated northwesterly of Block 406, Ellis
Division, and westerly of Block 31 of said Ellis Division, City of Ashland, Ashland County,
Wisconsin, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the southwesterly corner of Block 66 of said Ellis Division (said
southwesterly corner is marked by a 1" iron pipe which is offset N 31 degrees 46'07" W.,
1.00 feet from said true southwesterly corner);
Thence N 31 degrees 46'07" W along the easterly right-of-way line of Ellis Avenue, 522.38
feet;
Thence S 58 degrees 13'53" W and perpendicular to said easterly right-of-way line, 102.12
feet to a 2" inside diameter iron pipe located at the ordinary high water mark (O.H.W.M.) of
602.00 feet (I.G.L.D.), which is the point of beginning (P.O.B.) of said bulkhead line;
Thence N. 44 degrees 57'46" W, 310.07 feet;
Thence S 45 degrees 02'14" W., 21.00 feet;
Thence N 44 degrees 57'46" W, 117.83 feet;
Thence N 45 degrees 02.14" E, 25.38 feet;
Thence N 44 degrees 57'46" W, 181.99 feet;
Thence S 45 degrees 02'14" W, 20.67 feet;
Thence N 42 degrees 51'43" W., 485.37 feet;
Thence N 52 degrees 20'15” E, 132.96 feet;
Thence N 73 degrees 56’ 33" E, 186.20 feet;
Thence S 13 degrees 43'10" E, 367.26 feet;
Thence S 44 degrees 57'46" E 363.74 feet to a 2" inside diameter iron pipe located at the
O.H.W.M. of 602.00 feet (I.G.L.D.), which is the end of said bulkhead line.
Said bulkhead line encompasses 3.30 acres, more or less.
Said bulkhead line subject to all easements and restrictions of records.
Page 992-2
Bearing are assumed. Based on said easterly right-of-way line of Ellis Avenue, which is
assumed to bear N 31 degrees 46'07" W.
992.02. Public Interest. Said bulkhead line is established in the public interest to establish a
practical shoreline connecting existing land, to provide for the construction and maintenance of a
municipal marina and to provide for the protection and improvement of the shoreline and
existing land and structures along Chequamegon Bay.
992.03. File Copies. The City Clerk is directed to cause the bulkhead line hereby established to
be delineated on maps which shall be submitted to the State of Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources for its approval under Section 30.11 (3), Wisconsin Statutes, and to file copies of said
map and this ordinance as provided in this section.
ADOPTED: 992 (1065) 3/11/1986
Page 993-1
CHAPTER 993. ESTABLISHMENT OF A BULKHEAD LINE ON THE
CHEQUAMEGON BAY OF LAKE SUPERIOR BETWEEN NORTH 6TH AVENUE
WEST AND THE EAST END OF THE SO-CALLED CITY DOCK (16TH AVENUE
EAST).
993.01. Establishment of Bulkhead Line. Pursuant to Section 30.11(3) Wisconsin Statutes, a
bulkhead line is hereby established along that part of the shores of Lake Superior hereinafter
described, and more particularly as shown on the attached map. The bulkhead line hereby
established is subject to the approval of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
993.02. Location of Bulkhead Line. The bulkhead line is located in Blocks 4-7, 10, 14, 19, 20,
28, 29, 30, 37, 38, 49 and 406-409 of the Ellis Division; and Blocks 68-71 and 406 of the
Vaughn's Division; all in the City of Ashland, Wisconsin, more specifically described as follows:
Commencing at the corner common to sections 33 and 34 T.48N. R.4W.; and sections 3 and 4;
T.47N.; R.4W.; which is marked by an Ashland County aluminum monument; Thence
N04º45'04"W 5147.36 feet to the point of beginning of said bulkhead line; which is also on the
current and original shoreline of Lake Superior;
Thence S67°31'43''W along said bulkhead line 154.93 feet; Thence N76°36'04''W 52.03 feet;
Thence N38°19'00''W 127.63 feet; Thence N88°53'42''W 56.05 feet; Thence N49°42'41''W
112.67 feet; Thence S79°16'04''W 87.45 feet; Thence N42°38'35''W 110.89 feet; Thence
S58°17'10''W 703.09 feet; Thence S31°14'28''E 32.42 feet; Thence S45°01'40''W 130.88 feet;
Thence N89°23'08''W 121.70 feet; Thence N31°16'24''W 54.61 feet; Thence S67°30'34''W 94.35
feet; Thence N81°52'48''W 276.66 feet; Thence N85°15'33''W 42.37 feet; Thence N50°18'04''W
82.40 feet; Thence N28°38'31''W 121.45 feet; Thence N34°28'51''W 222.26 feet; Thence
N33°46'19''W 736.47 feet; Thence S57°28'15''W 187.80 feet; Thence S01°04'24''W 48.15 feet;
Thence S34°55'21''E 832.56 feet; Thence S20°49'07''W 73.37 feet; Thence S04°50'58''E 38.47
feet; Thence S19°17'26''E 22.62 feet; Thence S44°07'44''W 141.47 feet; Thence S6º36'18"E
120.32 feet Thence S27º39'17"E 87.47 feet; Thence S48º58'48"E 124.32 feet; Thence
N89º37'48"W 117.39 feet; Thence N33º19'31"W 167.42 feet; Thence N2º13'02"W 72.11 feet;
N27°27'09''W 67.16 feet; Thence N23°47'12''W 101.16 feet; Thence S75°53'05''W 142.81 feet;
Thence S03º49'19"W 115.04 feet; Thence S67°14'39''E 53.01 feet; Thence S10º01'17"E 159.97
feet; Thence S45º16'00"E 74.28 feet; Thence S30º32'02"W 217.13 feet; Thence S14º21'30"W
52.48 feet; S68°48'30''W 29.83 feet; Thence S26°02'48''E 37.45 feet; Thence S14º21'30"W
163.18 feet; Thence S51º13'32"W 289.06 feet; Thence S82º27'36"W 78.08 feet; Thence
N65°38'52''W 63.31 feet; Thence N76º43'16"W 37.68'; Thence S54º07'10"W 70.22 feet; Thence
S23º01'35"W 62.38 feet; Thence S66º50'08"W 89.40 feet; Thence N31°24'32''W 67.21 feet;
Thence N57°22'16"E 18.70 feet; Thence N32º13'07"W 302.23 feet; Thence S57°46'53"W 31.76
feet; Thence N35°56'08"W 49.28 feet; Thence N35°15'09"W 307.50 feet; Thence
S51º56'58"W 32.24 feet; Thence S34º35'19"E 319.63 feet; Thence S08°12'54''W 109.53 feet;
Thence S22°46'54''W 176.14 feet; Thence S29°16'59''W 160.85 feet; Thence S36°45'36''W
145.63 feet; Thence S52°56'46''W 69.96 feet; Thence S46°11'35''W 136.01 feet; Thence
S54°40'32''W 99.61 feet; Thence S73°49'59''W 102.38 feet; Thence N35°44'48''W 54.49 feet;
Thence N64°42'43''W 43.05 feet; Thence N32°52'43''W 144.86 feet; Thence N57°10'53''W 32.16
feet; Thence S48°44'31''W 15.91 feet; Thence S15°08'24''E 54.75 feet; Thence S31°21'38''E
121.50 feet; Thence S75°40'34''E 32.66 feet; Thence S12°04'46''E 105.00 feet; Thence
S75°55'35''W 66.05 feet; Thence N12º04'46"W 50.17 feet; Thence N33º06'29"W 245.08 feet;
Thence N23°22'23''W 85.59 feet; Thence S51°38'33''W 33.43 feet; Thence S28°52'41''E 303.09
feet; Thence S31°27'04''W 32.97 feet; Thence S39°35'20''W 161.23 feet; Thence S57°26'55''W
Page 993-2
145.00 feet; Thence N89º00'29"W 113.80 feet; Thence S57°33'03''W 65.78 feet; Thence
S04º57'07"W 83.82 feet; Thence S23°22'27''E 194.13 feet; Thence S35º41'12"W 372.03 feet;
Thence S82°48'40''W 256.64 feet; Thence N45°40'55''W 306.15 feet; Thence N16°49'39''W
373.02 feet; Thence S66°36'56''W 141.15 feet; Thence S79°34'22''W 78.69 feet; Thence
S41°27'48''W 66.71 feet; Thence S44°07'44''E 413.43 feet; Thence S37°38'06''E 74.74 feet;
Thence S46°22'57''E 248.45 feet; Thence N59°21'04''E 15.38 feet; Thence S47°53'59''E 238.64
feet; Thence S12º54'56"E 88.86 feet; Thence S00°19'33''W 85.13 feet; Thence S06°30'56''W
118.27 feet; Thence S41°33'38''W 105.68 feet; Thence S49°58'09''W 328.59 feet; Thence
S48°00'35''W 326.67 feet; Thence S51°44'58''W 315.78 feet; Thence S54°27'18''W 49.45 feet;
Thence S62°05'16''W 99.85 feet; Thence S76°18'14''W 75.36 feet; Thence S71°57'15''W 232.09
feet; Thence S84°32'44''W 193.05 feet; Thence N71°28'38''W 79.12 feet; Thence N46°54'42''W
199.40 feet; Thence N74°28'08''W 51.68 feet; Thence N65°49'17''W 41.37 feet; Thence
N33°53'24''W 774.05 feet; Thence N41°19'53''W 63.85 feet; Thence S56°52'25''W 317.87 feet;
Thence S31°55'18''E 410.07 feet; Thence S32°02'32''E 372.23 feet; Thence S32°25'06''E 403.81
feet; Thence S46°13'49''W 136.68 feet; to the point of ending of said bulkhead line;
Thence S57°52'20''E 126.84 feet to the original meander line of Lake Superior; Thence
N66°24'52''E continuing along said original meander line; 176.75 feet; Thence N59°46'42''E
165.39 feet; Thence N44°23'18''E 153.91 feet; Thence N35°22'34''E 128.27 feet; Thence
N27°05'06''E 84.19 feet; Thence N89°55'19''E 149.23 feet; Thence N73°40'01''E 111.26 feet;
Thence N62°45'29''E 120.43 feet; Thence S69°13'55''E 62.55 feet; Thence N60°05'37''E 309.73
feet; Thence N53°56'25''E 299.78 feet; Thence N41°51'20''E 161.06 feet; Thence N54°07'05''E
160.58 feet; Thence N27°53'34''E 143.92 feet; Thence N34°28'41''E 118.22 feet; Thence
N42°15'26''E 131.01 feet; Thence N11°58'01''E 115.75 feet; Thence N40°40'06''W 16.94 feet;
Thence N42°52'21''E 1353.87 feet; Thence N56°34'35''E 396.07 feet; Thence N22°37'59''E
281.10 feet; Thence N69°20'13''E 312.61 feet; Thence N51°13'32''E 661.50 feet; Thence
N14°21'30''E 261.52 feet; Thence N30°32'02''E 236.79 feet; Thence S89°37'48''E 511.99 feet;
Thence S89°13'20''E 166.24 feet; Thence N62°12'19''E 234.60 feet; Thence N76°30'57''E 481.62
feet; Thence N61°25'20''E 201.14 feet; Thence N69°36'13''E 870.91 feet; Thence N78°04'28''E
52.95 feet to the point of beginning.
993.03. Public Interest. Said bulkhead line is established in the public interest to establish a
practical shoreline connecting existing land, provide a recoverable shoreline in cases of dredging
or excavation, and to provide a regularized shoreline for the protection and improvement of the
shoreline and existing and proposed land and structures along Chequamegon Bay. The owners of
the lands abutting on said shore are authorized to fill and improve their property up to said
bulkhead line with necessary permits from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and
in accordance to the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
ADOPTED: 993 (1777) 3/13/2012
CHAPTER 165. COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE.
165.01 Adoption. The City of Ashland “Comprehensive Fee Schedule” is hereby adopted, as authorized by
Wisconsin State Statutes. The Fee Schedule is attached to this Chapter as Exhibit 1.
165.02 Public Access. The City of Ashland “Comprehensive Fee Schedule” shall be permanently on file and
open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk after its adoption.
ADOPTED: 165 (2018-1912) 12/11/2018
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-2
EXHIBIT 1: CITY OF ASHLAND COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
FEE OR CHARGE
Ambulance Fees Resident Non-Resident
Basic Life Support $ 850.00 $1000.00
Advance Life Support 1 $ 950.00 $1100.00
Advance Life Support 2 $1100.00 $1250.00
SCT Base Rate $1250.00 $1350.00
Mileage $ 17.00 $ 17.50
Oxygen $ 75.00 $ 75.00
Spinal Immobilization $ 150.00 $ 150.00
BLS on Scene Care $ 250.00 $ 250.00
ALS on Scene Care $ 700.00 $ 850.00
Apparatus Fees
Engines $ 400.00 per hour
Aerial Apparatus $ 550.00 per hour
Tanker $ 350.00 per hour
Command Vehicle $ 150.00 per hour
Ambulance $ 245.00 per hour
Ambulance for Local Events $ 95.00 per hour/per ambulance
*Non-Subscriber Ambulance Fee $ 1957.00 per call
Brush Truck $ 200.00 per hour
Ice Angel $ 400.00 per hour
Snowmobile/Rescue Trailer $ 175.00 per hour
Haz Mat Trailer $ 300.00 per hour
Extrication Equipment $ 150.00 per hour
*A non-subscriber fee will be charged to townships that do not currently have an agreement with the City of Ashland for
fire protection and emergency medical services. This amount will be charged on top of the non-resident fees.
Accommodation Tax Permit Application fee $ 5.00
Airport
Hangar Use
Daily fee $ 25.00 + tax
Monthly fee $ 80.00 + tax
Lease $ .10 per square foot + tax
Parking $ 15.00 per month + tax
Dog License
Neutered/Spayed $10.00
Unneutered/Unspayed $17.00
Cat License
Neutered/Spayed $ 8.00
Unneutered/Unspayed $13.00
Kennel Fees
First 12 Dogs $15.00
Each additional Dog over 12 Dogs $ 5.00
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-3
NSF Fee
Non-Sufficient Fund (NSF) Fee $25.00 per Check
Residential Garbage Collection
48 Gallon Container $ 9.50/month
64 Gallon Container $14.25/month
96 Gallon Container $19.00/month
Burning Permit Fees
Bonfire Permit [978.16(f)] $10
Burning for Agricultural Clearing [978.16(c)] $50
Burning for Industrial Clearing [978.16(c)] $50
Building Permits: All fees shall double if the work requiring a permit is commenced without a permit. Additionally, a
$100 - $1,000 penalty may be enforced against any person, contractor, company, or agent who commences work on a
project which does not have a valid building permit. All permits, unless otherwise specified, shall be valid for one year (12
months) from the time of issuance.
A. Residential Construction Permits
1. New UDC Homes
Plan review fee $250
Building permit/ Inspections $250 Manufactured Home
$300.00 Custom or Stick Built Home
State Seal $ 50
Electrical permit $ 75
Plumbing permit $ 5.00 per fixture - $50 minimum
Occupancy permit $ 75
2. Alteration/Remodel or Additions (Except siding and roofing projects)
? Miscellaneous repairs under $5,000 in labor and materials, which do not involve structural alteration, do not
require a permit.
? Projects over $5,000 in labor and materials, or structural alteration at any cost require a permit.
$5.00/$1,000 of project cost - Minimum fee is $25.00
3. Roofing and Siding Projects (including replacement / repair of roof or siding)
? Roof or siding projects with material cost under $1,000 do not require a permit
Roof projects with material cost over $1,000 $40
Siding projects with material cost over $1,000 $40
4. Handicapped ramps No fee with proof of disability but permit is still required
*Materials and labor are considered at market value, as if a paid contractor was installing.
B. Commercial Construction Permits
(Note: a development permit and site plan review may be required for commercial projects.)
1. New Construction and Additions
? Does not apply to unfinished storage buildings or airplane hangars
$0.25 per square foot- Minimum fee is $250.00
2. Alterations and Remodeling to existing structure (including handicapped ramps)
?Certificate of Appropriateness maybe required on designated Historical Structures or within designated Historical
Districts
? Miscellaneous repairs under $5,000 in labor and materials, which do not involve structural alteration, do
not require a permit. The cost of furniture and removable equipment/fixtures is excluded from project cost.
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-4
? Projects over $5,000 in labor and materials or structural alteration at any cost
require a permit.
$5.00/$1,000 for first $1,000,000 of project cost - Minimum fee is $50.00
$3.00/$1,000 for project cost over $1,000,000
3. Roofing and Siding Projects (including replacement / repair of roof or siding)
*Roof or siding projects with material cost under $1000 do not require a permit.
Roof projects with material cost over $1000 $ 50.00
Siding projects with material cost over $1000 $ 50.00
4. Warehouse / self-storage / hangars
$5.00 per 100 square feet - Minimum fee is $50.00
5. Communication structures/towers
$2.50 per $1,000 of project cost – Minimum fee is $50.00
6. Occupancy Permit $100.00 flat fee
(Additional fee not required if issued in conjunction with a Building Permit.)
C. Permit Fees Pertaining to All Construction
1. Plumbing Permits
New plumbing fixtures $ 5.00 per fixture- $25.00 Minimum
2. HVAC Permits
HVAC (New) $ 75.00
HVAC (Replacement) $ 50.00
? Residential HVAC replacement requires no permit if heating type & location of heating system is
unchanged.
New outdoor furnace $25.00
3. Electrical Permits
Establish new service $ 75.00
? No permit required for replacement of existing service panel or wiring update.
4. Renewal of Expired Building Permit 25% of original permit fee
5. Accessory structures under 200 square feet $ 25.00 flat fee
6. Accessory structures over 200 square feet $ 5.00 per 100 sq ft - $25 minimum
7. Accessory structures – Storage canopy (of any size) $ 25.00
8. Decks $ 50.00
9. Fences
Fences up to 50’ in length $ 25.00
Fences 50’ – 200’ $ 50.00
Fences over 200’ $ 75.00
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-5
D. Demolition and Moving Permits
1. Moving Permits
Move buildings or structures that are under 600 sq ft $10.00
Move buildings or structures that are over 600 square feet) $50.00
2. Demolition Permits
Demolitions up to 600 square feet $ 15.00
Demolitions over 600 square feet
$5.00/$1,000 of project cost - Minimum fee is $30.00
E. Miscellaneous Permits
1. Early Start Permit (for footings and foundation)
Residential $ 25.00
Commercial $100.00
2. Certificate of Appropriateness No Fee
Planning, Zoning & Development Fees: All fees shall double if the work requiring a permit is commenced without a
permit.
A. Development Permit Applications (i.e., Change of Use, Bed & Breakfast
Establishment & Fill Permits) $ 75.00
B. Site Plan Review Applications:
1. New Development less than 10,000 square feet $150.00
Review Fee for Amended Site Plan that requires Plan Commission review $ 75.00
Review fee for Amended/Revised Plan Set that requires City staff review $ 25.00
2. New Development greater than 10,000 sq ft. $350.00
Review fee for amended site plan that requires plan commission review $175.00
Review fee for amended/revised plan set that requires only city staff
review (not plan commission) $ 75.00
C. If engineering services are required as part of the site plan review, the following fees apply to land disturbances
greater than 10,000 square feet
Erosion Control $100.00
Storm Water Management Plan Review $100.00
D. Conditional Use Permit Applications (Class 2 Public Hearing Notice) $200.00
Republication Fee $ 50.00
E. Map (rezoning) and/or Text Amendment to Unified Development Ordinance $200.00
Applications (Class II Public Hearing Notice)
Republication Fee $100.00
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-6
F. Variance and Appeal Request Applications $500.00
(Class I Public Hearing Notice)
Republication Fee $100.00
G. Comprehensive Plan Amendment Applications $500.00
H. Right-of-Way Vacation / Discontinuance Applications (Class III Notice)
Alley Vacation / Discontinuance Application $250.00
Street Vacation / Discontinuance Application $500.00
Republication Fee $150.00
I. Sale Price of Vacated / Discontinued City Right-of-Way $ 0.25 / sq. ft.
J. Land Transfers
Public Notification Fee for Request to Purchase City Owned Property $150.00
Republication Fee $100.00
Down Payment for Request to Purchase City Owned Property $500.00
K. Request to Name or Rename Public Improvements
Public Notification Fee for Request $150.00
Republication Fee $100.00
L. Special Planning Commission Meetings (requested by applicant) $400.00
M. Application for Certified Survey Map Review $ 50.00
N. Application for Plat Map/ Subdivision Plat Review
1. Preliminary Plat Review
Principle Fee $150.00
Fee for each lot in excess of one $ 25.00
2. Final Plat Review
Principle Fee $ 75.00
Fee for each lot in excess of one $ 5.00
O. Application for Planned Unit Development (PUD) Review
1. General Development Plan (PUD-GDP)
Principle Fee $150.00
Fee for each lot in excess of one $ 25.00
2. Specific Implementation Plan (PUD-SIP)
Principle Fee $ 75.00
Fee for each lot in excess of one $ 5.00
P. Three Year Keeping of Animal Permit (i.e. Chickens, Rabbits, Beekeeping) $ 20.00
Q. Public Art Permit Application (i.e. Murals) $ 50.00
R. Sign Permits & Applications
1. Permanent Signs $ 50.00
2. Permanent Electrically or Mechanically Energized Animated Sign
(i.e. message boards) and Joint/Area Identification Sign Application $ 50.00
3. Temporary Sign Permit $ 10.00
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-7
4. A $50 - $500 penalty may be enforced against any person, contractor, company, or
agent who commences installation or modification of a sign which does not have a
valid sign permit.
S. Billboard Licenses
1. Per sign annual fee $50.00
2. License transfer fee $10.00
3. A $50 - $500 penalty may be enforced against any person, contractor, company, or agent who
commences install of a billboard which does not have a valid billboard license.
T. Assessment Record Copy Fee
1. Self service copy or print (fee per page) $1.00
2. Full service copy or print (fee per page) $2.50
U. Comprehensive Plan Purchase $44.00
(Plan is available in a PDF format on the City’s website; no fee charged)
V. Unified Development Ordinance Purchase
Unbound $20.00
Bound & Divided in Three-ring Binder $25.00
Digital Copy (on a CD) $15.00
(U.D.O. is available on the City’s website; no fee charged)
W. Revocable Occupancy Permit $50.00
X. Formal Zoning Determination $25.00
Y. Residential Rental Registration Fee
Registration fee per building $10.00
Z. Mobile tower siting fees
Class 2 colocation permit $500.00
New construction or substantial modification $3,000.00
AA. Weights and Measures Based on WI DSPS Census fee of estimate number of devices
Current estimate per device $10.00
* Planning, Zoning and Development Permit and License Fees are refundable if the permit is not issued. The Application
Fees and Republication Fees are nonrefundable.
FAXES – SENDING AND RECEIVING (sales tax included)
1st Page $2.00
Each Additional Page $1.00/each
PRINTING AND COPYING FEES (sales tax included)
Black & White Copies/ Prints
8.5” x 11” Single-Sided Copy $0.20
8.5” x 11” Double-Sided Copy $0.30
8.5” x 14” Single-Sided Copy $0.30
11” x 17” Single-Sided Copy $0.40
11” x 17” Double-Sided Copy $0.60
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-8
Color Prints
8.5” x 11” Single-Sided Print $1.00
8.5” x 14” Single-Sided Print $1.50
11” x 17” Single-Sided Print $2.00
24” x 36” Single-Sided Print $9.00
Computer Disc (CD/DVD) or electronic file preparation (data, maps, exhibits) $15.00/each
Preparation Time (Research, Reformatting, Plotting and Organization of Data)
First half hour is free, thereafter: $17.50/half hour
Map/Exhibit Plotting or Printing Fee
8.5 x 11 (color) $ 2.00/first page $1.00/each
thereafter
8.5 x 11 (black and white) $ 1.00/first page $.50/each
thereafter
8.5 x 14 (color) $ 2.00 first page $1.25/each
thereafter
8.5 x 14 (black and white) $ 1.00/first page $0.75/each
thereafter
11 x 17 $ 2.00 each
24 x 36 $10.00/each
36 x 42 $12.00/each
Large or custom sizes $ 1.50/sq ft
Premium Paper (Heavy Weight Glossy or Satin) $ 3.00/sq ft
PUBLIC WORKS SPECIAL CHARGES
Permanent Right-of-Way Application/Inspection Fees $150.00*
*All Right-of-Way fees shall quadruple if the work requiring a permit is commenced without a permit unless approved as
an emergency as defined in 501.02(g).
Temporary Obstructions on Sidewalk Application/Inspection Fees $30.00
Temporary Obstructions on Highways Application/Inspection Fees $30.00
Revocable Occupancy Application/Inspection Fees $50.00
Public Utility Right-of-way User Registration/Application $150.00
Administrative Fee for Invoicing $15.00 per invoice
Storage Fee per Ordinance 501 (tax included) $10.00 per day, per
Item stored
After Hours Inspection (After Hours is considered any time of day
between 3 p.m. and 7 a.m. M-F and Saturday and Sunday) $100.00
*Overnight Parking Lots A, B, C, D, E (tax included) $25.00 per month for month-to-month Lease
$20.00 per month for yearly lease
*Overnight parking leases will only be available to those who verify necessity as determined by the City. Vehicle must
have a current lease parking permit as established in 601.04(c) of the Ashland City Ordinances.
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-9
Spring Clean-up Event
Minimum Charge $10.00
Per Car Load $10.00
Per Pick-up or Small Trailer Load $10.00
Per Large Trailer Load $30.00
Marina Rates – Subject to State and Local Sales Tax
Slip Rates
$50 per boat foot for full service slips
$850 flat rate for boat maximum 22’ - NO Electricity
$1075 flat 23’ – 29’;
$1300 flat 30’ – 36’;
$1525 flat 37’ – 43’;
$1750 flat 44’ – 50’;
$1975 flat 51’ – 57’
$50 per foot for Charters, Taxis, and any other boat for hire
$150 surcharge on single slips (no minimum service in single slips)
Storage Rates
$15 per boat foot for summer/winter storage if on a trailer or stand
$20 per boat foot for Non-Tenant summer/winter storage if on a trailer or stand
$75 Trailer or cradle storage $150 Non-Tenant trailer storage
$40 stand storage summer/winter $ 40/ea. Stand rental
Miscellaneous
$5 for Pump Outs < 32’ boat $10 for Pump Outs > 32’ boat
$80/hr. Service/Repair
Travel Lift
Travel Lift: Lift boat and/or splash - $9.00 per foot Non Tenant - $10.00 per foot
Hold Boat in Sling: $50
Use of power washer for Tenants: 15 min free >15 min $10.00 “1/2 hour limit”
Use of Power Washer for Non Tenants: $25 “1/2 hr limit”
Transient Slip Rates
Daily: Breakwall $2 Slips $1/ft., minimum 25’ for A, B, & C Docks
Daily Commercial: $2.00/ft.
Weekly (7 Days): Slips: $1/ft. min 24’ (1 Free Night) A, B & C Docks
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-10
Monthly: Breakwall & Slips
$450 25’ Max
$500 30’ Max
$550 35’ Max
$600 40’ Max
$650 45’ Max
$700 50’ Max
$750 55’ Max
$800 60’ Max
Boat Launch
Annual Boat Launch Fees: $50 (includes tax)
Senior Rate (65+), Military and Disabled: $40 (includes tax)
Daily Boat Launch: $ 5.00
Daily Commercial Boat Launch (excluding fishing guides) $150.00
Daily Parking: $ 5.00
Overnight Parking: $ 5.00
RV Overflow Parking @ Sunset Launch or Hot Pond $ 25.00/night
Special Assessment Rates
Sidewalk Special Assessment Rates 40% of the Unit Rate
Special Assessment Letter (7 day service) Prepaid by Requestor $10.00
Special Assessment Letter (7 day service) Billed to Requestor $15.00
Special Assessment Letter (1 day service) Prepaid by Requestor $25.00
Special Assessment Letter (1 day service) Billed to Requestor $35.00
Wastewater Lab Fees
Laboratory Analysis for Each Unit
Coliform Bacteria Total $25.00
Coliform Bacteria Most Probable Number (MPN) $25.00
Coliform Bacteria Standard Plate Count (SPC) $25.00
Fecal Coliform Membrane Filter (MF) $25.00
E. Coli Bacteria Total $20.00
E. Coli Bacteria Most Probable Number (MPN) $25.00
Nitrate/Nitrite 3 Day $20.00
Nitrate/Nitrite RUSH 1 day $40.00
Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) $40.00
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) $20.00
Phosphorus Total $15.00
pH $ 7.00
Temperature $ 4.00
Conductivity $ 8.00
Fluoride $20.00
Sanitary Sewer Service Charges as stated in Chapter 711, Ashland City Ordinances, Appendix A
City Clerk Fees
Council Packet $10.00
Committee of the Whole Packet $ 5.00
Planning Commission Packet $ 5.00
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-11
Budget Book $25.00
Miscellaneous License Fees
Arcade License $ 25.00
Mobile Home Park License $ 2.00/each space
Pawnbroker License $210.00
Recycling Junk Dealer License $ 50.00
Cigarette and Tobacco License $ 75.00
Jukebox License $ 15.00/each machine
Coin Operated Game $ 20.00/each machine
Duplicate Coin Operated License $ 5.00/per license
Mobile Concession Street Vendor $ 50.00
Taxicab License $ 25.00/per vehicle
Taxicab License Transfer $ 25.00/per vehicle
Operator’s License $ 20.00 (one year)
Operator’s License $ 30.00 (two year)
Duplicate License (other than coin) $ 10.00/per license
Change of Agent $ 10.00
Publication Fee Per Liquor License $ 40.00
Transient Merchant/Solicitor $40.00 1st day;
$5 each additional day
Special Meeting of 3rd Party
Council $900.00
Committee of the Whole $600.00
Public Records Requests
Requestor shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying records in accordance with Ordinance 133.
A deposit may be required prior to completing any request.
SVRS Data (includes sales tax)
SVRS Data Requests $25 + $5 per 1000 voter records ($5 for up to the first thousand, and then rounded to the
nearest thousand thereafter)
Printed Data from SVRS additional $0.20 per single-sided page or $0.30 for double-sided page, plus the cost of
postage and shipping
Parks and Recreation Fees
Reservation of City Open/Green Spaces
(requires $100 refundable security deposit) $20.00 + tax
Reservation of the Ore Dock
(requires $100 refundable security deposit) $50.00 + tax
Reservation of the Central Railyard Concessions Building
(requires $100 refundable security deposit) $50.00 + tax
Non-Profit Park Reservation (requires $100 refundable security deposit) $15.00 + tax
(or community service)
Pavilion Reservation Rental
Large facility: Bayview, Prentice Large Pavillion, Kreher, Maslowski $45.00 + tax
Small facility: Prentice Park Small Pavillion $35.00 + tax
(requires $100 refundable security deposit)
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-12
Dumping Fee (suggested donation) $5.00/daily fee
Residential yearly fee $20.00
Ballfield Usage Fee $100.00/league
Business in City Parks Daily Fee** $ 10.00 (+ sales tax)
Business in City Parks Weekly Fee** $ 20.00 (+ sales tax)
Business in City Parks Monthly Fee** $ 60.00 (+ sales tax)
Business in City Parks Yearly Fee** $120.00 (+ sales tax)
Special Event Fee**
(requires $100 refundable security deposit) $50.00 plus tax
Bretting Community Center Fees
BCC Daily Entry Fee $1.00
BCC Yearly Membership:
Individual $25.00
Family $60.00
BCC (Game Room and Gym) Rental (includes sales tax)
During Business Hours
First Hour $75.00
Each Additional Hour $50.00
Half Hour $25.00
During Non-business Hours
First Hour $50.00
Each Additional Hour $30.00
Half Hour $15.00
BCC (Game Room or Gym) Ashland Community Organization/Group Fee* $10.00/Class
Daily Camping Rates (includes sales tax)
Kreher Park $30.00
Prentice Park $30.00
Prentice Park Tent $17.00
Weekly Camping Rates (includes sales tax)
Kreher Park $180.00
Prentice Park $180.00
Prentice Park Tent $100.00
Monthly Camping Rates (includes sales tax)
Kreher Park $690.00
Prentice Park $690.00
Spring Special Event Camping Rates (includes sales tax)
Bayview Park parking lot Camping/Overnight Parking:
Daily Rate $15.00
Weekly (6 nights + 1 night fee) $90.00
Hot Pond Camping/Overnight Parking:
Daily Rate $10.00
City of Ashland Comprehensive Fee Schedule
Page 165-13
Weekly Rate (6 nights + 1 night free) $60.00
* The BCC Community Fee was created for Ashland groups such as baseball, basketball, karate, Zumba and others who
wish to use the gym or game room, are not a program run by APR, and are charging little to no fee for their participants to
participate in the activity.
** The Business in the Parks fee has been established for private businesses making profit from doing business in City
Parks. The Parks and Recreation Committee is working on the final draft of this policy.
*** Special Event Fee is a fee charged to organizations hosting a special event in/on City property. Events include, but
are not limited to, parades, festivals, car shows, etc. Organizations may be charged additional fees for labor, equipment
and supplies needed from the City Work C