Town	of	Cady  

Ordained and Published. By Authority of the Town Board


2006

Community Code Service

Alan J. Harvey, Attorney 3900 Vinburn  Road
DeForest, WI  53532
(608) 846-5897
 
Fore  ord 	


ARE PLEASED to provide this new Code of Ordinances for the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin. This codification provides  a  complete  revision  and codification of all Ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the  Town.  All amended  Ordinances  are  brought  up  to  date.    The  Code  also  includes  certain  new
Ordinances that were prepared to fill gaps not covered by existing Ordinances.

The Code also includes several features that will facilitate its use. The various chapters and articles follow one another in a natural, logical order. The table of contents, with a complete outline of this order, will often provide sufficient reference points for the reader. In addition, the reader may consult the alphabetical index at the end of the volume. At the beginning of each chapter there is a section-by-section analysis of the articles within the chapter.

Nontextual provisions such as severability clauses, repeals and enacting clauses are omitted from the text but are covered by Title 1 of the Code. In most instances, references to "this ordinance" in the text of an ordinance have been changed to "this chapter" or "this article" as deemed appropriate.	Various editorial notes, state law references and amendment notes have been included throughout the Code to clarify its provisions.

We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation and assistance rendered by Town of Cady officials in the preparation of this Code.




Community Code Service Alan J. Harvey, Attorney 3900 Vinburn Road
DeForest, WI 53532
(608) 846-5897
 
Preface 	





EMOCRACY IS a government of laws. Good democracy requires not only good laws, but laws which are readily available in written form to all who are subject to them, to the public officials and police officers who must administer them and to the judges and attorneys who must interpret and apply them.  It is for this reason that the Town Board
of the Town of Cady has adopted this Code of Ordinances. This Code represents the contribution of the Town Board to the democratic and efficient administration of the government and affairs of the Town of Cady.




TOWN OFFICERS


Chairperson	Dennis  Blegen


Supervisors	Hugh   Hampton
Roger Timm


Clerk	Carla  Greiber


Treasurer	Teresa  Trealoff
 
pen	eeting Law Guide





General Requirements

1.	Wisconsin's Open Meeting Law provides that all  meetings  of  governmental  bodies, including subcommittees, shall be open to all citizens at all times.   Sec. 19.81(2), Wis. Stats.

2.	Meetings of local governing bodies  or their  subunits  must  be  held  in  places  reasonably accessible  to the public.

3.	Meetings  are open to all members  of the public unless  specifically provided  otherwise by law.

4.	When members of a governmental body gather in sufficient numbers to compose a quorum, that meeting is presumed to be convened for the purpose of conducting official business. Such a meeting is in violation of The Open Meeting Law if proper notice was not given and the meeting  is not open to the public.   Sec. 19.82(2), Wis. Stats.

5.	The Open Meeting Law applies when members of a governmental body meet  with  a purpose to engage in government business and the number of members present is sufficient to determine the parent body's course of action  regarding  the proposal  being  discussed. State ex rel. Newspapers  v.  Showers,  135 Wis.2d 77, 398 N.W.2d  154 (1987).

6.	A meeting is covered by the Open Meeting Law even where the governmental body is not empowered to exercise the final powers of its parent body  (ex. advisory committee to governing body).  State v. Swanson, 92 Wis.2d 310, 284 N.W.2d 655 (1979).

7.	A private home may qualify as a "meeting place" under Sec. 19.82(3), Wis. Stats.  67 Atty.
Gen. 125.

8.	A telephone conference call involving members of a governmental body is a "meeting" under the Open Meeting Law and it shall be reasonably accessible to the public and proper notice of such meeting must be given.  69 Atty. Gen. 143.

9.	No duly elected or appointed member of a governmental body may be excluded from any meeting  of  such body.   Sec.  19.89, Wis. Stats.
 
Public Notice

1.	Who Must Receive Notice. For any meeting, the presiding officer, or his/her designee, shall give notice to the official newspaper and to any other members of the news media who have filed a written request to receive such notices, or if neither exists, in a manner likely to give notice to the public. News media who have filed written requests for notices of public meetings cannot be charged fees by governmental bodies for sending such media notices.  77 Atty. Gen. 312.  However, a newspaper (or other media outlet) is not obligated to print a notice received under such a standing meeting notice request, nor is the governmental body obligated to pay for the publication of such a notice. (Martin v. Wray, 473 F. Supp. 1131 (1979). Notice must also be given as required by any other state statutes.

2.	Construction of Notice.   The notice for the meeting  shall include:

a.	The governmental body holding the meeting;

a.	The time, date and place of the meeting; and

b.	The subject matter of the meeting, including subject matter to be considered in closed session.

3.	Time for Notice. Notice must be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to  the commencement of the meeting unless for good cause  such  notice  is  impossible  or impractical, in which case shorter notice may be given. In no case may notice be provided less than two (2) hours in advance of the meeting.   Sec. 19.84(3), Wis. Stats.

4.	Committees and Subunits Exemption to Notice Requirement. A legally constituted subunit of a parent government body may conduct a meeting during the recess of the governing body's meeting or immediately after the lawful meeting to act or deliberate upon a matter which was the subject of that meeting. For this exemption to apply, the presiding officer must publicly announce the time, place and subject matter of the subunit's meeting in advance at the meeting of the governing body.



Procedure for Closed Sessions.

1.	Required  notice must be given if the presiding  officer or his/her  designee knows that  a closed session is being contemplated. Notice is required regardless of whether a majority of   members  will  or  will  not  support  going  into  closed   session   at   the   meeting. Sec.  19.84(2), Wis. Stats.
 
2.	After first meeting in open session, with proper notice, a motion made and recorded, supported by majority vote, is required to close, with the vote of each member recorded in the minutes.   Sec. 19.85(1), Wis. Stats.

3.	If the motion to go into closed session is carried, the presiding officer shall announce to those present at the meeting (to be recorded in the minutes) the nature of the business to be considered in the closed session and the specific exemption(s) relied upon in Sec. 19.85, Wis. Stats., under which the closed session is permitted.

4.	Only matters contained in the presiding officer's announcement of the closed session may be considered during the closed session.

5.	An open session, with adequate notice, must precede a closed session, even where it was decided at a prior open session to go into a closed session at a subsequent meeting.

6.	A governmental body may vote to go into closed session at a properly convened  open session, for a permitted purpose, where specific notice of intent to consider going into closed session was not included on the agenda at the time notice of the open session was given. However, such procedure requires that the presiding officer or his/her designee did not contemplate or have knowledge that any of the other members contemplated a closed session at the time notice of the agenda was given.



Specific  Exemptions Allowing  Closed Sessions

1.		Sec. 19.85(l)(a), Wis. Stats., creates an exemption for governmental bodies deliberating after quasi-judicial trials or hearings. However, boards of review cannot rely on this exemption, for Sec. 70.47(2m), Wis. Stats., requires all board of review meetings to be held
.	.
rn open session.

2.	Sec. 19.85(l)(b), Wis. Stats., is a limited exception to the Open Meeting Law allowing the use of a closed session when a governmental body is considering the demotion, dismissal, licensing, discipline or tenure of a public employee or a person licensed by a board or commission. This exception permits preliminary discussion and investigation without the necessity of providing actual notice to the individual involved. However, before any evidentiary hearing can be conducted or formal action taken, notice must be given to the person involved so that he or she can exercise his or her right to request an open session for those purposes.

3.	Sec. 19.85(1)(c), Wis. Stats., sanctions the use of closed sessions where governmental bodies are considering employment, promotion, compensation or performance evaluation of any public employee. Governmental bodies should exercise caution when considering performance to avoid discussing matters that are covered by Sec. 19.85(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
 
4.	Sec. l 9.85(1)(c), Wis. Stats., permits the use of closed sessions when applications for parole or probation are being considered, or when crime detection or prevention strategy is to be discussed.

5.	Sec. l 9.85(1)(e), Wis. Stats., allows closed sessions for the purpose of deliberating or negotiating the purchase of public properties, the investing of public funds, or the conducting of other specified public business, as long as competitive or bargaining reasons require a closed session. Under this exception, a governmental body could meet in closed session for the purpose of forming negotiation strategies, although the body must give notice that an open session will be held for the purpose of taking a vote to convene in closed session for the purpose of discussing labor negotiation strategies.

6.	Discussions by governmental bodies considering the financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons which, if conducted in public, would have a "substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to" may be held in closed session under Sec. l 9.85(1)(f), Wis. Stats. However, this exemption is unavailable where Sec. 19.85(1)(b), Wis. Stats., is applicable.

7.	Sec. 19.85(1)(g), Wis. Stats., allows a governmental body to confer with its legal counsel in closed session for the purpose of obtaining oral or written advice concerning strategy to be adopted by the body with respect to present and prospective litigation directly involving the governmental body.

8.	Closed sessions may be utilized  by governmental bodies to consider requests for confidential written advice from ethics boards under Sec. 19.85(1)(h), Wis. Stats.



Limitations on Closed Sessions

1.	Sec. 19.85(2), Wis. Stats., makes it impermissible for a governmental body to reconvene in open session within twelve (12) hours after a closed session, unless public notice of the subsequent open session was given at the same time and in the same manner as was required for the original open session.

2.	Final ratification or approval of a collective bargaining agreement is required to be in open session under Sec. 19.85(3), Wis. Stats. However, a governmental body can vote to preliminarily approve bargaining proposals in closed session, in order to reach a consensus, as long as final ratification occurs in open session.
 
Ballots, Votes and Records

1.	Unless provided elsewhere by statute, no secret ballot may be utilized by a governmental body to determine any election or decision, except the election of the officers of such body. This narrow exception does not permit the use of secret ballots to elect members of committees, officers of the governmental units such as department heads, or fill vacancies on the body itself.

2.	Any member may require the ascertainment  and recording of each vote.

3.	Records of motions  and roll-call votes must be preserved  and open for public inspection.



Use of Equipment in Meetings

1.	A governmental unit must make a reasonable effort to accommodate the media's equipment.

2.	Any person may record, film or photograph  a meeting in open session, provided that the use of this equipment does not interfere with the conduct of the meeting(s).

3.	A member of a governmental body does not have the right to tape record a closed session of  the governmental body.
 
Adopting
 
rdinance
 





An Ordinance  Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective.

The Town Board of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, Do Ordain as Follows:



Section 1.

The Code of Ordinances is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Cady, Wisconsin," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shal        ersede all zther general and permanent Ordinances of the Town passed
on or before	.J.	0 0	, to the extent provided  in  Section  2 hereof.
 


Section 2.

All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after "'-'--"-"7'1---,.!C>---=--O_& 	 and all Ordinances of a gen r 1 and permanent nature of the Town of Cady,	nae   d on final passage on or before	·"ti		0		, and not included in such Code or recognized and force	by	ef	ence	therein	are	hereby	repealed	from	the	Code	after
L-_!     ,,)!f":.:::.::: -'O ·:...!  -'    except  as  hereinafter  provided.	No resolution of the Town, not
 
specifi
 
entioned, is hereby repealed.
 


Section 3.

(a)	The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following, except that some of the following provisions existing at the time of adoption may be amended by this recodification:
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty  or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance;
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Town, or any contract or obligations assumed by the Town;
(3)	The  administrative   Ordinances  or  resolutions   of  the  Town   not  in  conflict  or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code;
 
(4)	Any appropriation ordinance or resolution;
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the Town Board to any person, firm or corporation;
(6)	Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the Town;
(7)	Any ordinance or resolution establishing the prescribing of street grades of any streets in the Town;
(8)	Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor;
(9)	Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the Town;
(10)	Any ordinance consolidating territory to the Town;
(11)	Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures, except that these ordinances have been amended as part of this recodification;
(12)	Zoning ordinances; one- and two-family dwelling building code; and any other building codes except that these ordinances have been amended as part of this recodification.
(13)	The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of  the  Town  of  whatever  name  or description.
(b)	Nor shall the repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.



Section 4.

A copy of the Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the Town Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Town Clerk or someone authorized by the Town Clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments, ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the Town Board to make the same a part of the Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code all provisions which may be repealed from time to time by the Town Board. This copy of the Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it.



Section 5.

All ordinances or parts in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
 
Section 6.
This ordinance shall become  effective on -ffe--- --;f"=-----· 20	OtP.

Passed, Approved and Adopted by the Cady Town Board on This	:;('7  ay of	fLJ_i_ _
 	, 20	J]_k, Pursuant to Section 66.0103, Wis. Stats.	'



Attest:



[},i/lo/i i
Chairperson
t::L	,
Town Clerk
 


























Code of General Ordinances














Key to Section Numbering:



TITLE   -	CHAPTER   -	SECTION



1. 1 - 1
 














TITLE 1 	




eneral	rovisions for Use  e of	rdinances



 
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
 
Use and Construction  of Code of Ordinances Use of Citation
 
 
 
Title 1	Chapter	1

and Construction of Code of Ordinances





 
1-1-1
1-1-2
1-1-3
1-1-4
1-1-5
1-1-6
1-1-7





Sec. 1-1-1
 
Title of Code; Citation Principles of Construction Conflict of Provisions Separability of Provisions Effective Date of Ordinances General Penalty
Clerk to Maintain Copies of Documents Incorporated by Reference




Title of Code; Citation.
 

These collected Ordinances shall be known and referred to as the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin." References to the Code of Ordinances, Town of Cady, Wisconsin, shall be cited as follows: "Sec. 2-1-1, Code of Ordinances, Town of Cady, Wisconsin."



Sec. 1-1-2      Principles of Construction.

The following rules or meanings shall be applied in the construction and interpretation of Ordinances codified in this Code of Ordinances unless such application would be clearly inconsistent with the plain meaning or intent of the Ordinances:
(a)	Acts by agents. When an Ordinance requires an act be done by a person which may be legally performed by an authorized agent of that principal person, the requirement shall be construed to include all acts performed by such agents.
(b)	Code and Code of Ordinances. The words "Codes," "Code of Ordinances" and "Municipal Code" when used in any Section of this Code shall refer to this Code of Ordinances of the Town of Cady unless the context of the Section clearly indicates otherwise.
(c)	Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these Ordinances, the day of the act or event from which the period of time begins to run shall not be included, but the last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a
 
Use and Construction
1-1-2


Sunday or a legal holiday.  If the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven
(7) days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used in this Section, "legal holiday" means any statewide legal holiday specified by state law.
(d)	Fine.  The term "fine" shall be the equivalent of the word "forfeiture," and vice versa.
(e)	Gender. Use has been made of masculine pronouns in these Ordinances solely for the sake of brevity. Unless specifically stated to the contrary, this Code of Ordinances is gender neutral and words in these Ordinances referring to the masculine gender shall also be construed to apply to females, and vice versa.
(f) General Rule. All words, phrases and ordinances  shall be construed  according  to their plain meaning in common usage  and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Town. However, words or phrases with a technical or special meaning shall be understood and construed according to that technical or special meaning if such is the intent of the Ordinances. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances shall have the same meaning as they have at common law and to give this Code of Ordinances its most reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(g)	Joint Authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more Town officers or employees shall be construed  as giving  such authority  to a majority of such officers or other persons.
(h)	Officers.  The term "officers" shall refer solely to local offices created by state statute.
(i)	Officials.  The term  "officials" shall mean all Town officers and employees.
U) Person. The word "person" shall mean any of the following entities: natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, limited liability companies, firms, bodies politic, joint venture, joint stock company, association, public or private corporation, the United States, the State of Wisconsin, including any unit or division thereof, any county, city, village, town, municipal utility, municipal power district or other governmental unit, coooperative, estate, trust, receiveer, executor, administrator, any other fiduciary, any representative appointed by order of any court or otherwise acting on behalf of others, or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued (includes singular as well as plural).
(k) Repeal. When any Ordinance having the effect of repealing a prior Ordinance is itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive the prior Ordinance or any part thereof, unless expressly so provided.
(l) Singular and plural.  Every  word  in these  Ordinances  referring  to the  singular number only shall also be construed to apply to several persons or things, and every word in these Ordinances referred to the plural number shall also be construed to apply to one (1) person or thing.
(m)	Tense. The use of any verb in the present tense shall not preclude the interpretation of the verb in the future tense where appropriate.
 
Use and Construction
1-1-2


(n)	Town.  The term "Town" shall mean the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin.
(o)	Wisconsin Statutes. The term "Wisconsin Statutes" and its abbreviation as "Wis. Stats." shall  mean,  in  these  Ordinances,  the  Wisconsin  Statutes  for  the  year  2003-2004,  as amended.
(p)	Wisconsin Administrative Code. The term "Wisconsin Administrative Code" and  its abbreviation as "Wis. Adm. Code" shall mean the Wisconsin Administrative Code as of the adoption of this Code, as amended or renumbered from time to time.

State Law Reference:   Legal Holidays, Section 256.17, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 1-1-3       Conflict of  Provisions.

(a)	If the provisions of different Chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual Chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that Chapter.
(b)	If the provisions  of different  Sections of the same Chapter conflict with each other, the
provision  which is more specific in its application  to the  events  or persons  raising  the conflict shall control over the more general provision.



Sec. 1-1-4      Separability of Provisions.

If any provision of this Code of Ordinances is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitu­ tional by reason of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other provisions of these Ordinances.



Sec. 1-1-5      Effective Date of Ordinances.

(a)	Code. The Code of Ordinances, Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, shall take effect as provided by state law.
(b)	Subsequent Ordinances. All Ordinances passed by the Town Board subsequent to the adoption of the Code of Ordinances, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect from and after their publication or legal posting.

State Law Reference:   Code of Ordinances, Section 66.0103, Wis. Stats.
 
Use and Construction
1-1-6


Sec. 1-1-6	General Penalty.

(a)	General Penalty. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(1)	First Offense - Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), together with the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not exceeding ninety
(90) days.	,
(2)	Second Offense - Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until such forfeiture and costs of prosecution are paid, but not exceeding six (6) months.
(b)	Continued Violations. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the Town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Code.
(c)	Other Remedies. The Town shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes in addition to the forfeitures and costs of prosecution above, including those specificially prescribed in Secs. 66.0109, 66.0114 and 66.0115, Wis. Stats., incorporated herein by reference.
(d)	Court Authority to Impose Alternative Juvenile Dispositions and Sanctions.
(1)	For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance, a court is authorized to impo'se any of the dispositions listed in Sec. 938.343 and 938.344, Wis. Stats., in accordance with the provisions of those statutes and this Section.
(2)	For a juvenile adjudged to have violated an ordinance who violates a condition of a dispositional order of the  court under  Sections 938.343 or 938.344, Wis. Stats., a Court is authorized to impose any of the sanctions listed in Sec. 938.355(6)(d), Wis. Stats., in  accordance with the provisions of those statutes.
(3)	This Section is enacted under the authority of Sec. 938.17(2)(cm), Wis. Stats.
(e)	Juvenile Disposition Alternatives for Alcohol/Drug Offenses.
(1)	If a juvenile is found to have engaged in underage drinking of alcohol, drinking of alcohol on school premises or at a school sponsored activity, falsifying proof of age, possessing drug paraphernalia, delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor in violation of  Town ordinances, the Court may order any of the following:
 
Use and Construction
1-1-6


a.	1.	A forfeiture;
2.	Suspension or revocation  of the juvenile's  driver's license;
3.	Participation  in a supervised work program;
b.	After ordering any of the above penalties, the Court may, with the juvenile's agreement, enter an additional· order staying the execution of the penalty order and suspending or modifying the penalty imposed and may require the juvenile to do any of the following:
1.	Submit to an Alcohol or Other Drug Abuse (AODA) assessment;
2.	Participate   in   an   outpatient   AODA   treatment   program   if   an   AODA assessment  recommends  treatment;
3.	Participate in an AODA education program.
(2)	In addition to the dispositions listed above, the Court may order a juvenile to participate  in a teen court program if the following conditions are satisfied:
a.	The chief judge of the judicial administrative district has approved a teen court program established in juvenile's county of residence and the judge  determines that participation in the court program will likely benefit the juvenile and the community;
b.	The juvenile admits or pleads no contest to the allegations that the juvenile was truant in open court with the juvenile's parent, guardian or legal custodian present;
c.	The juvenile has not successfully completed participation in a teen court program
during the two (2) years before the date of the alleged violation.
(3)	If the Court finds that a juvenile's parent or guardian is unable to provide or refuses to provide  a court-ordered AODA services for the juvenile through his or her health insurance or other third (3rd) party payments, the Court may order the parent or health insurer to pay.
(4)	If payment is not attainable as described in Subsection (e)(3) above, the Court may
order the municipality  to pay for any AODA services so ordered.
(f)	Dispositional Alternatives for Other Ordinance Violations.   The Court may impose one
(1)	or more  of  the  following  dispositional  alternatives  against  a juvenile  found  to have violated  a municipal ordinance, for which no penalty is otherwise provided,  as follows:
(1)	Counseling for the juvenile  and/or the parent or guardian;
(2)	A forfeiture not to exceed the maximum forfeiture that may be imposed on an adult for committing the same violation.
(3)	If the forfeiture is for a violation that is only applicable to a juvenile, the maximum forfeiture amount is Fifty Dollars ($50.00) plus costs;
(4)	Suspend a fishing, hunting or driving license from ninety  (90) days to five (5) years
for failure to pay the forfeiture;
(5)	Order the juvenile to participate in a supervised work program or other community service work;
 
Use and Construction
1-1-6


(6)	Order participation in an AODA assessment, an outpatient AODA treatment or an AODA education program;
(7)	Order participation  in a pupjl assistance program provided by the juvenile's  school
provided the juvenile's school agrees;
(8)	In  addition  to  the  dispositions  listed  above,  the  Court  may  order  a juvenile  to participate in a teen court program if the following conditions are satisfied:
a.	The chief judge of the judicial administrative district has approved a teen court program established in juvenile's county of  residence  and  the judge  determines that participation in the court program will likely benefit the juvenile and the community;
b.	The juvenile admits or pleads no contest to the allegations that the juvenile was
truant  in  open  court  with  the juvenile's  parent,  guardian  or  legal  custodian present;
c.	The juvenile has not successfully completed participation in a teen court program during the two (2) years before the date of the alleged violation.
(g) Violation of Juvenile Dispositional Orders. The Court  may  impose  the  following sanctions on a juvenile who has violated a Town ordinance and who has violated  a condition  of his or her  dispositional  order:
( 1)	Suspend the juvenile's operating privilege for a period not more than ninety (90) days;
(2)	Detain the juvenile in his or her home or current residence for not more than thirty
(30) days without electronic monitoring;
(3)	Order no more than twenty-five (25) hours of community service work in a supervised work program.

State Law Reference:  Secs. 66.0014, 66.0015 and 66.0109, Wis. Stats.



Sec.  1-1-7	Clerk to Maintain Copies of Documents Incorporated by Reference.

Whenever any standard code, rule, regulation, statute or other written or printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set forth herein, and the Town Clerk shall maintain in his/her office a copy  of any such material as adopted and as amended from time to time. Materials on file at the Town Clerk's office shall be considered public records open to reasonable examination by any person during the office hours of the Town Clerk subject to such restrictions on examination as the Clerk imposes for the preservation of the material.
 
Title 1 .. Chapter 2

Issuance of Citations





 
1-2-1
1-2-2
1-2-3
1-2-4
1-2-5
1-2-6




Sec. 1-2-1
 
Method of Enforcement Form of Citation Schedule of Deposits Issuance of Citations Procedure Nonexclusivity




Method of  Enforcement.
 

The Town of Cady hereby elects to use the citation method of enforcement of ordinances. All law enforcement officers and other Town personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this Code of Ordinances are hereby authorized pursuant to Sec. 66.0113, Wis. Stats., to issue citations for violations of this Code of Ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists.



Sec. 1-2-2      Form of Citation.

The form of the citation to be issued by  law enforcement  officers or other designated  Town officials is incorporated herein by reference and shall provide for the following information:
(a)	The name and address of the alleged violator;
(b)	The factual allegations describing the alleged violation;
(c)	The date and place of the offense;
(d)	The Section of the Ordinance violated;
(e)	A designation  of the offense in such manner as can be readily  understood  by  a person making a reasonable effort to do so;
(f)     The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court;
(g)	A statement which, in essence, informs the alleged violator:
(1)	That the alleged violator may make a cash deposit of a specified amount to be mailed to a specified official within a specified time;
(2)	That, if the alleged violator makes such a deposit, he/she need not appear in court unless subsequently summoned;
 
Issuance of Citations
1-2-2


(3)	That, if the alleged violator makes a cash deposit and does not appear in court, he will be deemed to have tendered a plea of no contest and submitted to a forfeiture and a penalty assessment imposed by Section 165.87, Wis. Stats., and court costs as imposed by Section 800.10, Wis. Stats., not to exceed the amount of the deposit or will be summoned into court to answer the complaint if the court does not accept the plea of no contest;
(4)	That, if the alleged violator does not make a cash deposit and does not appear in court
at the time specified, an action may be commenced against the alleged violator to collect the forfeiture and the penalty assessment imposed by Section 165.87, Wis. Stats.
(h)	A direction that, if the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit, the alleged violator shall sign an appropriate statement which accompanies the citation to indicate that he read the statement required under Subsection (g) and  shall send the  signed statement with  the cash  deposit;
(i)	A statement that if the court finds the violation involves an offense that prohibits conduct prohibited by state statute punishable by fine or imprisonment or both, and that the violation resulted in property damage or physical injury to a person other than the alleged violator, the Court may summon the defendant into court to determine if restitution shall be ordered under Sec. 800.093, Wis. Stats., for Municipal Court (if applicable).
(j)	Such other information as may be deemed necessary.



Sec. 1-2-3	Schedule of Deposits.

(a)	The schedule of cash deposits shall be established by the Town Board for use with citations issued under this Chapter according to the penalty provision in Section 1-1-6 of this Code of Ordinances, a copy of which is on file with the Town Clerk.
(b)	Deposits shall be made in cash, money order or certified check to the Clerk of Court who shall  provide a receipt therefor.  Sections 66.0114, 66.0115 and 66.0117, Wis. Stats., are adopted  and incorporated herein by reference.



Sec. 1-2-4	Issuance of Citation.

(a)	law Enforcement Officer. Any law enforcement officer may issue citations authorized under this Chapter.
(b)	Town Officials. The following Town officials may issue citations with respect to those specified Ordinances which are directly related to their official responsibilities:
(1)	Building Inspector.
(2)	Fire Inspector.
 
Issuance of Citations
1-2-4


(3)	Code Enforcement Officer.
(4)	Animal Control Officer.
(5)	Anyone authorized by majority vote of the Town Board to issue citations, including a member(s) of the Town Board ..
(6)	Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) wardens.
(c)	Delegated Authority. The Town officials named in Subsection (b) above may delegate their authority to issue citations to their subordinates, provided such delegation is authorized by the Town Board.



Sec. 1-2-5	Procedure.

Section 66.0113, Wis. Stats., relating to violator's options  and procedure  on default is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.



Sec. 1-2-6	Nonexclusivity.

(a)	Other Ordinance. Adoption of this Chapter does not preclude the Town Board from adopting any other ordinance or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinance, including, but not limited to, summons and complaint, relating to the same or other matter.
(b)	Other Remedies. The issuance of a citation hereunder shall not preclude the Town or any authorized officer  from proceeding under any other ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce any ordinance, regulation or order.
 














TITLE	11




enses and Nuisances



(Reserved for Future Use)
 














TITLE 2




overnment	and Administration



 
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
 
General Provisions and Elections Town Meetings
Town Board
Town  Officers  and Employees
Boards, Commissions and Committees Ethical Standards
 
 
 
Title 2	Chapter	1

General Provisions and Elections





 
2-1-1
2-1-2
2-1-3
2-1-4
2-1-5
2-1-6




Sec.. 2-1-1
 
Legal Status; General Town Powers Village Powers
Voter Registration
Election Poll Hours; Election Workers Official Newspaper; Legal Posting Polling  Locations




Legal Status; General Town Powers..
 

(a)	The Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin is a body corporate and politic, with those powers granted by law. The Town shall be designated in all actions and proceedings by its name, as the Town of Cady.
(b)	The Town may:
(1)	Sue and be sued.
(2)	Acquire and hold real and personal property for public use and convey and dispose · of  the property.
(3)	Enter into contracts necessary  for the exercise of its corporate powers.

State Law Reference:  Section 60.01, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-1-2        Village Powers..

The Town Meeting having, by action of the citizenry at a special Town meeting on August 10, 2001, directed the Town Board to exercise all powers relating to villages and conferred on village boards by Chapter 61, Wis. Stats., the Town of Cady shall have said powers through its Town Board.   This is a continuing grant of powers.



State Law Reference:  Sections 60.10(2)(c), 60.22(3) and Ch. 61, \Vis. Stats.
 
General Provisions and Elections
2-1-3


Sec. 2-1-3	Voter Registration.

(a)	Pursuant  to the provisions  of Sec. 6.27(2) of the Wisconsin  Statutes, the Town of Cady elects that registration shall be required for all primaries and elections in the Town of Cady.
(b)	The Town Clerk of the Town of Cady shall forthwith certify this action to the County Clerk and  to the Secretary of State.



Sec.	2-1-4	Election Poll Hours; Election Workers.

(a)		Poll Hours.  The polls in the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin,  shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for all elections.
(b)	Election Officials.
(1)	Pursuant to Section 7.30(1), \/\/is. Stats., there shall be seven (7) election inspectors at the polling place at each election conducted in the Town of Cady, except as otherwise provided below  in Subsections (b)(2)-(4).
(2)	Section 7.32, Wis. Stats., authorizes the Town Board to reduce the required  number
of election officials at a polling place to no less than three (3), and the Town Board has determined that would be advantageous to the Town of Cady to have only as many election officials on duty as are needed for any given election. Pursuant to Section 7.32, Wis. Stats., the Town Clerk is authorized, at the discretion of the Town Clerk, to reduce the number of election officials, provided that at all time there shall be a minimum of three (3) election officials on duty. The Town Clerk shall determine in advance of each election whether the number of election officials for such election should be reduced from the number prescribed by the Wisconsin Statutes, and if such a reduction is so determined, the Town Clerk shall further redistribute duties among the remaining officials.
(3)	At the discretion of the Town Clerk, the requisite number of election officials may be
increased for any election; however, the number of election officials working at a given election shall always be an odd number.
(4)	Because Section 7.30(1), Wis. Stats., allows for the selection of two (2) or more sets of officials to work at different times on each election day, the Town Board authorizes the selection of two (2) sets of election officials to staff the polls on election day if deemed necessary by the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to schedule election officials in shifts on any said election day. The Town Clerk shall redistribute the duties of such election officials to reflect scheduling by shift. The second, or last, shift shall end with completion of all required election day duties that foliow the ciosure of lhe poils.
(5)	As prescribed by Section 7.30(l)(b), Wis. Stats., the Town Board authorizes the Town
Clerk for each election to appoint, at the Town Clerk's discretion, one ( 1) additional
 
General Provisions and Elections
2-1-4


election worker per shift to serve as a greeter to answer questions  and  to  direct electors to the proper locations for registration and voting, and who shall be available to substitute for other election officials who must leave the polling place room during the voting process.

State Law Reference:   Secs. 7.30 and 7.32, Wis. Stats.



Seca 2-1-5	Official Newspaper; legal Posting.

(a)	The Town of Cady shall generally use posting pursuant  to the Wisconsin Statutes as its means  of  giving  notice.	When  publication  is  utilized,  publication   shall  be  in  the
 	.  The Town may supplement its legal posting/publication  with notices
or other information published in shopper-type or other free newspapers.
(b)	Unless other sites are specifically designated by the Town Board, the three (3) usual and customary public posting locations shall be:
(1)	Town of Cady Town Hall.
(2)	l<w \ l:	\'P
(3)	<:>t\l. N · fl\-Q."'	S\A?ln,.,"l(
(c)	When publication is required, the Town will utiltize a newspaper deemed to have sufficient coverage in the Town as designated in Subsection (a).



Sec. 2-1-6	Polling locations.

The polling place for elections in the Town of Cady shall be the Town of Cady Town Hall.
 
 
 
Title 2	Chapter 2









 
2-2-1
2-2-2
2-2-3
2-2-4
2-2-5
2-2-6
2=2=7




Sec. 2-2-1
 
Town Meeting Definitions Powers of Town Meeting Annual Town Meeting Special Town Meetings
Presiding Officer at Town Meetings
Procedure at All Town Meetings
Clerk of Town rv1eetings




Town Meeting Definitions.
 

In this Code of Ordinances:
(a)	Annual Town Meeting means the Town meeting held under  Sec. 60.11, Wis. Stats.
(b)	Special Town Meeting means a Town meeting, other than the annual Town meeting, held under  Sec. 60.12, Wis. Stats.
(c)	Town Meeting means the annual Town meeting or a special Town meeting.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.001, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-2-2	Powers of Town  Meeting.

(a)	Direct Powers.  Town Meeting may:
(1)	Raise money. Raise money, including levying taxes, to pay for  expenses of  the Town, unless the authority has been  delegated  to  the  Town  Board  under Subsection (b)( 1) below.
(2)	Town offices and officers.
a.	Fix the compensation of elective Town offices under Sec. 60.32,  Wis.  Stats., unless	the authority  has  been  delegated  to  the  Town  Board  under Subsection  (b)(l) below.
b.	Combine the offices of Town Clerk and Town Treasurer  under Sec. 60.305(1), Wis. Stats.
 
Town Meetings
2-2-2


c.	Combine the offices of Town Assessor and Town  Clerk under Sec. 60.305(2), Wis. Stats.
d.	Establish or abolish the office of Town Constable and establish the number of
constables.	Abolition  of  the office is effective  at the  end of the term  of the person serving in the office.
e.	Designate the office of Town Clerk, Town Treasurer or the combined office of Clerk and Treasurer as part time under Sec. 60.305(1)(b), Wis. Stats.
(3)	Election of town officers.
a.	Adopt a plan under Sec. 5.60(6), Wis. Stats., to elect Town Board Supervisors to numbered  seats.
b.	Provide under Sec. 8.05(3)(a), Wis. Stats., for the nomination  of candidates for
elective Town offices at a nonpartisan primary election.
(4)	Public Waterways. Appropriate money for the improvement and maintenance of a public waterway  under Sec. 81.05, Wis. Stats.
(5)	Cemeteries.  Authorize  the  acquisition  and   conveyance   of   cemeteries   under Sec. 157.50(1) and (3), Wis. Stats.
(6)	Administrator agreements. Approve agreements to employ  an  Administrator  for more than three (3) years under Sec. 60.37(3)(d), Wis. Stats.
(b)	Directives or Grants of Authority  to  Town  Board.  Except  as  provided  under Subsection (c), directives or grants of authority to the Town Board under this Subsection may be general and continuing or may be limited as to purpose, effect or duration. Resolutions adopted by a Town Meeting directing or authorizing the Town Board  to exercise one of the optional powers of this Subsection shall include language that makes the intent of those attending the Town Meeting clear. A resolution adopted under this Subsection shall specify whether the directive or grant is general and continuing or whether it is limited as to purpose, effect or duration. A resolution that is continuing remains in effect until rescinded at a subsequent Town Meeting by a number of electors equal to or greater than the number of electors who voted for the original resolution.  This Subsection does not limit any authority otherwise conferred on the Town Board by law. By resolution, the Town Meeting may:
(1)	Raise money.   Authorize  the Town Board to raise money, including levying taxes,
to pay for expenses of the Town.
(2)	Membership of Town Board in populous towns. If the Town  has  a population  of 2,500 or more, direct the Town Board to increase the membership of the Board under Sec. 60.21(2), Wis. Stats.
(3)	Exercise of village powers. Authorize the Town Board to exercise powers  of  a Village  Board  under  Sec. 60.22(3),  Wis.  Stats.    A  resolution  adopted  under  this
p.....,.n1...,.narv5Y"1"na......,.'h.     ;e>  5CvTau.rv'\1aa.rn1.-l   •\Yll:f   Lv"v'1r'1\nuf;1Y1ll\l.Yu'ulr5r .
 
j_,:)
 
c.u1\...L
 
(4)	General obligation bonds.   Authorize  the Town  Board  to  issue  general  obligation bonds in the manner and for the purposes provided by law.
 
Town Meetings
2-2-2


(5)	Purchase of land.  Authorize the Town Board to purchase any land within the Town for present or anticipated Town purposes.
(6)	Town buildings. Authorize the Town Board to purchase, lease or construct buildings for the use of the Town, to combine for this purpose the Town's funds with those of a society or corporation doing business or located in the Town and to accept contributions of money, labor or space for this purpose.
(7)	Disposal of property.  Authorize the Town Board to dispose of Town property, real
or personal, other than property donated to and required to be held by the Town for a special purpose.
(8)	Watershed protection and soil and water conservation.  Authorize the Town Board
to engage in watershed protection, soil conservation or water conservation  activities beneficial to the Town.
(9)	Appointed assessors.  Authorize the Town Board to select Assessors by appointment
under Sec. 60.307(2), Wis. Stats.
(10)	Compensation  of  elective  Town  offices.   Authorize  the  Town  Board  to  fix  the compensation  of elective Town offices under Sec. 60.32(l)(b), Wis. Stats.
(c)	Authorization to Town Board to Appropriate Money. The Town Meeting may authorize the  Town Board to appropriate money in the next annual budget for:
(1)	Conservation of natural  resources.   The conservation  of  natural  resources  by  the Town or by a bona fide nonprofit  organization under Sec. 60.23(6), Wis. Stats.
(2)	Civic functions.   Civic and other functions under Sec. 60.23(3), Wis. Stats.
(3)	Insects, weeds and animal diseases. The control of insect pests, weeds or plant or animal diseases within the Town.
(4)	Rural numbering systems.  Posting signs and otherwise cooperating with the county in establishment of a rural numbering system under Sec. 59.07(65), Wis. Stats.
(5)	Cemetery   improvements.	The  improvement  of  a  Town  cemetery   under  Sec.
157.50(5), Wis. Stats.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.10, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-2-3	Annual Town Meeting..

(a)		Requirement.  The Town of Cady shall hold an annual Town meeting as provided in this Section.
(b)	When Held.
(1)	Except as provided in Subsection (b)(2) below, the annual Town meeting shall be held on the third (3rd) Tuesday of April.
(2)	The   annual	Town	meeting	may	set   a   date   different	than	provided	under
Subsection (b)(a) above for the next annual Town meeting if the date is within ten ( 10) days after the second (2nd) Tuesday of April.
 
Town 2-2-3


(c)	Where Held.
(1)	The annual Town meeting may be held in the Town or in any village or city within or  adjoining the Town of Cady.
(2)	The annual Town meeting shall  be held at the location of the last annual  Town meeting unless the location is changed by the Town Board. If the Town  Board changes the location, it shall publish a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., stating the location  of the meeting, not more than twenty  (20) nor less than fifteen
(15) days before the date of the meeting.
(d)	Adjournment. The annual Town meeting may be recessed to a time and date certain if the resumed meeting is held within thirty  (30) days after the date of the meeting originally scheduled under Subsection (b). Business not acted on at the annual meeting, or within the thirty (30) days allowed for adjourning  and reconvening the meeting, shall be left to the next annual meeting or taken up by a special Town meeting convened under Sec. 60.12, Wis.  Stats.
(e)	Notice.  No pubiic notice of the annuai Town meeting is required if held as provided under
Subsection  (b)(l).  If held as provided under Subsection (b)(l), notice of the time and date of the meeting shall be given under Sec. 60.12(3), Wis. Stats.
(f) Jurisdiction. The annual Town meeting may transact any business over which the Town meeting has jurisdiction.
(g)     Poll list. The annual Town meeting may require the Clerk of the Town meeting to keep a poll list with the name and address of every elector attending the meeting.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.11, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-2-4	Special Town Meetings.

(a)	Who May Convene.  A special Town meeting may be convened  if:
(1)	Called by a Town meeting.
(2) A written request, signed by a number of electors equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the votes cast in the Town for Governor at the last general election is filed with the Town Clerk.
(3)	Called by the Town Board.
(b)	Time, Date and Purpose to be Stated. If a special Town meeting is requested or called under Subsection (a), the time, date and purpose of the meeting shall be stated  in  the request or as part of the call.
(c)	Notice. The Town Clerk shall, not more than twenty (20) nor less than fifteen ( 15) days before the date of a special Town meeting, publish a Class 2 notice of the meeting under      The   notice   shall   state   the   purpose,   date,   time   and   location   of   the                        meeting. If notice is posted instead of published, the same time and content requirements apply.
 
Town Meetings
2-2-4


(d)	location.
(1)	A special Town meeting may be held in the Town or in any village or city within or adjoining the Town.
(2)	A special Town meeting shall be held where the preceding annual town meeting was held, unless the location is changed by the Town Board.
(e) Adjournment. A special Town meeting may be recessed to a time and date certain if the resumed meeting is held within thirty (30) days after the date of the originally scheduled meeting.
(f) Jurisdiction. Any business which may be transacted at an annual Town meeting may be transacted  at a special Town meeting.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.12, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-2-5	Presiding Officer at Town Meetings.

(a)	Who Presides.
(1)	If present, the Town Board Chairperson shall chair the Town meeting, as defined in Sec. 2-1-1. If the Town Board Chairperson is absent, another Town Board Supervisor shall chair the Town meeting. If  no Town Board Supervisor is present, the Town meeting shall elect the chairperson of the meeting.
(2) If the annual Town meeting is held in a year when the office of Town  Board Chairperson is filled by election, the person holding the office on the day prior to the date of the election to fill the office shall preside at the annual Town meeting and is entitled to receive the per diem which is ordinarily paid to the presiding officer. If such person is absent or refuses to serve as the presiding officer, the presiding officer shall be chosen under Subsection (a)(l) above.
(b)	Duties. The Town meeting chairperson shall conduct the meeting's proceedings in accordance with accepted parliamentary  procedure.
(c)	Enforcement Authority. The Town meeting chairperson shall maintain order and decorum and may order any person to leave a Town meeting if the person has conducted himself or herself in a disorderly manner and persisted in such conduct after being directed by the chairperson to cease the conduct. If the person refuses the chairperson's order to withdraw, the Town meeting chairperson may order a constable or other law enforcement officer to take the person into custody until the meeting is adjourned.

State Law Reference:	Section 60.13, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-2-6	Procedure at AH Town Meetings.

(a)	Qualified Voters. Any qualified elector of the Town, as defined under Ch. 6, Wis. Stats., may vote at a Town meeting.
 
Town Meetings
2-2-6


(b)	Definition. A qualified elector, as defined under Ch. 6, Wis. Stats., means an individual who is a U.S. citizen, eighteen (18) years of age or older, and who has been a resident of the Town for at least ten ( l 0) days on the date a Town meeting is held.
(c)	Method of Action; Necessary Votes.  All actions of a Town meeting shall be by  vote.
All questions shall be decided by a majority of the electors voting.
(d)	Order of Business. At the beginning of the Town meeting, the Town meeting chairperson shall state the business to be transacted and the order in which the business will be considered. No proposal to levy a tax, except a tax for defraying necessary Town expenses, may be acted on out of the order stated by the Town meeting chairperson.
(e)	Reconsideration   of  Actions.
(1)	No reconsideration of any vote shall be had at any Town meeting unless it be taken by a majority vote within one (1) hour from the time such vote  shall  have  been passed, or if taken later than one (1) hour, unless it be sustained by a number of votes equal to a majority of all the names entered on the poll list at such election up to the time the motion therefor shall be made. All other questions upon motions at a Town meeting shall be determined by a majority of the electors voting.
(2)	No  action  of a Town meeting may be reconsidered  at a subsequent Town meeting
held prior to the next annual Town meeting unless a special Town meeting is convened under Sec. 60.12(l)(b) or (c), Wis. Stats., and the written request or the call for the meeting states that a purpose of the meeting is reconsideration  of the action.

State Law Reference:  Section 60.14, \Vis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-2-7      Clerk of Town Meetings.

The Town Clerk shall serve as clerk of the Town meeting. If the Town Clerk is absent, the Denutv Town Clerk. if the Town has one. shall serve as town meeting clerk.  If the Denutv Clerk is absent, the Town meeting chairperson shall appoint a clerk of the meeting. The clerk of the Town meeting shall keep a poll list if required by the annual Town meeting under Sec. 60.11(7), Wis. Stats.  The Town meeting minutes shall be signed by the Clerk of the Town meeting and filed in the Office of the Town Clerk within five (5) days after the meeting.

State Law Reference:  Section 60.15, Wis. Stats.
 
Title 2	Chapter 3









 
2-3-1
2-3-2
2-3=3
2-3-4
2-3-5
2-3-6


2-3-8
2-3-9
2-3-10
2-3-11
2-3-12


2-3-13
2-3-14
2-3-15
2-3-16
2-3-17
2-3-18
2-3-19




Sec. 2-3-1
 
Elections to Town Board
General Powers and Duties of the Town Board Miscellaneous Powers of the Town Board Powers and Duties of Town Board Chairperson Internal Powers of the Board
Meetings  of the Town  Board Special  Meetings  of the  Board Open  Meetings
Quorum
Presiding Officer; Absence of Chairperson or Clerk Order of Business
Introduction of Business, Resolutions and Ordinances;
Disposition of Communications Conduct of Deliberations Procedure at Public Hearings Motions; Voting
Reconsideration  of  Questions
Publication  or  Posting  of  Ordinances  and  Resolutions Amendment  of  Rules
Suspension of Rules




Elections to Town Board.
 

(a)	Membership.  The Town Board consists of Lwo (2) Supervisors of the Town of Cady  and the Chairperson.
(b)	Elections.  Biennially in odd-numbered years, at the annual spring election, there shall be
elected a Town Chairperson and two (2) Supervisors to the Cady Town Board, with terms commencing on the third (3rd) Tuesday of April in their year of election.



State Law Reference:   Sec. 60.20, Wis. Stats.
 
Town Board 2-3-2



Sec. 2-3-2	General Powers and Duties of the Town Board.

The Town Board of the Town of Cady has the specific authority, powers and duties, pursuant to Sections 60.10, 60.20, 60.22 and 60.23, Wis. Stats., and has, with authorization of the Town meeting, additional statutory authority, powers and duties to manage and direct certain affairs of the Town of Cady. In addition, the Town Board of the Town of Cady has additional general and specific statutory authority, powers and duties established beyond Chapter 60, Wis. Stats., and as prescribed by this Code of Ordinances.
(a)	Charge of Town Affairs. The Town Board shall have charge of all affairs of the Town not committed by law to another body or officer or to Town employee(s).
(b)	Charge of Actions. The Town Board has charge of any action or legal proceeding to which the Town is a party.
(c)	Viliage Powers. As authorized under Sec. 60.10(2)(c), Wis. Stats., and Sec. 2-1-2 of this Code, the Town Board shall exercise powers relating to villages and conferred on village boards under Ch. 61, Wis. Stats., except those powers which conflict with statutes relating to towns and town boards.
(d)	Jurisdiction of Constable. Pursuant to the Wisconsin Statutes, the Town Board shall determine the jurisdiction  and duties of the Town Constable.
(e)	Pursue Certain Claims of Town. The Town Board shall demand payment of penalties and forfeitures recoverable by the Town and damages incurred by the Town clue to breach of official bond, injury to property or other injury. If, follmving demand, payment is not made, the Board shall pursue appropriate legal action to recover the penalty, forfeiture or damages.

State Law Reference:  Secs. 60. l0(2)(c) and 60.22, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-3-3	Miscellaneous Powers of the Town Board.

The Town Board may:
(a)	Joint Participation. Cooperate with the state, counties and  other  units  of  government under Sec. 66.030 I, Wis. Stats., including cooperative arrangements involving the acquisition, development, remodeling, construction, equipping, operation and maintenance of land, buildings and facilities for regional projects, whether or not located in the Town.
(b)	Utility Districts. Establish utility districts under  Sec. 66.0827,  Wis.  Stats., and provide that any convenience or public improvement in the district be paid for under that Section. l "  utility district n-Lay be used v1hen special services such as, but not li1nited to, street lighting, sidewalks, sewers, water systems, etc., are to be installed in a particular area of the Town only.
(c)	Appropriations for Civic and Other Functions. If authorized  under  Sec. 60.10(3)(b), Wis. Stats., appropriate reasonable amounts of money for gifts or donations to be used to:
 
Town Board
2-3-3


(1)	Further civic functions and agricultural societies.
(2)	Advertise the attractions, advantages and natural resources of the Town.
(3)	Attract  industry.
(4)	Establish industrial  complexes.
(5)	Establish, maintain  and repair ecological areas.
(6)	Provide for the organization, equipment and maintenance of a municipal band or for the employment of other bands to give concerts and municipal entertainment in the Town.
(d)	Town Industrial Development Agency. In order to promote and develop the resources of the Town, appropriate money for and create a Town industrial development agency or appoint an executive officer and provide staff and facilities for a nonprofit organization organized to act under this Subsection. A Town industrial development agency created under this Subsection and Sec. 60.23(4), Wis. Stats., may:
(l)	Develop data regarding the industrial needs of, advantages of and sites in the Town.
(2)	Engage in promotional  activities to acquaint prospective  purchasers  with industrial products manufactured in the Town.
(3)	Coordinate  its  activities  with  the  Regional  Planning  Commission,  the  Wisconsin Department of Commerce and private credit development organizations.
(4)	Engage in any other activity necessary for the continued improvement of the Town's
industrial  climate.
(e) Cooperation in County  Planning.  Cooperate  with  the  county  in  rural  planning  under Secs. 27.015, 59.07(65) and 59.97, Wis. Stats.
(f)	Conservation of Natural Resources.  If authorized by the Town meeting  under Sec.
60.10(3)(a), Wis. Stats., appropriate money for the conservation of natural resources or for payment to a bona fide nonprofit organization for the conservation of natural resources within the Town or beneficial to the Town. No payment may be made to a nonprofit organization unless the organization submits and the Town Board approves a detailed plan of the work to be done. The plan shall include the name of the owner of any property on which work is to be performed.
(g)	Obstructions in Non-navigable Waters. Remove, at the expense of the Town or the property owner(s) at the Town Board's option, any obstruction located in the Town which prevents the natural flow of water in a non-navigable  stream.  One or more Supervisors, or a designee of the Town Board, may enter upon any land if necessary to remove the obstruction.
(h)	Emergency Pest and Disease Control.  Appropriate money for the control of insects,
weeds or plant or animal diseases if:
(1)	An  emergency  arises  within  the  Town  due  to insects,  weeds  or  plant  or  animal diseases; and
(2)	The Town Board  determines  that any delay  resulting  from calling a special Town
meeting to authorize the Town Board to appropriate money for this purpose under Sec. 60.10(3)(c), 'Wis. Stats., would result in serious harm to the general welfare of the Town.
 
Town Board 2-3-3


(i)	Bowling Alleys, Pool Tables  and  Amusement  Devices.  Regulate,  including  the licensing of, bowling alleys, billiard and pool tables and other amusement devices maintained in commercial facilities. If a license is required, the Board shall establish the term of the license, not to exceed one ( 1) year, and the license fee.  The  Board  may suspend or revoke, for cause, a license issued under this Subsection.  Any person violating a regulation adopted under this Subsection shall forfeit to the Town an amount established by the Town Board.
U) Reimbursement of School Districts for Providing  Transportation  in  Hazardous Areas. Reimburse a school district for costs incurred by the district under Sec. 121.54(9), Wis. Stats., in transporting pupils who reside in the Town.
(k) Exchange Tax Credit  for County  land.  Authorize  the  Town  Clerk  to  exchange  any credit the Town has with the county, arising from delinquent real estate taxes, for county­ owned lands.
(l)     Associations of Towns.  Appropriate money to purchase membership in any association of town boards, town officials or town government for the protection of Town interests and improvement of Town government.
(m)	Vacation of Alleys. Vacate  any alley in the Town  under Sec. 66.1003, Wis. Stats. The Town Board may not vacate, under this Subsection, an ailey adjacent to land fronting a state or county trunk highway.
(n)	Cemeteries.   Provide for cemeteries  under Ch. 157, Wis. Stats.
(o)	Change Street Names.  Name, or change the name of, any street in the Town under Sec.
81.01(11), Wis. Stats.
(p)	Use of Firearms. Regulate the careless use of firearms and impose forfeitures for violation of the regulations.
(q)	Fences in Subdivisions. Require a subdivider to construct a fence under Sec.90.02, Wis.
Stats., on the boundary  of a subdivision, as defined under Sec. 236.02(8), Wis. Stats., as a condition of plat approval by the Town. The fence shall be maintained under Sec. 90.05(2), \Vis. Stats., and repaired under Secs. 90.10 and 90.11.
(r)	Disposition of  Dead Animals.   Notwithstanding  Sections 59.07(84)  and  95.50(3),  Wis.
Stats., dispose of any dead animal within the Town or contract for the removal and disposition with any private disposal facility. The Town may enter into a contract with any other governmental unit  under Sec. 66.0301, Wis. Stats., to provide for the removal and disposition.  The Town may recover its costs hereunder by levying a special assessment.

State Law Reference:  Sec. 60.23, Wis. Stats.



            Powers and Duties of Town Board Chairperson.

(a)	General Powers and Duties.  The Town Board Chairperson  shall:
(1)	Preside at Board meetings.   Preside over meetings  of the Town Board.
(2)	Preside at Town meetings.  Preside over Town meetings as provided under Sec.
60.13, Wis. Stats., and Sec. 2-2-5 of this Code.
 
Town Board
2-3-4


(3)	Sign documents.
a.	Sign all ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, orders, regulations, commissions, licenses and permits adopted or authorized by the Town Board unless the Town Board, by ordinance, authorizes another officer to sign specific types of documents in lieu of the Chairperson. The Board, by ordinance, may authorize use of  a facsimile  signature.
b.	Sign all drafts, order checks and transfer orders as provided under Sec. 66.0607,
Wis.  Stats.
(4)	Assure administration of Statutes. Supervise the administration of the Wisconsin Statutes relating to the Town and Town operations to see that they are faithfully executed.
(5)	Act on behalf of Board.  Act, on behalf  of the Town Board, to:
 
a.
h
LI•
 
See that Town orders and Ordinances are obeyed.
See that peace  and order are maintained  in tl1c Town.
 
c.	Obtain necessary assistance, if available, in case of emergency, except as provided  under Ch. 166. Wis. Stats.
(6)	Act on authorization of Board.  If authorized by the Town Board, act on behalf of
the Board to:
a.	Direct, as appropriate, the solicitation of bids and quotations for the Town's purchase of equipment, materials and services and submit the bids and quotations to the Town· Board for approval. Although the Town Board may direct the Chairperson to solicit bids and quotations, the final decision as to which bid to accept or the decision to enter into a contract shall be made by the entire Board.
b.	Represent, or designate another officer to represent, the Town at meetings of, and hearings before, governmental  bodies on matters affecting the Town.
(b)	Administer  Oaths.  The Chairperson  may  administer oaths and affidavits  on  all matters pertaining to the affairs of the Town.
(c)	Other  Responsibilities.	In addition to the powers and duties under this Section, the
Chairperson  has the following responsibilities:
(1)	Nominate election officials when the Town Board disapproves the nominee of a party committee under  Sec. 7.30(4)(b)2, Wis. Stats.
(2)	Serve as caucus official under Sec. 8.05(1)(c), Wis. Stats.
(3)	Sue on official bonds  under Sec. 19.015, Wis. Stats.
(4)	Execute and sign a certificate  of indebtedness  in connection  with  obtaining  a state trust fund loan under Sec. 24.67, Wis. Stats.
(5)	Serve as Town fire warden  under Secs. 26.13 and 26.14, Wis. Stats.
(6)	Appoint members of library boards under Secs. 43.54(l)(a) and 43.60(3), Wis. Stats.
(7)	Exercise the powers and duties specified for a mayor under Sec. 62.13, Wis. Stats., if the Town creates a joint board of police and fire commissioners or joint police or fire department with a village under Sec. 61.65(3g)(d)2, Wis. Stats., or a board of police  and fire commissioners under Sec. 60.57, Wis. Stats.
 
Town Board 2-3-4


(8)	Provide an annual estimate of funds necessary for any utility district established under Sec. 66.0827, Wis. Stats.
(9)	Publish  annually  a notice  regarding  noxious  weeds  and  appoint  one  ( l)  or  more
commissioners  of noxious weeds under Secs. 66.0407 and 66.0517, Wis. Stats.
(10)	Sign general obligation bonds issued by the Town under Sec. 67.08(1), Wis. Stats.
(11) If authorized by the Town Board, represent the interests of the Town in connection with appearances before the State Tax Appeals Commission under Sec. 70.64(5), Wis. Stats.
(12)	Approve  the  bond  of  the  Town  Clerk  delivered  to  the  County  Clerk  under  Sec.
70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
(13)	Perform duties in connection with selection of jurors in actions relating to the taking of property to provide access to a cemetery, fairground or land used for industrial expositions under Sec. 80.48(3) and (4), Wis. Stats.
(14)	Sign orders for payment of work performed and materials furnished on Town highways under Sec. 81.04, Wis. Stats.
(15)	See that all tunnels in the Town are constructed under Sec. 81.35, Wis. Stats., and that they are kept in good repair.
(16)	If applicable, serve as a member of the County Highway Committee under Sec.
83.015(l)(d), Wis. Stats.
( 17) If applicable, close county trunk highways when rendered dangerous for travel and notify the Highway Commissioner  under Sec. 80.09, Wis. Stats.
( 18)	If  applicable,  appoint  members  to  airport  commissions  under  Sec.  114.14(2), Wis.
Stats.
( 19) If applicable, vote or designate another Supervisor to vote on whether to abolish a city school district and create a common school district or a unified school district containing the territory of a city school when an order for school district reorganiza­ tion has been issued under Sec. 120.50, Wis. Stats.
(20)	Perform  the Town  Chairperson's duties related  to jewelry  auction  sales under  Sec.
J ':l(\ (\7  \Xlic	te>t<e
_l_JV.V	l f   _l_LJ•    \...>'\, LU.
(21)	Under Sec. 167.10, Wis. Stats., enforce regulation of fireworks.
(22)	Perform the Town Chairperson's duties related to stray animals and lost goods under Ch.  170, Wis. Stats.
(23)	Perform the Town Chairperson's duties related to distrained animals under Ch.  172, Wis.  Stats.
(24)	Perform the Town Chairperson's  duties related  to animals that have caused damage
in the Town under Ch. 173, Wis. Stats.
(25)	If applicable, perform the Town Chairperson's duties related to municipal power and water districts under Ch. 198, Wis. Stats.
(26)	If applicabie, cause actions to be commenced for recover of forfeitures for vioiations
of Town Ordinances that can be recovered in municipal court under Sec. 778.11, Wis. Stats.
 
Town Board
2-3-4


(27)	If applicable, notify the district attorney of forfeitures which may not be recovered in municipal court under  Sec. 778.12, Wis. Stats.
(28)	Approve bonds furnished by contractors for public works under Sec. 779.14( 1), Wis.
Stats.

State Law Reference:   Sec. 60.24, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-3-5	Internal Powers of the Board..

The Town Board has power to preserve order at its meetings, compel attendance of Supervisors and punish  nonattendance.



Sec.. 2-3-6	Meetings of the Town Board.

(a)	Regular Meetings.  Regular meetings of the Town Board of the Town of Cady will be held at the Town of Cady Town Hall at a time determined by the Town Board on the first Monday of each month, or as otherwise determined by the Town Board.  Any  regular meeting of the Town Board falling upon a legal holiday shall be held on the day designated by the Town Board. Any meeting of the Town Board, including any special or adjourned meetings that are not held at the Town Hall but at any other substitute location, shall be designated by the Town Chairperson or his or her designee, in compliance with the open meeting law, by posting a proper written notice of the substituted location at the three (3) usual and customary posting locations likely to give notice. This notice shall occur at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting of the Town Board, unless in an emergency situation wherein the proper notice posting shall occur at least two (2) hours prior to the meeting of the Town Board.
(b)	Board Minutes. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all Board proceedings and cause the proceedings to be published  and/or posted.
(c)	Attendance; Excused Absences.
(1)	Absences. Members of the Town Board may be excused from attending a Board meeting by contacting the Town Chairperson prior to the meeting and stating the reason for his/her inability to attend. If the member is unable to contact the Town Chairperson, the member shall contact the Clerk, who shall convey the message to the Town Chairperson.  Following roll call, the Presiding Officer shall inform the Board of the member's excused absence. Board members who do not follow  the  above process will be considered  unexcused  and it shall be so noted in the minutes.
(2)	Late Arrivals.   Members of the Town Board who anticipate a late arrival to a Board
meeting  should  contact  the  Town  Chairperson  prior  to  the  meeting  and  state the
 
Town Board 2-3-6


reason for the expected late arrival. If the member is unable to contact the Town Chairperson, the member shall contact the Clerk, who shall convey the message to the Town Chairperson. Board members who do not follow the above process and are not in attendance at the time of roll call will be considered as an unexcused  tardy. Members who are not in attendance within one (1) hour of roll call, and have not followed the above process, will be considered as an unexcused absence. Arrival times of members will be noted in the minutes.

State Law Reference:  Sec. 61.32, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-3-7	Special Meetings of the Board..

(a)	Any special meeting of the Town Board may be calied by the Chairperson or any member of the Town Board of the Town of Cady in writing with the written call for the special meeting of the Town Board filed with the Town Clerk at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the proposed special meeting of the Town Board with the time specified in the written call for the special meeting.
(b)	No special meeting of the Town Board shall be held unless the notice requirement of the
State Open Meeting Law, pursuant to Sec. 19.82, Wis. Stats., have been complied with by the person or persons requesting the public meeting.
(c)	The Town Clerk, upon receipt of the written call for the special meeting of the Town Board, shall immediately notify each member of the Town Board by communicating the notice or by having a written notice delivered personally to each member of the Town Board. If any member of the Town Board cannot be personally notified in writing, then the Town Clerk shall deliver or have delivered a copy of the written notice at the home of any such member of the Town Board in the presence of an adult member of the family of the Town Board member. If any member of the Town Board cannot be noticed in writing through an adult family member as noted above, then the Town Clerk shall post such special meeting written notice in the above noted three (3) usual and customary locations. Special Board meetings may not be called by electors. Electors may, in accordance with Ch. 60, Wis. Stats., call for special Town meetings.
(d)	The Town  Clerk shall  file proof  of  service  of such  special meeting  notice  by  filing an
affidavit noting the time, place and location of authorized service of the special meeting notice upon the Town Board. If personal service or written notice upon any member of the Town Board was not completed, then the Town Clerk shall so state in the affidavit the type of service or written  notice completed.
(e) Citizens cannot call a special meeting of the Board. They can only petition for special meetings of the electors for the purposes listed in Sec. 60.10, Wis. Stats. The notice requirement  under Sec. 60.12, Wis. Stats., must  be  followed  (Class 2 notice,  etc.).   The
 
Town Board
2-3-7


Town Board can also call a special meeting of the electors, but this must be done at a Board meeting, not by one member acting alone.
(f) Special meetings of the Town Board attended by a quorum of the  members  shall  be considered a regular meeting of the Town Board for the transaction of any Town of Cady business that may come before the Town Board if such regular Town business was so noted in the written notice to the public as required by the State Open Meeting Law, Sec. 19.82, Wis.  Stats.
(g)	In  the  event  of  an  emergency  (an  unusual  situation  due  to circumstances  that  requires
immediate action) the Chairperson of the Town Board may call an emergency meeting of the Town Board for consideration of the situation requiring immediate action. The Chairperson is responsible for providing notice to the media and public at least two (2) hours in advance of any emergency meeting. The Clerk may assist the Chairperson in giving notice as outlined above. Board members shall be notified of  the  emergency meeting, if possible, and notice may be oral or in writing, by facsimile or by email.



Sec.. 2-3-8	Open Meetings.

(a)	Open Meetings. All Town Board and official Town committee and commission meetings shall be open to the public and be in compliance with Wisconsin's  Open Meeting Law.
(b)	Adjournment of Meetings. An adjournment to a closed session may be only  for  a permitted purpose as enumerated in Sec. 19.85, vVis. Stats., and must meet the other requirements  of said Sec. 19.85, \Vis. Stats.
(c)	Meetings to Be Open. During the holding of any open session  in the regular  meeting room or in the substituted meeting room, said room and said meeting shall at all times be open and remain open to all citizens.
(d)	legally Permitted Closed Meetings.
(1)	Pursuant to Statute.  The provisions of this Code of Ordinances do not prohibit the Board or any committee thereof from having a closed meeting ("executive meeting")
which is legally convened and/or legally held in a room in said building other than the official meeting room or in some other building in the Town provided proper notice is given thereof pursuant to the Wisconsin Open Meeting Law.
(2)	Confidentiality.
a.	Board members shali keep confidential all written materials and  verbal information provided to them during executive sessions, to ensure that the Town's position is not compromised. Confidentiality also includes information provided to members outside of executive sessions when the information is considered to be exempt from disclosure under the laws of the State of \Visconsin.
b.	If the Town Board, after executive session, has provided direction or consensus
to Town staff on proposed terms and conditions for any confidential or privileged
 
Town Board 2-3-8


issue, all contact with any other party shall be made by the designated Town representative handling the issue. Members should consult with the Town Chairperson and/or Town Attorney prior to discussing such  information with anyone other than other Town Board members, the Town Attorney or designated Town staff. Any Town Board member or Town employee having any contact or discussion with any person other than those listed above on any such confidential or privileged issue shall make full disclosure to the Town Board in a timely manner.
(e) Photographs,  Motion  Pictures,  Videotape-Permission  Required   for  Artificial mumination. No photographs, motion pictures, or videotapes that require the use of flash bulbs, electronic flashes, flood lights, or similar artificial illumination shall be  made  at Town Board meetings without the consent of the Presiding Officer.
(f) Disturbances and Disorderly Conduct.  Whenever  any disturbance or disorderly conduct shall occur in any of the meetings of the Town Board, the Chairperson may cause the room to be cleared of all persons causing such disorderly conduct (i.e., "disturbance" means being persistently  out of order).

State Law Reference:  Sec. 61.32 and Ch. 19, Subch. IV, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-3-9	Quorum.

A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn if a majority is not present. The Chairperson shall be counted in determining whether a quorum exists. If no legal quorum is present at the time of the initial roll call, the meeting of the Town Board shall be thereon adjourned by the members of the Town Board present to a specific date and hour.



Sec.. 2-3-10		Presiding Officer; Absence of Chairperson or Clerk.

(a)	Chairperson to Preside. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Town Board when present.
(b)	Chairperson Pro Tern. At the first regular Board meeting following the annual spring election, the Town Chairperson shall appoint a Board member to serve as Chairperson Pro Tern, who shall preside at meetings of the Town Board in the Chairperson's absence. The Chairperson Pro Tern is also authorized to sign documents, ordinances, checks, etc., on behalf of the Tov;n in the Chairperson's absence.
(c)	Absence of Town Clerk at Meeting. If the Town Clerk is not present at the time of the initial roll call of the meeting of the Town Board, the Town Chairperson shall appoint the
 
Town Board
2-3-10


Deputy Clerk or any other person present at the meeting to be the Town Clerk pro tern. The Town Clerk pro tern shall prepare and maintain minutes of the meeting of the Town Board. The Town Clerk pro tern shall deliver these minutes to the Town Clerk after the end of the meeting of the Town Board or when the Town Clerk pro tern is replaced during the meeting of the Town Board by the Clerk.



Sec. 2-3-11	Order of Business..

(a)	Order of Business.
(1)	Meetings of the Town Board may follow the general format guidelines below:
a.	Call to order.
b.    Roll call.
c.	Adoption of agenda; confirmation of meeting notice.
d.	Approval of minutes.
e.	Announcements.
f.	Correspondence.
g.	Financial statement.
h.	Reports of Town officials, commissions and committees.
i.  Unfinished business (must be specific).
J.      New  business  (must be specific).
k.	Committee reports.
1.	Adjournment.
(2) Unless the Town Board as a whole overrules by a two-thirds (2/3) maJonty, the Chaiperson may direct that agenda items be taken in a different order to promote efficiency.
(b)	Agenda Preparation.
(1)	The Town Chairperson, in consultation with the Town Clerk, shall prepare an agenda incorporating the matters comprising the order of business;
(2)	There be included on said agenda a time for hearing citizens wishing to address the Board;
(3)	No matter shall be placed on the agenda of the Town Board unless a request to do so is made to the Town Clerk by the Friday preceding the meeting, (except in emergency situations as determined by the Chairperson or Town Clerk).
(4)	When a Town resident wishes to have a matter placed on the agenda for consideration
at the regular monthly Town Board meeting, the Chairperson or Town Clerk must be notified of the subject matter to be discussed in order to facilitate the proper posting of the item and an orderly meeting. The Town Chairperson shall decide whether the item is to be placed on the agenda for consideration and discussion. Any agenda item of a general nature is insufficient.  The agenda item must be sufficiently specific so
 
Town Board
2-3-11


as to inform the general public of the matter that will be placed before the Town Board for discussion and consideration. The Town Chairperson, in consultation with the Town Clerk, is ultimately responsible for preparation of the agenda, the agenda's content, distribution and use.  Any matter known to the Chairperson as likely to become a subject matter at the meeting should be included on the agenda. At any Town Board meeting where a topic is not on the agenda, a majority of the Board members may direct that the item be placed on the agenda for  the  next  regular meeting of the Town Board or an agenda for a special Town Board meeting to be held.
(c)	Order to be Followed; Citizen Comments.
(1)	Unless the Board as a whole overrules by a majority vote, the Chairperson may direct that  agenda items be considered in a different order to promote efficiency.
(2)	a. At meetings of the Town Board no person, other than the members of this Board, shaH  address the Town Board or any member of the Town Board.  By exception, citizens  may address the Board with permission of the presiding officer, by request of a Supervisor to the Chairperson as to matters that are being considered at the time, or  during such other times noticed on the agenda for public input. This provision shall  not apply to:
1.	The Town Clerk, Town Treasurer, Public Works Director/Road  Supervisor,
Building Inspector, or other Town enforcement officials.
2.	Any member of the Town Board.
3.	Town Engineer or Town Attorney.
b.	This provision shall also not apply under the specmc orders of business established to recognize residents of the Town or other persons, under the specific order of business to recognize members  of any Town office, Town committee, Town agency, Town commission or a special board or other Town officers or except if the person has specifically requested the  right to address the Town Board and then only after the approval of the presiding officer.
c.	The Chairperson or presiding  officer may impose a time limit on the length of
time citizens may address the Board, following the guidelines in Section 2-3-14.
(d)	Roll Call; Procedure When Quorum Not in Attendance. As soon as the Board shall be called to order, the Town Clerk shall note for the record the names of the members who are present and who are absent and record the same in the proceedings of the Board. If it shall appear that there is not a quorum present, the fact shall be entered on the journal and the Board may adjourn.
(e)	Submittal of Written Comments.	If comments are provided in writing, they may be
submitted to the Town Board on matters which the Board is considering at its meeting. It is encouraged that such \Vritten con1_..rnents be filed vvith the Clerk by noon of the Friday preceding the regular meeting. If written comments are given at the meeting, the presenter should provide copies for the Town Board and staff.
 
Town Board
2-3-12


Sec.   2-3-12		Introduction  of  Business,  Resolutions  and Ordinances;  Disposition  of  Communications=

(a)	Ordinances to be in Writing. All ordinances submitted to the Town Board shall be in writing and shall include at the outset a brief statement of the subject matter and a title. All ordinances shall be available then discussed and acted upon as the Town Board deems appropriate.
(b)	Subject and Numbering of Ordinances. Each Ordinance shall be related to no more than one (l) subject. Amendment or repeal of Ordinances shall only be accomplished if the amending or repealing Ordinance contains the number and title of the Ordinance to be amended or repealed, and title of amending and repealing Ordinances shall reflect their purpose to amend or repeal.
(c)	Notice.
(1)	The Town Board may take action on an Ordinance only if it appears on the written agenda for the meeting at which action is requested in order to provide proper legal notice.
(2)	Ordinances  will  be placed  on the  agenda for Town Board  action  only if they  are
submitted to the Town Clerk in written form a minimum of three (3) days prior to the meeting at which action is requested (except in emergency situations as determined by the Chairperson or Town Clerk).
(3)	The Town Board may elect to conduct a public hearing, following proper notice, on ordinances being considered when a public hearing is not statutorily required.
(d) Disposition of Petitions, Communication,  Etc.  Every  petition  or other writing  of  any kind, addressed to the Town Board, Clerk or other Town officer for reference to the Town Board, shall be delivered by the Town Clerk or such other Town officer to the Chairperson or to the presiding officer of the Town Board as soon as convenient after receipt of same and, in any event, prior to  or at the opening of the next meeting of the Town Board following the receipt of same.



Sec.. 2-3-13	Conduct of Deliberations.

(a)	Roll Call Votes. A roll call shall not be necessary on any questions or motions except as follows:
(1)	'When the ayes and noes are requested by any member.
(2)	On confirmation and on the adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriations or disbursing money, or creating any liability or charge against the Tovvn or any fund thereof.
(3)	When requested by the State Statutes of Wisconsin.
(b)	Record of Votes. All aye and nay votes shall be recorded in the official minutes. The ayes and nays shall be ordered upon any question at the request of any single member of
 
Town Board 2-3-:13


the Town Board or the Chairperson.  The Town Clerk shall then cali the roll in alphabetical order, starting with  "A".
(c)	Parliamentary Procedure. Except as provided below, the  deliberations  of  the  Town Board shall be conducted in accordance with parliamentary procedures as published in A Guide to Parliamentary Procedure for Wisconsin Local  Governments (Larry Larmer, author), which is hereby incorporated by reference, unless otherwise provided by Ordinance or Statute, except when otherwise limited or modified by this Code of Ordinances:
(1)	No Supervisor shall address the Town Board until he/she has been recognized by the presiding officer. The Supervisor shall thereupon address himself/herself to the Chairperson and confine his/her remarks to the question under discussion and avoid all personalities.
(2)	When two (2) or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the presiding officer shall  name the member who is to speak first.   All  members shall have a chance to speak  before anyone can speak a second time, a third time, etc.
(3)	No person other than a Board member shall address the Town Board. By exception, citizens may address the Town Board with permission of the presiding officer or by request of a Supervisor to the Chairperson as to matters that are being considered at the  time.



Sec. 2-3-14	Procedure at Public Hearings.

(a)	The Chairperson  shall then  call on those persons who wish to speak for the proposition.
Each person  wishing to speak for the proposition  shall give his or her name and address.
(b)	Each person speaking on behalf of the proposition shall be limited in time of five (5) minutes, or as noticed on the meeting agenda.
(c)	The Chairperson  shall then call on those persons who wish to oppose the proposition.
(d)	Each such person wishing to speak in opposition  to the proposition shall give his or her name and address and shall also be limited to five (5) minutes, or as noticed on the meeting agenda.
(e)	Any person wishing to speak in rebuttal to any statements made may, with the permission
of the Chairperson, do so, provided,  however,  such rebuttal  statement  shall be limited to three (3) minutes by any one (1) individual.
(f)	When the Chairperson in his/her discretion is satisfied that the proposition has been heard,
he/she shall announce the fact that the hearing is concluded.



Sec=  2-3-15	iv1otions; Voting..

(a)	Motions Stated. Prior to any debate on a matter, the members of the Town Board shall be entitled to a clear understanding of the motion before the Town Board. The person making the motion shall clearly state the motion.   There shall be a second to any motion
 
Town Board
2-3-15


prior to any debate or discussion of the motion. Motions made in writing by a member of the Town Board and provided to the Town Clerk prior to the meeting shall be provided priority in the appropriate order of business. The Town Chairperson may, if felt necessary, restate the motion prior to any debate and discussion. Any member of the Town Board, prior to a vote on the motion, may request that the motion and any amendments adopted to the motion be reduced to writing and submitted in writing to the members of the Town Board prior to the final vote on the matter.
(b)	Change of Vote.   No member  of  the Town Board may change his or her vote on any action item, business item, motion or question after the final result has been announced.
(c)	Motions With Preference.  During any meeting of the Town Board certain motions will have preference.   In order of precedence they are:
(l)   Motion to Adjourn.  This motion can be made at any time and has first precedence.
This is a non-debatable motion.
(2)	Motion to Lay on the Tabie. This motion may be made when the subject matter appropriate for tabling is to be debated or discussed. This motion is a non-debatable motion.
(3)	Motion to Call Previous Question. This motion may be made at any time after the debate or discussion commences related to an action item, business item, motion  or question that is properly before the Town Board. This motion is a non-debatable motion. This motion, if adopted, ends the debate and discussion at the meeting on the action item, business item, motion or question. The motion, if adopted, brings the Town Board to a direct vote with the first vote on any amendments, if any, and then to the main action item, business item, motion or question.
(4)	Motion to Postpone to a Date Certain. This motion may be made at any time after the debate and discussion commences on an action item, business item, motion or question that is properly before the Town Board. This motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, ends the debate and discussion at the meeting on the action item, business item, motion or question. This motion must establish a date and time certain when the debate and discussion before the Town Board will continue. The date and time established must be on a date and time for a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the Town Board.
(5)	Motion to a Committee. This motion may be made at any time after the debate and discussion commences on an action item, business item, motion or question that is properly before the Town Board. The motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, ends the debate and discussion at the meeting on the action item, business item, motion or question. This motion, if adopted, forwards the action item, business item, motion or question to a committee for further review and discussion. The committee must be a committee of the Tmvn Board.
(6)	Motion to Amend or Divide the Question.  This motion may be made at any time
after debate and discussion commences on the action item, business item, motion or
 
Town Board
2-3-15


question properly before the Town Board. The motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, divides the main action item, main business item, main motion or main question pursuant to the method described and adopted in the motion to divide.
(7) Motion to Postpone indefinitely.  This motion may be made at any time after debate and discussion commences on the action item, business item, motion or question properly before the Town Board. This motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, ends the debate and discussion at the  meeting on the action item, business item, motion  or question.
(8)    Motion to Introduce a Matter Related to the Action Item, Business Item, Motion or Question. This motion may be made at any time after the debate and discussion commences on the action item, business item, motion or question properly before the Town Board. This motion is debatable. This motion, if adopted, expands or adds to the debate and discussion new items related to the main action item, main business item, main motion or main question pursuant to the method described and approved in the motion to introduce a matter related.
(d)	Public Directory Votes. No member of the Town Board shall request, at a meeting of the Town Board, a vote from the general public unless the proposed vote of the general public is so noted by the Town Chairperson or the presiding officer of the meeting as strictly an advisory vote to the Board. Any vote taken by the general public at a meeting of the Town Board shall be considered by this Board only as an advisory vote and shall not be considered as a directory vote. Directory votes to require certain actions to be taken by the Town Board may occur at an annual or special Town meeting.
(e)	Compelling Votes; Abstentions. No member may be compelled to vote.  When  a member abstains from voting, the effect is the same as if the member voted on  the prevailing side. The "prevailing side" is defined as the votes accumulated which resulted in carrying or defeating a question. In case of a tie vote (not including the abstention), the abstaining vote is considered a "naye."  In case of a vote requiring approval by more than a simple majority, an abstaining vote is considered an "aye." (See also Section 2-5-7 on conflicts of interest).
(f)	Majority Vote; Tie Votes on Motions.
(1)	Unless a larger number is required by statute, ordinance or bylaw, a majority vote of those present at a legally constituted meeting is necessary to carry a question.
(2)	In the case of a tie vote on any motion, the motion shall be considered lost.
(g) Staff Input. During regular or special meetings of the Town Board, the presiding officer may call  for a staff report on business items as the agenda is considered and before a motion is entertained by the presiding officer. Once a motion is pending, debate is limited to Town Board members; additional staff input will be limited to providing clarification on issues if requested by a Town Board member.
 
Town Board
2-3-16


Sec.. 2-3-16	Reconsideration of Questions.

It shall be in order for any member if, in the majority, to move for the reconsideration of any vote in question at the same meeting or at the next succeeding regular adjourned meeting. A motion to reconsider being put and lost shall not be renewed.



Sec. 2-3-17	Publication or Posting of Ordinances and Resolutions.

(a)	General Requirement.
(1)	The Town Clerk shall publish as a Class 1 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., or post in at least three (3) places in the Town of Cady likely to give notice to the public, the following,  within thirty (30) days after passage or adoption:
a.	Resolutions, motions and other actions adopted by the Town meeting, or in the
exercise of powers, under Sec. 60.10, Wis. Stats.   (Posting may be utilized for ordinances without penalties.)
b.	Ordinances adopted by the Town Board.
c.	Resolutions of general application adopted by the Town Board and having the effect of law.
(2)	All ordinances and bylaws shall be signed by the Town Board and countersigned by the Town Clerk; and, if any penalty or forfeiture is thereby imposed, shall be published as a Class l notice, under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats., and shall take effect on the day after its publication or a later date if expressly prescribed. If there is no newspaper published in the Town, the Town Board may in lieu of newspaper publication have copies of ordinances and bylaws posted in at least three (3) public places in the Town and proof thereof filed and recorded by the Town Clerk, and the same shall ta.ke effect the day after the proof of posting has been filed and recorded, or at a later date if expressly provided in the ordinance or bylaw.
(b)	Requirement for Forfeitures. If an ordinance imposes a forfeiture, posting may not be used in lieu of publication under Subsection (a).
(c)	Effective Upon Publication. An ordinance, resolution, motion  or other action required to be published or posted under this Section shall take effect the day after its publication or posting, or at a later date if expressly provided in the ordinance, resolution, motion or action.
(d)	Affidavit of Posting. If an ordinance, resolution, motion or other action is posted under
this Section, the Town Clerk shall sign an affidavit attesting that the item was posted as required by this Section and stating the date and piace of posting. The affidavit shall be filed with other records under the jurisdiction  of the Clerk.

State Law Reference:  Sec. 60.80, Wis. Stats.
Cross-Reference:    Section  2-1-6.
 
Town Board
2-3-18


Sec. 2-3-18     Amendment of Rules.

The rules of this Chapter shall not be rescinded or amended unless the proposed ordinance amendment or motion to rescind has laid over from a regular meeting, and then it shall require a vote of two-third (2/3) of all the members of the Board.



Sec. 2-3-19     Suspension of Rules.

Any  of  the  provisions  of  Sections 2-3-13  through  2-3-16,  inclusive,  of  this  Code  may  be suspended temporarily by a majority  of the Board members present at any meeting.
 
Title 2

Town






2-4-1
2-4-2
2-4-3
2-4-4
2-4-5
2-4-6


2-4-8
2-4-9
2-4-10
2-4-11
2-4-12
2-4-13
2-4-14
2-4-15
2-4-16
2-4-17
2-4-18
2-4-19
 
Chapter 4

cers and Employees






Election of Town Officers; General Provisions; Appointed  Officials Temporary  Vacancies
Official Oath and Bond
Compensation of Elective Town Offices Reimbursement  of Expenses
Compensation When Acting in More Than One Official Capacity
Tovvn Clerk Town  Treasurer Assessor
Building Inspector
Weed  Commissioner Town Attorney Town  Engineer
Town Auditor/ Accountant
Town Constable
Town Employees; Special Office Positions Custody of Official Property
Eligibility for Office/Incompatibility  of Office Form of Oath and Bond




Election of Town Officers; General Provisions; Appointed  Officials.
 

(a)		Elected Town Board Members.  Pursuant to Section 2-3-1, the Town of Cady shall elect a Chairperson and two (2) Supervisors.   (See Section 2-3-1.)
(b)	Restrictions.
(1)	Only an elector of the Town may hold a Town office, other than an Assessor appointed under Sec. 60.307, Wis. Stats., if the Town elects to change the office of Assessor to an appointed position.
(2)	No person may hold the offices of Town Treasurer and Town Assessor at the same
time.	No person  may assume the office of Town Assessor  unless certified by the
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-1


Wisconsin Department of Revenue, under Sec. 73.09, as qualified to perform the functions of the office of Town Assessor. If the Town reverts to a system of electing instead of appointing the Assessor and a person is elected to the office and is not certified by June 1 of the year elected, the office is vacant and the Town Board shall fill the vacancy from a list of persons certified by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue.
(c) Notice of Election. Within five (5) days after completion  of the canvass under Sec. 7.53, Wis. Stats., the Town Clerk shall transmit a notice of election to each person elected to a Town office.
(d)	Term of Office.
(I)	Every elected Town officer shall hold the office for two (2) years.
(2)	The regular term of elected Town officers, other than the Town Assessor, if elected, commenced on the third (3rd) Tuesday of April in the year of their election.
(e)  Appointed Officiais.  The following Town officials may be appointed in the manner and for the term indicated:

Official                                 How Appointed                       Term

Assessor	Town Board	By contract  (3 year maximum  contract)


Building Inspector	Town Board	By contract  (3 year maximum  contract)


Attorney	Town Board	Indefinite  (pleasure  of the Board)

Weed Commissioner	Town Board	1 year

State Law Reference:  Section 60.30, Wis. Stats.
Cross-Reference:    Section  2-3-1.



Sec.. 2-4-2	Temporary  Vacanciesm

(a)	If any elected Town officer, other than a Supervisor, is absent or temporarily incapacitated for any cause, the Town Board may appoint, if there is no deputy officer for the office, a suitable person to discharge the duties of the office until the officer returns or the disability is removed. Appointees shall file the official oath and bond required under Sec. 60.31, Wis. Stats. _
 
Town Officers and Empioyees
2-4-2


(b)	Vacancies on the Town Board shall be filled by appointment by the remaining Supervisors, except when the vacancy is caused by removal by the Circuit Judge as provided by law, which latter vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the said Judge. Persons appointed under this Subsection to fill vacancies shall hold office for the residue of the unexpired term.
(c)	If any elected Town officer, other than a Supervisor, refuses to perform any official duty, the Town Board may appoint a suitable person  to perform those duties which the officer refuses to perform. An appointee shall file the official oath and bond required of the office under Sec. 60.31, 'vVis. Stats. This paragraph does not preclude a finding that refusal to perform  official duties constitutes  cause under Sec.  17.13(3), Wis. Stats.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.30(5), Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-4-3	Official Oath and Bond.

(a)	Official Oath. Except as  provided in Subsection (c), every elected or appointed  Town officer shall take and file the oath under Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., within five (5) days after notification  of election or appointment.
(b)	Official Bond. The Town Clerk, Town Treasurer and elected Assessor, if applicable, shall execute and file an official bond provided by the Town. No natural person may be a surety on a bond under this Subsection. The bond may be furnished by a surety company under Sec. 632.17(2), Wis. Stats. The amount of the bond shall be fixed by the Town Board. If the amount of the bond is not fixed by the Board, the amount shall be the same as that required of the last incumbent of the office. If the Town Board at any time determines that the bond is insufficient, it may require an additional bond to be filed within ten (10) days in an amount fixed by the Board. If the Town Board establishes Deputy Clerk or Treasurer positions, such persons shall be bonded.
(c)	Exceptions. If the Town reverts to a system of electing an Assessor and/or creates a Municipal  Court:
(1)	An elected Assessor shall take and file the official oath and bond at any time between
May 27 to May 31.
(2)	The Municipal Judges shall take and file the official oath and bond under Sec. 755.03, Wis.  Stats.
(d)	Failure to File Oath or Bond.  If any person elected or appointed to a Town office fails
to file a required official oath or bond within the time prescribed by law, the failure to file constitutes  refusal  to serve in office.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.31, Wis. Stats.
Cross-Reference:   Section 2-4-19.
 
Town Officers and Employees 2-4-4


Sec. 2-4-4	Compensation of Elective Town Offices..

(a)	Established by Town Meeting or Board.
(1)	Except as provided under Subsection (a)(2) below, the Town meeting shall establish the compensation  of elective town offices.
(2) If authorized by the Town meeting under  Sec. 60.10(2)(k),  Wis.  Stats.,  the  Town Board shall establish the compensation of elective Town offices, other than the office of Supervisor or Chairperson, which are set by citizen vote.
(b)	Nature of Compensation.   Compensation  under this Section may  be: ( 1)	An annual salary.
(2)	A per diem compensation for each meeting necessarily devoted to the service of the Town and the discharge of duties. Board members or Town officials shall be the Town's authorized representative at a meeting or be attending an authorized conventionitraining  session to be eiigible for per diem compensation.
(3)	A combination of the above.
(c)	Changes During Term. Subject to Subsection (d), the Town meeting or, if authorized to establish compensation, the Town Board may make a change in the compensation of an elective Town office to take effect during the term of office.
(d)	When Established. Compensation under this  Section  shall  be  established  prior  to  the latest  date and time for filing nomination papers for the office. After that date and time, no change  may be made in the compensation of the office that applies to the current term of office.

State Law Reference:  Section 60.32, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-4-5	Reimbursement of Expenses.

(a)	Generally. The Town Board may provide for reimbursement of expenses necessarily incurred by any office or employee of the Town in the performance of official Town duties pursuant to Section 3-1-19. The Board may determine who is eligible for expense reimbursement, which expenses are reimbursable and the amount of reimbursement. Expenses reimbursable  under this Section include, but are not limited to:
(1)	Traveling expenses, including mileage, lodging and meal expenses.
(2) Costs associated with programs of instruction related to the officer's or employee's office or employment.
(b)	Manuals.  The Town  Board  may purchase  handbooks  and  manuals  that  will  materially
assist Town officials and employees in the performance  of official  duties

State Law Reference:  Section 60.321, Wis. Stats.
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-6


Sec. 2-4-6	Compensation When Acting in More Than One Official Capacity.

Except for offices  combined under Sec. 60.305, Wis. Stats., the Town may not compensate a Town officer for acting in more than one ( l) official capacity or office of the Town at the same time.

State Law Reference:   Secs. 60.323 and 946.13, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2=4-7       Town Clerk.

The Town of Cady Clerk shall be elected in odd-numbered years for a two (2) year term of office.   The Town Clerk, shall:
(a)     Clerk  of  Town Meeting.   Serve  as  Clerk  of  the Town  meeting  under  Sec. 60.15, Wis.
Stats.
(b)    Clerk of Town Board.
(l)		Serve as Cierk of the  Town  Board,  attend  meetings  of  the  Board  and keep  a full record of its proceedings.
(2)	File all accounts approved by the Town Board or allowed at Town meetings and enter
a statement of the accounts in the Town's record books.
(3)	File  with  the  Tovm  Board  claims  approved  by  the  Clerk,  as required  under  Sec.
60.44(2)(c), Wis. Stats.
(c) Finance Book. Maintain a finance book, which shall contain a complete record of the finances of the Town, showing the receipts, with the date, amount and  source of  each receipt; the disbursements, with the date, amount and object of each disbursement; and any other information relating to Town finances prescribed by the Town Board. The financial records a Town Clerk is expected to maintain are in addition to, not in lieu of, those a Town Treasurer is expected to maintain.
(d)	Elections and Appointments.
(1)	Perform the duties required by Chapters 5 to  12, Wis. Stats., relating to elections.
(2)	Transmit to the County Clerk, within ten (10) days after election or appointment and qualification of any Town Supervisor, Treasurer, Assessor or Clerk, a written notice stating the name and post office address of the elected or  appointed  officer.  The Clerk  shall promptly  notify  the  County  Clerk  of  any  subsequent  changes  in  such offices.
(3)	Transmit to the Clerk of Circuit Court, immediately after the election or appointment
of any Constable or lVIunicipal Judge in the Town, a written notice stating the name of the Constable or Municipal Judge and the term for which elected or appointed. If the Judge or Constable was elected or appointed to fill a vacancy in the office, the Clerk shall include in the notice the name of the incumbent who vacated the office.
 
Town Officers and 2-4-7


(e) Sale of Real Property. Execute the conveyance of real property of the Town. However, prior to the sale of any property by the Town Board, the electors attending a Town meeting must have given the Town Board authorization to do so.
(f)	Notices.
(1)	Publish or post ordinances and resolutions as required under Sec. 60.80, Wis. Stats.
(2) Give notice of annual and special Town meetings as required under Sections 60.11(5) and 60.12(3), Wis. Stats.
(g)	Records.
(1)	Comply with Subch. II of Chapter 19, Wis. Stats., concerning any record of which the Clerk is legal custodian.
(2)	Demand and obtain the official books and papers of any Municipal Judge if the office becomes vacant and the Judge's successor is not elected or appointed and qualified, or if any Municipal Judge dies. The Town Clerk shall  dispose of the books and papers as required by law.
(h)	Licenses. Issue any license or permit granted by the Town Board when any required fee has been paid.
(i)	Schools.
(i)	Perform the Clerk's duties under Chapters 115 to 121, Wis. Stats., relating to public instruction.
(2)	Within ten (10) days after the Clerk's election or appointment, report his or her name
and post office address to the administrator of each cooperative educational service agency which contains any portion of the Town. The Clerk shall report to the administrator the name and post office address of each school district clerk within ten ( 10) days after the name and address is filed in the Clerk's office.
(3)	Make and keep in the Clerk's office a map of the Town, showing the exact boundaries of  school districts within the Town.
(4)	Apportion, as provided by law, tax revenues collected by the Town for schools.
(j) Highways and Bridges. Perform the duties specified in Chapters 80 to 92, Wis. Stats., relating to highways, bridges and drains.
(k)	Notice of Property Tax Revenue. Notify the Clerk of the county in which the Town is located, by March 15, of the proportion of property  tax  revenue  and  the credits  under Sec. 79.10, Wis. Stats., that is to be disbursed by the County Clerk to each taxing jurisdiction  located in the Town.
(1)	Recording Orders and Certificates. Obtain and maintain  a cancellation  book pursuant to Sec. 66.081, Wis. Stats.
(m)	Statement of  Indebtedness to Secretary of  State.   Furnish,  pursuant  to  Sec. 69.68,
Wis. Stats., a full and complete summary of the bonded indebtedness and all other indebtedness, the purpose for which the sum was incurred and any accrued interest, if any, remaining unpaid to the Secretary of State.
(n)	Managed Forest Act. Receive copies from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources of all petitions for entry under the Managed Forest Law of all lands in the Town
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-7


pursuant to Sec. 77.82(5), Wis. Stats. The Town Clerk shall receive copies of notice of hearings established pursuant to Sec. 77.82(6), Wis. Stats., and copies of any orders issued pursuant  to Sec. 77.82(8), Wis. Stats.
(o)	Notice of  Cessation  of  Operations.	Receive  the  appropriate  notice,  pursuant  to Sec.
109.07, Wis. Stats., of mergers, liquidation, disposition, relocation or cessation of operations from any employer in the Town; the Town Clerk shall then immediately inform the Town Board of receipt of such information.
(p)	Release and Publication of Assessment Roll. Receive the assessment rolls and then publish a Class 1 notice, if applicable, or post notice under Chapter 985, Wis. Stats. The notice will provide that in the noted days the assessment roll will be open for examination by the taxable inhabitants.
(q)	Rabies Control Program. Promptly post notice in at least three (3) public places in the Town pursuant to Sec. 95.21(3), Wis. Stats., with the notices of quarantine to be furnished bv the Denartment of Health and Services.
J	'
(r)	Prepare General Statistics and Annual Statement of Taxes.  J'vfake out and transn:iit
to the County Clerk by years end a statement pursuant to Sec. 69.60, Wis. Stats., showing the assessed value of all property within the Town, all taxes levied, all special assessments made and purposes for special assessments. Also, a complete and detailed statement of the bonded and other indebtedness of the Town and of any accrued interest remaining unpaid and the purpose for which the indebtedness was incurred. In addition, on or before the third Monday of December, the Town Clerk shall file a statement of taxes levied to the Department of Revenue.
(s) Make Tax Roll.  Make out the complete list of all taxable real property  to be called the Tax Roll as required in Sec. 70.65, Wis. Stats.
(t) Correct Tax Roll. Before delivering the Tax Roll to  the  Town  Treasurer  and  after delivering the Tax Roll to the Town Treasurer, shall correct the errors in the Tax Roll required  in Sec. 70.73, Wis. Stats.
(u)	Receive Assessment Roll. Receive from the assessor on or before the first Monday in May the compieted Assessment Roll as required by Sec. 70.50, Wis. Stats.
(v)	Drainage District. Insert in the Tax Roll, in a separate column, amounts certified by the Drainage Board secretary as assessments and interest due as required under Sec. 88.42, Wis. Stats.
(w)	In General.  Perform all other duties required by law, ordinance or lawful direction of the
Town meeting or Town Board.
(x)	Deputy Clerk. The Town Clerk may, pursuant to Sec. 60.331, Wis. Stats., appoint  a Deputy Clerk. The Deputy Clerk shall take and file the oath and bond as required by Sec. 60.31, Wis. Stats. The Town Board shall determine what compensation is to be paid the Deputy Clerk.
 
Town Officers and Emp!oyees 2-4-8


Sec. 2-4-8	Town Treasurer.

The Town of Cady Treasurer shall be elected in odd-numbered years for a two (2) year term of office.   The Town Treasurer,  shall:
(a)	Receive and Disburse Town Money.
(1)	Receive and take charge of all money belonging to the Town, or which is required by law to be paid into the Town treasury, and disburse the money under Sec. 66.0607, Wis.  Stats.
(2)	Keep an itemized account of all moneys received and disbursed, specifying the source
from which it was received, the person to whom it was paid and the object for which it was paid. The Town Treasurer shall issue numbered receipts for all funds received. At the request of the Town Board, the Town Treasurer shall  present  the  account books, and any supporting documents requested, to the Board.
(b)	Deposit of Town Money.
(1)	Deposit as soon as practicable funds of the Town in the name of the Town in the public depositories designated by the Town Board. Failure to comply with this paragraph  is grounds for removal from office.
(2)	When money is deposited under Subsection (b)(1), the Town Treasurer and the Treasurer's sureties are not liable for any loss as defined in Sec. 34.01(6), Wis. Stats. The interest arising from the money deposited shall be paid into the Town treasury.
(c)	Records.   Comply with Subch. II of Ch.  19, Wis. Stats., concerning records of which the Treasurer  is legal custodian.
(d)	Taxes.  Perform all of the duties relating to taxation required of the Town Treasurer under Chapters 70 to 79, Wis. Stats.

State Law  Reference:   Sections 60.33, 60.34, and 60.305, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-4-9	Assessor.

(a)	Qualification.
(1)	The Assessor, or assessment firm, shall be certified by the Wisconsin Department of Revenue under Section 73.03(2)(b), Wis. Stats., as qualified to perform the functions of an Assessor. The Town  Assessor is appointed for an indefinite term of office. Pursuant  to Sec. 60.307(2), Wis. Stats.,
(2)	The Town  has  elected  to change  the  Office  of Assessor  to  an  appointed  position.
Pursuant to Sec. 60.307(2), Wis. Stats., the Assessor is appointed by majority vote of the Tovvn Board for a term as determined by contract, but not less than one (1) year. The Town Assessor so appointed need not be a resident of the Town of Cady and may hold the office of Assessor for another town or municipality with the consent of the Town Board.
 
Town Officers and
 


2-4-9
 


(b) Duties. The Town Assessor shall have all the statutory authority, powers and duties for property tax assessment required of the Town Assessor pursuant to Chapters 60, 66, 70 and 79, Wis. Stats. The Assessor shall begin under Section 70.10, Wis. Stats., to make an assessment of all of the property in the Town liable to taxation, as prescribed by law. The Assessor shall return the assessment roll to the Town Clerk at the same time and in the same manner in which Town Assessors are required to do as required by Chapter 70, Wis. Stats.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.307(2) and Ch. 70, Wis. Stats.
Annotation:   Petzek vs. Graves, 33 Wis. 2d 175 (1967).



Sec.. 2-4-10	Building Inspector.

(a) Appointment. There is hereby created the position of Building Inspector(s), who shall be appointed by the Chairperson, subject to confirmation by the Town Board. The Building Inspector shall have an indefinite term of office or as prescribed by professional services agreement if an inspection firm is selected. The Building Inspector shall review plans, collect building code-related fees and arrange for on-site inspections. The Building Inspector shall have proper certification in areas of responsibility from the State of Wisconsin. If an independent contractor is serving as Town Building Inspector, the Town Board may require that such Building Inspector provide evidence of liability insurance.
(b)	Powers and Duties.
(1)	The Building Inspector shall enforce the Town's building and housing codes and all other ordinances, laws, and orders of the Town and State which relate to building construction, alteration, and repair. With the  authorization of the Town Board, he may appoint one (l) or more Deputy Building Inspectors and may delegate to them the above-mentioned powers and duties.
(2)	The Building Inspector shall make all on-site inspections necessary for compliance and enforcement of the Building Code. The  Building Inspector also assigns  and ensures installation of fire number signs and inspects culverts and  driveways  for proper compliance with Town ordinances.
(3)	The Building Inspector shall also have such responsibilities as assigned under Town
highway construction, driveway and culvert ordinances.
(4)	The Inspectors shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction, alteration, or repair of buildings in the Town when such work is  being done in violation of any Town ordinance. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order, except on written permission  of the appropriate  Inspector.
(c) Right Of Entry.  Inspectors shall have the power to make or cause to be made an entry into any building or premises where the work of altering, repairing, or constructing any building or structure is going on, including plumbing and electrical work.

Cross-Reference:  Title 15, Building Code.
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-11


Sec.. 2-4-11    Weed Commissioner.

The Weed Commissioner may be appointed by the Chairperson, subject to Town Board confirmation.  The term of office of the Weed Commissioner shall commence on the first day of May following his or her appointment. The Weed Commissioner shall take the official oath, which oath shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk, and shall hold office for one (1) year. The Weed Commissioner shall hold office pursuant to and fulfill the duties set out in state law.

State Law Reference:   Secs. 66.0517 and 66.0407, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-4-12     Town Attorney.

(a)	Election. The Office of Town Attorney is an appointed position. The Town Attorney may be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Town Board shall negotiate and establish the compensation in a contract for the designation, retention or employment of an attorney based on a regular salary, per diem rate, retainer, hourly rate, or other methods agreed to by the Town Attorney and the Town Board. The expense to the Town of the services of the Town may be billed back to private properties when such parties have created the need for such expenditures.
(b)	Duties.    The Town Attorney  shall have the following duties:
(1)	The Town  Attorney  shall  conduct  all  of  the  law business  m  which  the  Town  is interested.
(2)	The Town  Attorney  shall,  when  requested  by  Town  officers,  given  written  legal
opinions, which shall be filed with the Town.
(3)	The Town Attorney  shall draft ordinances, bonds  and other instruments  as may be required by Town officers.
(4)	The Town Attorney may appoint an assistant, who shall have power  to  perform his/her duties and for whose acts he shall be responsible to the Town. Such assistant shall receive no compensation from the Town, unless previously provided by Ordinance.
(5)	The Town  Board may  employ  and compensate special counsel to assist in or take
charge of any matter in which the Town is interested.
(6)	The Town Attorney shall perform such other duties as provided by State law and as designated by the Town Board.

State Law Reference:   Section 60.37, Wis. Stats.



Sec 2..4..13    Town Engineer.

The office of Town Engineer is an appointed position. The Town Engineer may be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Board. When authorized by the Town Board,  the  Town  Engineer  shall  provide  engineering  services  to  the  Town.    The  cost  of
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-13


engineering  services provided  to the Tmvn  may be billed  back  to private  parties  when  such parties have created the need for such expenditures.



Sec. 2-4-14	Town Auditor/Accountant.

(a)	Retention. The Town Board may, pursuant to Sections 60.41 and 60.43, vVis. Stats., designate, retain or employ one (l) or more accountants on an as-needed basis, including certified public accountants, on a temporary or continuing basis for financial matters or to represent the Town in financial matters.
(b)	Compensation. The Town Board shall negotiate and establish the compensation in a contract for the designation, retention or employment of an accountant based on a regular salary, per diem rate, retainer, hourly rate or other methods agreed to by the accountant and the Town Board.
(c)	Duties. The accountant has the duties and powers established in Sections 60.41 and 60.43, Wis. Stats., plus any additional powers and duties established pursuant to the retainer contract between the accountant and the Town Board. The appropriate bond shall be filed prior to the Town Board executing the written contract.

Cross-Reference:   Section  3-1-7.



Sec. 2-4-15	Town Constable..

(a)	Statutory Authority. Pursuant to Sec. 60.22(4) and  Sec. 60.35, Wis.  Stats., the  Town Board hereby establishes the jurisdiction and duties of the Town Constable.  For purposes of this Code of Ordinances, a Town Code Enforcement Officer may be appointed  to perform the duties of Town Constable. The Town Constable position will be filled on an as-needed basis, at the discretion of the Town Board.
(b)	Jurisdiction and Duties.  The Town Constable shall:
(1)	Serve as animal control officer and dog catcher in cooperation with law enforcement and humane officers.
(2)	Suppress unlawful assemblies within the Town of Cady pursuant to Sec. 947.06, Wis.
Stats.
(3)	Serve within his/her Town any writ, process, order or notice, and execute any order, warrant or execution  lawfully directed to or required to be executed by him/her by any court or officer..
(4)	Inform the District Attorney  of all trespasses on public lands on which he/she has
knowledge or information.
(5)	Impound cattle, horses, sheep, swine and other animals at large on the highways in violation of any duly published order or ordinance adopted by the Town Board.
 
Tovm Officers and Employees
2-4-15


(6)	Keep order at Town meetings.
(7)	Perform all other duties required by the Town Board.
(8)	Cause  to be  enforced  and prosecuted  all  violations  of  Town  ordinances  of  which he/she has knowledge  or information except building  or zoning code violations.
(9)	Act on behalf  of the Town Board as directed:
a.	To see that Town orders and ordinances in his/her area of jurisdiction  are obeyed.
b.	To see that peace and order are maintained in the Town.
c.	To  obtain  necessary  assistance,  if  available,  in  case  of  emergency,  except  as provided  under Chapter  166, Wis. Stats.
(c)	Nonexclusivity.
(1)	Adoption of this Section does not preclude the Town Board from adopting any other ordinances or providing for the enforcement of any other law or ordinances relating to the same or other matters.
(2) The jurisdiction  and duties of the Town Constable as stated herein shall not preclude the Town Board or any other Town officer from proceeding under any ordinance or law or by any other enforcement method to enforce  any  ordinance,  regulation  or order.



Sec.. 2-4-16	Town Employees; Special Office Positions.

(a)	Town Employees. The Town Board may employ on a temporary or regular basis persons necessary to carry out the functions of Town government. The Board may establish the qualifications and terms of employment, which may include the residency of the employee. The Board may delegate the authority to hire Town employees to any Town official or employee.
(b)	Residency.   The following  special  office positions  need  not be Town  of Cady residents
to hold  these positions  (other Town officials described  in this Chapter  shall be Town  of Cady  residents):
(1)	Town  Attorney.
(2)	Town  Engineer.
(3)	Town  Auditor/ Accountant.
(4)	Town  Assessor.
(5)	Building Inspector.
(6)	Other  consultants.
(7)	Town employees.
(c)	Meeting Attendance. Special office holders listed in Subsection  (b) shall attend or make all good faith efforts to attend all properly called meetings of the To\vn Board if their attendance is requested at least three (3) days prior to the meeting, or as established by professional  services agreement.

State Law Reference:  Section 60.37, Wis. Stats.
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-17


Sec.. 2-4-17	Custody of Official PropertyE

Town officers must  observe  the standards of care imposed by Section  19.21, Wis. Stats., with respect to the care and custody of official property.

State Law Reference:   Section  19.21, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-4-18	Eligibility for Office/Incompatibility of Office..

(a)	Any person who is a qualified elector in the Town of Cady may hold any elected Town office. No member of the Town Board may, during his or her term, be eligible for any Town office or Town position which, during such term, the office or position has been created by or the selection to which is vested in the Town Board. P\.ny member of the Town Board will be eiigible for such Town office or Town position if he or she resigns from the Town Board before being appointed to the Town office or Town position and if the office or position was not created during his or her term in office.
(b)	Certain Town offices are incompatible, by common law and statutory law, with other Town offices and also with other county, state or federal offices. No Town officer shall serve in both offices at the same time. If any question or concern by any person is raised to the Town Board regarding incompatibility of any office in the Town of Cady, the Town Attorney, at the request of the Town Board, shall review the matter and shall provide his or her written comments to the Town Board.



Seca 2-4-19	Official Oath and Bond.

(a) Authority. The Town Board has the specific  statutory  authority,  powers  and  duties, pursuant to Sections 60.20, 60.22 and 60.31, \:Vis. Stats., and under Section 2-4-3 of this Code of Ordinances, to require that certain elected officials take an official oath and to require that they file the appropriate bond.
(b)	Oath.
(1)	General Provision. All elected officers and appointed officers of the Town of Cady, except elected assessors and municipal judges, (if such position is established), shall take and file the below noted oath within five (5) days after notification of election or appointment by the Town Clerk. The written oath of office and the oral oath of office, pursuant to Sec. 19.01, Wis. Stats., shall be substantially in the following form:
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-19


a.	Written Oath.


STATE  OF WISCONSIN,

County of St. Croix


I, the undersigned, who have been elected (or appointed) to the office of          , but have not yet entered upon  the duties thereof, swear (or affirm) that I will support the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state of Wisconsin, and will faithfully discharge the duties of said office to the best of my ability.  So help me God.

 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this   	
 
day of	,  20_.
 




Signature

b.   Oral Oath.

I,                 swear   (or   affirm)   that   I   will   support   the constitution of the state of Wisconsin, and will faithfully and impartially discharge  the  duties  of  the  office  of                       to  the  best  of  my ability.   So help me God.

(2)	Filing Locations. The official oath  of all elected officers and  appointed  officers  of the Town shall be filed with the Town Clerk except that the Town Clerk shall file his or her oath with the Town Treasurer and except that the Municipal Judge (if applicable) shall file his or her oath with the Clerk of the Circuit Court.
(3)	Failure to File Oath. If any elected officer or appointed officer of the Town of Cady
fails to file the proper oath within  the time prescribed by statute, the failure to file constitutes refusal to serve in the office. No Municipal Judge in the Town of Cady shall be paid a salary for anytime during the term during which the Municipal Judge has not executed and filed his or her oath.
(c)	Bonds.
(1)	General Provision. The bond costs shall be provided by the Town of Cady. No natural person may be a surety on a bond.   The bond may be furnished by a surety
 
company under Sec. 632.17(2), Vlis. Stats.	T----
 
T- o-wn-
 
Bm-m--i
 
-r-n---a-Jv  at  anJvtime
 
determine that any bond amount established is insufficient or in excess and may therefore require any officer noted above to file a new bond within ten ( 10) days, in an amount fixed by the Town Board.
 
Town Officers and Employees
2-4-19


(2)	Filing location. The official bond shall be filed with the Town Clerk except that the Town Clerk shall file his or her bond with the Town Treasurer and except that the municipal justice  shall file his or her bond with the Clerk of Circuit Court.
(3)	Failure to File Bond. The elected officers and appointed officers of the Town required to file a bond shall file the required bond before entering upon the duties of the office. If the elected officers and appointed officers of the Town fails to file the required bond within the time prescribed by law, the failure to file the required bond constitutes refusal to serve in office and the office can be declared vacant by the Town Board. No Municipal Judge of the Town shall be paid a salary for anytime during the term during which the Municipal Judge has not executed and fiied the required bond.
 
 
 
Title 2 .,._	Chapter    5

ards, Commissions and Committees





 
2-5-1
2-5-2
2-5-3
2-5-4
2-5-5
 
Board of Review Plan Commission
Zoning Board of Appeals
General Provisions Regarding Meetings and Public Notice Residency  Required for Service on Boards, Committees
or Commissions; Minimum Attendance  Standard
 




Sec.. 2-5-1	Board of Review..

(a)	Composition.
(1)	Membership. The Board of Review for the Town of Cady shall consist of the Chairperson, Town Board  Supervisors and Town Clerk.
(2)	A.ltemate Members. Pursuant to Secs. 70.47(6m)(c) and 70.46(1), Wis. Stats., the Town Board hereby provides for the appointment of alternates to serve on the Board of Review in the event a standing board member of the Board of Review is removed pursuant to Sec. 70.47(a), Wis. Stats., or recused pursuant to Sec. 70.47(b), Wis. Stats. The duly elected Town Treasurer shall serve as the first alternate member of the Board of Review. In addition, the Town Board may establish and maintain a public list of names and persons eligible and appointed by the Town Board to serve as alternative members of the Board of Review. The iist shali be arranged and maintained by the Town Clerk in a priority order of probable and likely service as an alternative. The Town Chairperson shail annualiy appoint two (2) alternate members. The Clerk shall notify any named member who has been lawfully removed under Sec. 60.47(6m)(a) or (b), Wis. Stats., and shall notify the alternate person of his/her appointment to replace a named member of the Board of Review. The alternate, once noticed, if he/she approves the appointment, and he/she would not violate Sec. 19.59, Wis. Stats., shall then take the oath of office and act as a member of the Board of Review under Sec. 60.47(6m)(c), Wis. Stats.
(3)	Training. No Board of Review may be constituted unless it includes at least one (1) voting member who, within two (2) years of the Board's first meeting, has attended a training session under Sec. 73.03(55), Wis. Stats., and unless that member is the municipality's chief executive officer or that officer's designee.  The Town Clerk shall
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees




provide  an  affidavit  to the Wisconsin  Department  of  Revenue  stating whether  the requirement  under this Section has been fulfilled.
(b)	Duties.  The duties and functions of the Board of Review shall be as prescribed  in Secs.
70.46 and 70.47, Wis. Stats.
(c)	Meetings. The Board of Review  shall meet annually on the second Monday of May, or any day within the next thirty (30) days, at the Cady Town Hall of the Town of Cady, and notice of such meeting shall be published pursuant to the  State  Statutes.  The  Board, through its Clerk, shall establish its meeting hours pursuant to Sec. 70.47(3)(b), Wis. Stats. The Board may adjourn from day to day or from time to time, until such time as its business is completed, providing that adequate notice of each adjournment is so given.
(d)	Compensation. Compensation for Board of Review members shall be as established by the Town Board.
(e)	Open Meetings. All meetings of the Board of Review shall be publicly held and open to ail citizens at all times. No formal action of any kind shaH be introduced, deliberated upon or adopted at any closed session or meeting of a Board of Review.

State Law Reference:  Secs. 70.46 and 70.47, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 2-5-2	Plan Commission..

(a)	Title.  This Section is entitled the "Town of Cady Plan Commission  Ordinance."
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish a Town of Cady Plan Commission and set forth its organization, powers and duties, to further the health, safety, welfare and wise use of resources for the benefit of current and future residents of the Town of Cady and affected neighboring jurisdictions, through the adoption and implementation of comprehensive planning with significant citizen involvement.
(c)	Authority; Establishment. The Town Board  of the Town of Cady, having  been authorized by the Town Meeting under Sec. 60.10(2)(c), Wis. Stats., to exercise village powers, hereby exercises village powers under Sec. 60.22(3), Wis. Stats., and establishes a five (5) member Plan Commission under Secs. 61.35 and 62.23, Wis. Stats. The Plan Commission shall be considered the "Town Planning Agency" under Secs. 236.02( 13) and 236.45, Wis. Stats., which authorize, but do not require, Town adoption of a subdivision or other land division ordinance.
(d)	Membership. The Plan Commission shall consist of five (5) citizen members, who are not otherwise Town officials, and who shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.
(e) Appointments. The To\vn Board Chairperson shall appoint the members of the Plan Commission and designate a Commission chairperson during the month of January to fill any expiring term.  All appointments are subject to the approval of the Town Board.  Any
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees
2-5-2


citizen appointed to the Plan Commission shall take effect and file the oath of office within five (5) days of notice of appointment, as provided under Secs. 19.01 and 60.31, Wis. Stats.
(f)	Terms of Office. The term of office for the Plan Commission chairperson and each Commission member shall be for a period of two (2) years, ending on Janurary 30th, or until a successor is appointed and qualified, with two (2) Commissioners appointed in odd­ numbered years and three (3) Comissioners appointed in even-numbered years.
(g)	Vacancies. A person who is appointed to fill a vacancy on the Plan Commission shall serve for the remainder of the term.
(h)	Compensation; Expenses. The Cady Town Board  may set a per diem allowance per meeting for members the Plan Commission, as aliowed under Sec. 66.0501(2), Wis. Stats. In addition, the Town Board may reimburse reasonable costs and expenses,  as allowed under Sec. 60.321, Wis. Stats.
(i)	Experts; Staff. The Plan Commission, under Sec. 62.23(1), Wis. Stats., may recommend to the Town Board the employment of experts and staff, and may review and recommend to the approval authority proposed payments under any contract with an expert.
(j)	Rules; Records. The Plan Commission, under Sec. 62.213(2), Wis. Stats., may adopt rules for the transaction of its business, subject to Town ordinances, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public  record under Secs. 19.21 through  19.39, Wis. Stats.
(k)	Chairperson and Officers.
(1)	Chairperson. The Plan Commission chairperson  shall be appointed and serve a term as provided in Subsections (e) and (f) of this Section.  The chairperson  shall, subject  to Town ordinances and Plan Commission rules:
a.	Provide leadership to the Commission;
b.	Set Commission meeting and hearing dates;
c.	Provide   notice   of  Commission   meetings   and  hearings   and  set  their  agendas, personally  or by his/her designee;
d.	Preside as Commission meetings and hearings; and
e.	Ensure that the laws are followed.
(2)	Vice-Chairperson. The Plan Commission may elect, by open vote or secret ballot under Sec. i9.88(i), Wis. Stats., a vice-chairperson to act in the place of the chairperson when the chairperson is absent or incapacitated for any cause.
(3)	Secretary. The Plan Commission shall elect, by open vote or secret ballot under Sec.
19.88(1), Wis. Stats., one of its members to serve as secretary, or, with the approval of the Town Board, designate the Town Clerk or other Town official or employee as secretary.
(1) Commission Members As local Public Officials. All members of the Plan Commission shall faithfully discharge their official duties to the best of their abilities, as provided in the oath of office [Sec. 19.01, \Vis. Stats.), in accordance with, but not limited to, the provisions of the Wisconsin  Statutes on Public Records [Secs. 19.21 through  19.39, Wis.
 
Boards,  Commissions  and Committees
2-5-2


Stats.); Code of Ethics for Local Government Officials [Secs. 19.42, 19.58 and 19.59, Wis. Stats.); Open Meetings [Secs. 19.81 through 19.89, Wis. Stats.]; Misconduct in Office [Sec.946.12, Wis. Stats.]; and Private Interests in Public Contracts [Sec.  946.13,  Wis. Stats.). Plan Commission members shall further perform their duties in a fair and rational manner and avoid arbitrary  actions.
(m)	General and Miscellaneous  Powers.  The PJan  Commission,  under  Sec. 62.23(4), Wis.
Stats., shall have the power:
(l)    Necessary  to enable it to perform its functions and promote Town planning.
(2)	To make reports and recommendations relating to the planning and development of the Town to the Town Board, other public bodies, citizens, pubiic utilities and organizations.
(3)	To  recommend  to  the  Town  Board  programs  for  public  improvements  and  the
financing of such improvements.
(4)	To receive from public officials, within a reasonable time, requested available information required for the Commission to do its work.
(5)	For itself, its members  and employees,  in the performance  of their duties, to enter
upon land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and markers thereon. However, entry shall not be made upon  private land, except to the extent  that the private land is held open  to the general public, without the permission of the landowner or tenant. If such permission  has  been refused, entry shall be made under the authority of an inspection warrant issued for cause under Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats., or other court-issued warrant.
(n)	Town Comprehensive Planning; General Authority and Requirements.
(1)	Comprehensive Plan. The Plan Commission shall make and adopt a comprehensive plan under Secs. 62.23 and 66.1001, Wis. Stats., which contains the eiements specified in Sec. 66.1001(2), Wis. Stats., and follows the procedures in Sec. 66.1001(4), Wis. Stats. The Plan Commission shall make and adopt the comprehensive plan within the time period directed by the Town Board, but not later than a time sufficient to allow the Town Board to review and plan and pass an ordinance adopting it to take effect on or before January 1, 2010, so that the Town comprehensive plan is in effect by the date on which any Town program or action affecting land use must be consistent with the Town comprehensive plan under Sec. 66.1001(3), Wis. Stats.
(2)   Preparation.  In this Subsection, the requirement to "make" the plan means that the
Plan Commission shall ensure that the plan is prepared, and oversee and coordinate the preparation of the plan, whether the work is performed for the Town by the Plan Commission, Town staff, another unit of government, the regional planning commission, a consultant, citizens, an advisory committee, or any other person, group or organization.
(o)	Procedure for Plan Commission Adoption and Recommendation of a Town Comprehensive Plan or Amendment. The Plan Commission, in order to ensure that the requirements of Sec. 66.1001(4), vVis. Stats., are met, shall proceed as follows:
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees
2-5-2


(1)	Public Participation Verification. Prior to beginning work on a comprehensive plan, the Plan Commission shall verify that the Town Board has adopted written procedures designed to foster public participation in every stage of preparation of the comprehensive plan. These written procedures shall include open discussion, communication programs, information services and noticed public meetings. These written procedures shall further provide for wide distribution of proposed, alternative or amended elements of a comprehensive plan and shall provide an opportunity for written comments to be submitted by members of the public to the Town Board and for the Town Board to respond to such written comments.
(2)	Resolution. The Plan Commission, under Sec. 66.1001(4)(b), Wis. Stats., shall recommend its proposed comprehensive plan or amendment to the Town Board by adopting a resolution by a majority vote of the entire Plan Commission. The vote shall be recorded in the minutes of the Plan Commission. The resolution  shall refer to maps and other descriptive materials that relate to one or more elements of the comprehensive plan.  The resolution adopting a comprehensive plan shall  further recite that the requirements of the comprehensive planning law have been met, under Sec. 66.1001, Wis. Stats., namely  that:
a.	The Town Board adopted vvritten procedures to foster public participation and that such procedures allowed public participation at each stage of preparing the comprehensive plan;
b.	The plan contains the nine (9) specified elements and meets the requirements of
those elements;
c.	The (specified) maps and (specified) other descriptive materials relate to the plan;
d.	The plan has been adopted by a majority  vote of the entire Plan Commission, which the clerk or secretary is directed to record in the minutes; and
e.	The Plan Commission clerk or secretary is directed to send a copy of the comprehensive plan adopted by the Plan Commission to the governmental units specified in Sec. 66.1001(4), Wis. Stats., and Subsection (c) herein.
(3)	Transmittal. One copy of the comprehensive plan or amendment adopted by the Plan Commission for recommendation  to the Town Board shall be sent to:
a.	Every governmental body that is located in whole or in part within the boundaries of the Town, including any school district, Town sanitary district, public inland lake protection and rehabilitation district or other special district.
b.	The clerk of every city, viliage, town, county and regional planning commission that is adjacent to the Town.
C.	The Wisconsin Land Council.
d.	The Wisconsin Department of Administration.
e.	The regional planning  commission in "vhich the Tovvn is locatedp
f.	The public library that serves the area in which the Town is located.
(p)	Plan Implementation  and Administration.
(1)	Ordinance Development. If directed by resolution or motion of the Town Board, the Plan Commission shall prepare the following:
 
Boards, Commissions and Committees
2-5-2


a.	Zoning:	A  proposed  Town  zoning  ordinance  under  village  powers,  Secs.
60.22(3), 61.35 and 62.23(7), Wis. Stats. (if not under county zoning), a Town construction site erosion control and stormwater management zoning ordinance under Sec. 60.627(6), Wis. Stats., a Town exclusive agricultural zoning ordinance under Subchapter V of Ch. 91, Wis. Stats., and any other zoning ordinance within the Town's  authority.
b.	O.fficial Map:	A  proposed  official  map  ordinance  under  Sec. 62.23(6),  Wis.
Stats.
c.	Subdivisions:	A proposed  Town  subdivision  or other land  division  ordinance under Sec. 236.45, Wis. Stats.
d.	Other:   Any  other ordinance specified by  the Town Board  (Note: e.g., historic preservation,  design review site plan review).
(2)	Ordinance Amendment.  The Plan Commission, on its own motion, or at the direction
of the Town Board by its resolution or motion, may prepare proposed  amendments to the Town's ordinances relating to comprehensive planning and land use.
(3)	Non-Regulatory Programs. The Plan Commission, on its own motion, or at the direction of the Town Board by resolution or motion, may propose non-regulatory programs to implement the comprehensive plan, including programs relating to topics such as education, economic development and tourism promotion, preservation of natural resources through the acquisition of land or conservation easements,  and capital improvements  planning.
(4)	Consistency.	Any  ordinance,  amendment   or  program   proposed   by   the  Plan
Commission, and any Plan Commission approval, recommendation for approval or other action under Town ordinances or programs that implement the Town's comprehensive plan under Secs. 62.23 and 66.1001, Wis. Stats., shali be consistent with that plan as of January 1, 2010. If any such Plan Commission action would not be consistent with the comprehensive plan, the Plan Commission shall use this as information  to consider in updating the comprehensive plan.
(q)	Referrals to the Plan Commission.
(l)	)  Required  Referrals  Under  Sec.  62.23( 5),  Wis. Stats.  The  following  shall  be referred to the Plan Com:rnission for report:
a.	The location and architectural design of any public building.
b.	The location of any statue or other memorial.
c.	The location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation, abandonment, change of use,  sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for any:
1.	Street, alley or other public way;
2.	Park or playground;
J,  .llll._irport;
4.	Area for parking vehicles; or
5.	Other memorial  or public grounds.
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees
2-5-2


d.	The location, extension, abandonment or authorization for any publicly or privately  owned public utility.
e.	All plats under the Town's jurisdiction under Ch. 236, Wis. Stats., including divisions under a Town subdivision or other land division ordinance adopted under Sec. 236.45, Wis. Stats.
f.	The location, character and extent or acquisition, lease or sale of lands for:
1.	Public or semi-public housing;
2.	Slum clearance;
3.	Relief of congestion; or
4.	Vacation camps for children.
g.	The amendment or repeal of any ordinance adopted under Sec. 62.23, Wis. Stats., including ordinances relating to the Town Plan Commission, Town master plan, Town comprehensive plan under Sec. 66.1001, Wis. Stats., Town official map and/or Tov1n zoning under village po\vers.
(2)	Required  Referrals  Under Sections  of the  Wisconsin Statutes Other  Than Sec.
62.23(5), Wis. Stats.  The following shall be referred  to the Plan  Commission  for report:
a.	An application for initial Iicensure of a child welfare agency or group home under
Sec. 48.68(3), Wis. Stats.
b.	An application for initial licensure of a community-based residential facility under Sec. 50.03(4), Wis. Stats.
c.	Proposed designation of a street, road or public way, or any part thereof, wholly within the jurisdiction of the Town, as a pedestrian mall under Sec. 66.0905, Wis. Stats.
d.	Matters   relating	to   the   establishment	or   termination	of	an   architectural
conservancy district under Sec. 66.1007, Wis. Stats.
e.	Matter's relating to the establishment of a reinvestment neighborhood required to be referred under Sec. 66.1107, Wis. Stats.
f.	Matters relating to the establishment or termination of a business improvement district required to be referred under Sec. 66.1109, Wis. Stats.
g.	A proposed housing project under Sec. 66.1211(3), Wis. Stats.
h.	Matters relating to urban redevelopment and renewal in the Town required to be referred under Subch. XIII of Ch. 66, Wis. Stats.
L	The adoption or amendment of a Tmvn subdivision or other land division ordinance under Sec. 236.45(4), Wis. Stats.
J.	Any other matter required by the Wisconsin Statutes to be referred to the Plan Commission.
(3)	Required Referrals  Under This Section.   In  addition  to  referrals  required  by  the
\Visconsin  Statutes, the following matters shall be referred to the Plan Commission for report:
 
Boards; Commissions and Committees
2-5-2


a.	Any proposal, under Sec. 59.69, Wis. Stats., for the Town to approve general county zoning so that it takes effect in the Town, or to remain under general county  zoning.
b.	Proposed regulations  or amendments relating to historic preservation  under Sec.
60.64, Wis. Stats.
c.	A proposed driveway access ordinance or amendment.
d.	A proposed Town official map ordinance under Sec. 62.23(6), Wis. Stats., or any other proposed Town ordinance under Sec. 62.23, Wis. Stats., not specifically required by the Wisconsin Statutes to be referred to the Commission.
e.	A proposed Town zoning ordinance or amendment adopted under Secs. 60.22(3),
61.35 and 62.23(7), Wis. Stats., a Town construction site erosion control and stormwater management zoning ordinance under Sec. 627(6), Wis. Stats., a Town exclusive agricultural zoning ordinance under Subchapter V of Ch. 91, Wis. Stats.
f.	A proposed extraterritorial  zoning ordinance  or a proposed amendment  to an
existing ordinance under Sec. 62.23(7a), Wis. Stats.
g.	A proposed boundary change pursuant to an approved cooperative plan agreement under Sec. 66.0307, Wis. Stats., or a proposed boundary agreement under Sec. 66.0225, \Vis. Stats., or other authority.
h.	A  proposed  zoning  ordinance  or  amendment  pursuant  to  an  agreement  in  an
approved cooperative plan under Sec. 66.0307(7m), Wis. Stats.
i.	Any proposed plan, element of a plan or amendment to such plan or element developed by the regional planning commission and sent to the Town for review or adoption.
J.	Any proposed contract, for the provision of information, or the preparation  of a
comprehensive plan, an element of a plan or an implementation measure, between the Town and the regional planning commission, under Sec. 66.0309, Wis. Stats., another unit of government, a consultant or any other person or organization.
k.	A proposed ordinance, regulation or plan, or amendment to the foregoing, relating to a mobile home park under Sec. 66.0435, Wis. Stats.
I.	A proposed agreement, or proposed modification to such agreement, to establish an airport affected area, under Sec. 66.1009, Wis. Stats.
m.	A proposed  town airport zoning ordinance under  Sec. 114.136(2), Wis. Stats.
n.	A proposal to create environmental remediation tax incremental  financing in the town  under Sec. 66.1106, Wis. Stats.
o.	A	proposed	county	agricultural	preservation	plan	or   amendment,	under
Subchapter IV of Ch. 91, Wis. Stats., referred by the county to the Town, or proposed Town agricultural preservation  plan or amendment.
p.	Any other matter required by any Town ordinance or Town Board resolution or
motion to be referred to the Plan Commission.
(4)	Discretionary Referrals. The Town Board, or other town officer or body with final approval authority or referral authorization under the Town ordinances, may refer any of the following to the Plan Commission  for report:
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees
2-5-2


a.	A proposed county development plan or comprehensive plan, proposed element of such plan, or proposed amendment to such plan.
b.	A proposed  county zoning ordinance or amendment.
c.	A  proposed  county  subdivision  or  other  land  division  ordinance  under  Sec.
236.45, Wis. Stats., or amendment.
d.	An appeal or permit application under the county zoning ordinance to the county zoning board of adjustment, county planning body or other county body.
e.	A proposed  intergovernmental  cooperation  agreement, under Sec. 66.0301, Wis.
Stats.,  or  other  statute,  affecting  land  use,  or  a  municipal  revenue  sharing agreement  under Sec. 66.0305, Wis. Stats.
f.	A proposed plat or other land division under the county subdivision or other land division ordinance under Sec. 236.45, Wis. Stats.
g.	A proposed county plan, under Sec. 235.46, Wis. Stats., or the proposed amendment or repeal of the ordinance adopting such plan, for a system of town arterial thoroughfares and minor streets, and the platting of lots surrounded by them.
h.	Any  other  matter  deemed  advisable  for  referral  to  the  Plan  Commission  for
report.
(5)	Referral Period. No final action may be taken by the Town Board or any other officer or body with final authority on a matter referred to the Plan Commission until the Plan Commission has made its report, or thirty (30) days, or such longer period as stipulated by the Town Board, has passed since referral. The thirty (30) day period for referrals required by the Wisconsin Statutes may be shortened only if so authorized by statute.  The thirty (30) day referral period, for matters  subject  to required or discretionary referral under the Town's ordinances, but not required to be referred under the Wisconsin Statutes, may be made subject by the Town Board to a referral period shorter or longer than the thirty (30) day referral period if deemed advisable.



Sec. 2-5-3	Zoning Board of Appeals.

(a) Establishment. A Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed and governed by the State zoning enabling law as contained in Sec. 62.23, Wis. Stats., the Town Zoning Code and ordinances and this Section. The laws of the State or Town and local ordinances shall prevail in that order. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) citizen members and two (2) alternate members,  appointed by the Zoning Board of Appeals Chairperson and subject to confirmation hy the Tov;n Board, for a three (3) year term of office.	The members shali be removable by the Town Board for cause upon written charges and upon public hearing. The Town Chairperson shall designate one of the members  chairperson.
 
Boards, Commissions and Committees 2-5-3


(b)	Powers.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1)	To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any Town Zoning Code or any ordinance adopted under Sections 62.23 or 62.231 (wetlands), 87.30 or 144.26 (flood plains) or Chapter 91 (farmland preservation), Wis. Stats.
(2)	To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the Town zoning and floodplain
zoning regulations  upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass.
(3)	To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the Town zoning regulations as wili not be contrary to the public interest,  where  owing  to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty  or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Zoning Code shall be observed, public safety and welfare  secured and substantial justice done; provided, however, that no such action shall have the effect of establishing in any district a use or uses  not permitted in such district. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant use variances in floodplain or wetland and conservancy districts. In all other districts, no  use variance shall be granted unless the applicant has first petitioned for a zoning amendment or a conditional use permit, if applicable, and upon a showing that no lawful and feasible use of the subject property can be made in the absence of such variance. Any use variance granted shall be limited to the specific use described in the Board's decision and shall not permit variances in yard, area or other requirements of the district in which located.
(4)	To permit  the erection and use of a building or premises in any location  subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purposes of the Zoning Code, for such purposes which are reasonably necessary  for  public convenience  and  welfare.
(5)	The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify
any order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass, or to effect any variation in the requirements of the Zoning Code. The grounds of every such determination shall be stated and recorded. No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals granting a variance shall be valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months from the date of such order unless the land use permit is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration  of a building is started or the use is commenced within  such period.
(c)	Meeting and  Rules.
( 1) Ail meetings and hearings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public, except that the Zoning Board of Appeals may go into closed session to deliberate after
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees
2-5-3


a hearing or an appeal. The final vote on an appeal shall be taken in open session by roll call vote, recorded and open for public inspection in the Board's office. Public notice of all regular and special meetings shall be given to the public and news media as required by the Wisconsin  Open Meeting Law.
(2)	Special meetings  may be  scheduled by  the Chairperson  or by  the  Secretary  at the
request of two (2) members. Notice of a special meeting shall be mailed to each member at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time set for the meeting, or announcement of the meeting shall be made at any meeting at which all members are present.
(3)	Hearings may be held at any regular or special meeting at the time set by the Zoning
Board of Appeals Chairperson. Statutory notice requirements for hearings shall be followed.
(4)	A quorum for any meeting or hearing shall consist of four (4) members, but a lesser
number may meet and adjourn to a specified time.
(5)	The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be public record. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this Code of Ordinances or with the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
(6)	No Zoning Board of Appeals member shall participate in the decision of or vote upon
any case in which the member is financially interested, directly or indirectly, but the Zoning Board of Appeals Chairperson shall direct an alternate member to act instead. Disqualification of a member for interest shall not decrease the number of votes required for acting upon any matter, but such member may be counted in determining whether a quorum is present for the transaction of business.
(d)		Offices.	The  Town  Board  shall provide  suitable  offices  for holding  hearings  and  the presentation  of records, documents, and accounts.

State Law  Reference:   Sec. 62.23(7)(e),  Wis. Stats.



Sec. 2-5-4	General Provisions Regarding Meetings and Public Notice.

(a)	Regular Meetings; Public Notice.
(1)	Every Board, Committee and Commission created by or existing under the ordinances
of the Town shall:
a.	Schedule a date, time and place for its meetings;
b.	Post, or when necessary publish, notice in or notify the official Town newspaper in advance of each such regular meeting of the date, time, and place thereof, in compliance with state law, thereof; and/or
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees 2-5-4


c.	Post and/or publish  an agenda of the matters to be taken up at such meeting.
(2)	A separate public notice shall be given for each meeting at a time and date reasonably proximate to the time and date of the meeting, but not  less  than  twenty-four  (24) hours prior to the commencement of such meeting unless otherwise authorized by law.
(3)	Such notice  shall set forth the time, date, place  and subject matter of the meeting,
including that intended for consideration at any contemplated closed session which may be authorized by law, and may be in the following form:



NOTICE OF MEETING


TOWN OF CADY, WISCONSIN

(commission)

Please take notice that a meeting of the (commission) of the Town of Cady will be held on (date), 20_, at (time) p.m., at the Cady Town Hall to consider the following:
l.	(Agenda items set forth).

2.	Such other matters as authorized by law.


 

 	(Commission)	_



By	_


Any person who has a qualifying disability as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act that requires the meeting or materials at the meeting to be in accessible location or format must contact the Town Office at                phone
(address)	by 2:00 p.m. the Friday prior to the meeting so any necessary  arrangements  can be made to accommodate each request.



 
(b)	N-ot- ic-   e-
 
t-o-
 
M-e-m--b-e-rs-..
 
-E--\re--r-.v; -m-e-m--h--e-r- o-f a---n-.v1  h- n-ar- cL7  c- o-m-m- is- .--io- n o-r c- o-mmitte-e-   o- f t-h--e-  T-o- wn--
 
of Cady shall be notified by the Town Clerk that a meeting is to be held, and the time and place  of  such  meeting  and  the  subject  to  be  considered  thereat.	No  member  shall  be
 
Boards, Commissions  and Committees
2-5-4


intentionally excluded from any meeting by a failure to give proper notice or a reasonable attempt to give proper notice to such member.
(c)	Special Meetings. Nothing in Subsection (a) shall preclude the calling of  a  special meeting or dispensing with the publication of notice or such posting of the agenda, for good cause, but such special meetings shall nonetheless comply in all respects with the provisions of Sections  19.81 and  19.89, Wis. Stats.
(d)	Minutes to Be Kept. Every board, commission and committee shall keep a record of the minutes of its proceedings and shall cause a signed copy thereof to be filed by its secretary with the Town Clerk within one ( 1) week of the meeting date.



Sec.  2-5-5		Residency Required for Service on Boards, Committees or Commissions;
Minimum Attendance Standard.

(a)	Residency. No person not a legal resident of the Town of Cady shall be appointed in a voting capacity to any Town board, committee or commission. Any voting board, commission or committee member who moves from the Town shall immediately be removed  from such board  or committee.
(b)	Attendance Standard. Members of boards, committees and commissions are required to attend a minimum of three (3) consecutive meetings of their respective bodies, unless excused by the chairperson of that body. Failure to comply with this Subsection may result in the removal and replacement of the official found to be in noncompliance by majority vote of the Town Board. Multiple incidents of failure to follow established guidelines and procedures may also be considered just cause for removal by the Town Board without public hearing.
 
 
 
Title 2	Chapter 6

hies C	e





 
2-6-1
2-6-2
2-6-3
2-6-4
2-6-5
2-6-6


2-6-8
2-6-9




Sec. 2-6-1
 
Statement of Purpose Definitions
Statutory  Standards of Conduct
Responsibility  of Public Office Dedicated  Service
Fair and Equal Treatment Conflict of Interest Advisory  Opinions Sanctions




Statement of Purpose.
 

(a)	The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the  people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental strncture; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.	In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established in this Chapter a Code of Ethics for all Town of Cady officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and commissions  of the Town, as well as any individuals who are candidates for elective office as soon as such individuals file nomination  papers with the Town.
(b)	The purpose of this Ethics Code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by  setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the Town of Cady and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the Town. The Town Board believes that a Code of Ethics for the guidance of elected and appointed officials and employees will help them avoid conflicts between their personal interests and their public responsibilities, will improve standards of public service and will promote and strengthen the faith and confidence of the citizens of this Town in their elected and appointed officials and employees. The Town Board hereby reaffirms that each elected and appointed Town official and employee holds his or her position as a public trust, and any  intentional  effort  to  realize  substantial  personal  gain  through  official  conduct  is  a
 
Ethics Code
2-6-1


violation of that trust. The provisions and purpose of this Ethics Code and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the Town of Cady.



Sec. 2-6-2	Definitions.

The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(a)	Public Official. Means those persons serving in statutory elected or appointed offices provided for in Chapter 60 of the Wisconsin Statutes, and all members appointed to boards, committees and commissions established or appointed by the Chairperson and/or Town Board pursuant to this Code of Ordinances, whether paid or unpaid.
(b)	Public Employee. Means any person excluded from the definition of a public official who is employed by the Town.
(c)	Anything of Value. Means any gift, favor, loan, service or promise of future employment, but does not include reasonable fees and honorariums, or the exchange of seasonal, anniversary or customary gifts among relatives and friends.
(d)	Business. Means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual or any other legal entity which engages in profit-making  activities.
(e)	Personal Interest.  Means the following  specific blood  or marriage  relationships:
( 1)	A person's spouse, parent, child, brother or sister; spouse of a parent or child, parent of a spouse, sibling of the Board member or spouse, or spouse of such sibling;
(2)    A person's  relative by blood  or marriage who receives, directly  or indirectly, more
than  one-half  ( 1/2) support from such person  or from whom  such person  receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half (112) of his/her support.
(f) Significant Interest. Means owning or  controlling,  directly  or  indirectly,  at  least  ten percent ( 10%) or Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) of the outstanding stock of at least ten percent ( 10%) or Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) of any business.
(g) Financial Interest. Any interest which  shall yield, directly  or indirectly,  a monetary  or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.



Sec.. 2-6-3	Statutory Standards of Conduct.

There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes which should, while not set forth herein,
 
following sections of the Wisconsin Statutes, as from time to time amended, are made a part of this Code of Ethics and shall apply to public officials and employees whenever applicable, to wit:
 
Ethics Code
2-6-3


(a)	Sec. 946.10.  Bribery of Public Officers and Employees.
(b)	Sec. 946.11.  Special Privileges from Public Utilities.
(c)	Sec. 946.12.  Misconduct in Public Office.
(d)	Sec. 946.13.  Private Interest in Public Contract Prohibited.



Sec.. 2-6-4        Responsibility of Public Office.

Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of this State and carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and Town, to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their prime concern.



Sec.. 2-6-5      Dedicated Service

(a)	Officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority.
(b)	Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others
to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
(c)	Members of the Town staff are expected to follow their appropriate professional  code of
ethics. Staff members shall file a copy of such professional ethics codes with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk may notify the appropriate professional ethics board of any ethics violations involving Town employees covered by such professional standards.



Sec.. 2-6-6       fair and Equal Treatment.

(a)    Use of Public Property.  No official or employee shall use or permit the unauthorized use of Town-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as Town policy for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business, as authorized by the Town Board or authorized board, commission or committee.
(b)       Use of Town Stationery ..     Copies  of any  correspondence  \vritten  on Tovvn  stationery  sbail
be filed with the Town Clerk, or his/her designee.
 
Ethics Code 2-6-6


(c)	Obligations to Citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. No official or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her position with the Town to secure any advantage, preference or gain, over and above his/her rightful remuneration and benefits, for himself/herself  or for a member of his or her immediate family.
(d)	Political Contributions. No official shall personally solicit  from  any  Town  employee, other than an elected official, a contribution to a political campaign committee for which the person subject to this Chapter is a candidate or treasurer.
(e)	Failure to Follow Board Directive. No Town official or employee, whether elected or appointed, shall deliberately, by individual action, direct a member of the public or a party under contract with the Town to take an action or perform an act that is contrary to an official Town policy adopted by the Town Board.



Sec. 2-6-7	Conflict of interest.

(a)	Financial and Personal Interest Prohibited.
(1)	No official or employee of the Town, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the public interest contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or which would tend to impair independence of judgment  or action in the performance of official duties.
(2)	Any member of the Town Board who has a financial interest or personal interest in
any proposed legislation before the Town Board shall disclose on the records of the Town Board the nature and extent of such interest; such official shall not participate in debate or vote for adoption or defeat of such legislation.
(3)	Any non-elected official, other than  a Town employee, who has a financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislative action of the Town  Board  or any board, commission or committee upon which the official has any influence or input or of which the official is a member that is to make a recommendation or decision upon any item which is the subject of the proposed legislative action shall disclose on the records of the Town Board or the appropriate board, commission or committee the nature and extent of such interest. Such official shall not participate in debate or discussion or vote for adoption or defeat of such legislation.
(4)	Any Town employee who has a financial interest or personal interest in any proposed
legislative action of the Town Board or any board, commission or committee upon which the employee has any influence of input, or of which the employee is  a member, that is to make a recommendation or decision upon any item which is the subject of the proposed legislative action shall disclose on the records of the Town Board or the appropriate  board, commission or committee the nature and extent of such interest.
 
Ethics Code
2-6-7


(b) Disclosure of Confidential Information. No official  or employee  shall, without  proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the Town, nor shall such information be used to advance the financial or other private interests of the official or employee or others.
(c)	Gifts and Favors.
(1)	No official or employee, personally or through a member of his immediate family, may solicit or accept, either directly or indirectly, from any person or organization, money or anything of value if it could be expected to influence the employee's official actions or judgments or be considered a reward for any action or inaction on the part of the official or employee.
(2)	No official or employee personally, or through a member of his/her immediate family,
shall accept any gift, whether in the form of money, service, loan, thing or promise, from any person which may tend to impair his/her independence of judgment  or action in the performance of his/her duties or grant in the discharge of his/her duties any improper favor, service or thing of value.
(3)	An  official  or employee  is not  to  accept  hospitality  if,  after  consideration  of  the
surrounding circumstances, it could reasonably be concluded that such hospitality v.rould not be extended were it not for the fact that the guest, or a member of the guest's immediate family, was a Town official or employee. Participation in celebrations, grand openings, open houses, informational meetings and similar events are excluded from this prohibition. This paragraph further shall not be construed to prevent candidates for elective office from accepting hospitality from citizens for the purpose of supporting the candidate's campaign.
(4)	Gifts received by an official or employee or his/her immediate family under unusual
circumstances shall be referred to the Town Board within ten (10) days of receipt for recommended disposition. Any person subject to this Chapter who becomes aware that he/she is or has been offered any gift, the acceptance of which would constitute a violation of this Subsection, shall, within ten ( 10) days, disclose the details surrounding said offer to the Town Board. Failure to comply with this reporting requirement shall constitute an offense under this Chapter.
(d)	Representing Private Interests Before Town Agencies.
(1)	Non-elected Town officials and employees shall not appear on behalf of any private person (other than him or herself, his or her spouse or minor children) before any Town agency, board, commission or the Town Board if the official or employee or any board, commission or committee of which the official or employee is a member has any jurisdiction, discretion or control over the matter which is the subject of such representation.
 
(2)
 
Elected  Town officials mav.,;
 
a-n	L   .nl.  ear before Tovvn a2o"- e-n--cies on behalf of constituents
 
in the course of their duties as representatives of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations.   However, the disclosure requirements  of Subsection
(a)	above shall be applicable to such appearances.
 
Ethics Code
2-6-7


(e)	Ad Hoc Committee Exceptions. No violation  of  the conflict  of  interest restrictions  of this Section shall exist, however, where an individual serves on a special ad hoc committee charged with the narrow responsibility of addressing a specific issue or topic in which that individual, or the employer or a client of that individual, has an interest so long as the individual discloses to the Town Board that such interest exists.
(f)	Contracts with the Town. No Town official or employee  who,  in  his/her  capacity  as such officer or employee, participates in the making of a contract  in which he/she has a private pecuniary interest,  direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that  contract  with some function requiring the exercise of discretion on his/her part shall enter  into  any contract with the Town unless, within the confines of Sec. 946.13, Wis. Stats.:
( l)	The contract is awarded through  a process of public notice and competitive bidding
or the Town Board waives the requirement of this Section after determining that it is in the best interest of the Town to do so.
(2)	The  provisions  of  this  Subsection  shaii  not  apply  to  the  designation  of  a  public
depository  of public funds.



Sec. 2-6-8       Advisory Opinions..

Any questions as to the interpretation of any provisions of this Code of Ethics Chapter shall be made to the Town Chairperson for possible referral  to the Town Attorney.  Such requests shall be as detailed as possible and shall be made in writing. Advisory requests and opinions shall be kept confidential, except when disclosure is authorized by the requestor, in which case the request and opinion may be made public.



             Sanctions.

A determination that an official's or employee's actions constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this Chapter may, in the case of an employee, constitute a cause of suspension, removal from office or employment or other disciplinary action. Sanctions, including any disciplinary action, that may affect employees covered under a labor agreement will be consistent with the terms and conditions set forth in the applicable labor agreement. In the case of an elected or appointed Town official, the Town Board, upon a review of the facts with the individual, may officially reprimand the official or remove such official from certain committee assignments  or responsibilities.
 


ORDINANCE NO. 13 - ---

The Town Board of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County Wisconsin, hereby ordains as follows:

Section 1:  Purpose.	The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances Title 2, Section 2-5-2 (d) to authorize one member of the Plan Commission to be a Town Board member. The reason for this change is that it is authorized by Wis. Stat. 60.62 (4) (a) and will help the Town Board to be kept informed of issues being discussed at the Plan Commission.

Section 2:  Authority.  The Town Board of the Town of Cady has been authorized by the Town Meeting under Sec. 60.11 (2)(c), Wis. Stat. to exercise village powers and the Town has a population of less than 2,500, according to the most recent regular or special federal census. The Town Board hereby exercises village powers under sec. 60.22 (3), 61.35 and, pursuant to Wis. Stat. 60.62 (4) and Wis. Stat.
62.23 (1), hereby amends the authorized membership of the Plan Commission to include one Town Board
member.

Section 3:  Membership:	Title 2, Section 2-5-2 (d) of Town of Cady Code of Ordinances shall be amended to read as follows:

The Plan Commission shall consist of five (5) members, one of which may be the Town Chair or a Town Supervisor.   The remaining commission members shall be citizen members, who are not otherwise Town officials, and who shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.

Section 4:	Balance of Section 2-5-2 remains in effect.  Except as provided ln Section 3 herein, the balance of Town of Cady Code of Ordinances Section 2-5-2 shall remain in effect.

Section 5: Severability.  If any section, provision, sentence or any part of this Ordinance is adjudged to be unconstitutional, unlawful, or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.

Section 6:  Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the Town Board and publication or posting as provided by law.

This Ordinance was duly adopted by the Town Board at a properly noticed Town Board meeting held on March 4, 2013, by a vote of	1-.  in favor,	opposed and	I	not voting.

TOWN OF CADY


n Chair



 
Approved: 	1
Published:	  	 Posted:	 	  
 
Carla Greiber, Town Clerk
 














TITLE 3




Finance and Public	Records



 
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
 
Finance
Special Assessments Public Records
 
(




























(




























(
 
Title 3	Chapter	1

Finance





 
3-1-1
3-1-2
3-1-3
3-1-4
3-1-5
3-1-6
3-1-7
3-1-8
3-1-9
3-1-10
3-1-11
3-1-12
3-1-13
3-1-14
3 1-15
3-1-16
3-1-17
3-1-18
3-1-19

3-1-20
3-1-21
3-1-22






Sec. 3-1-1
 
Fiscal Management
Preparation and Adoption of Budget Changes in Budget
Town Funds to Be Spent in Accordance with Appropriation Annual Financial Statement
Finance Book Financial Audits
Claims Against Town; Outstanding Checks Procedure Disbursements  from Town Treasury
Facsimile  Signatures Public Depositories
Temporary Investment of Funds Not Immediately Needed
Public Contracts and Competitive Bidding Receiving Money; Receipt for Same Statement of Real Property Status Liability of the Town for Acts of Agents Accounts Receivable
Purchasing and Reimbursement
Fee for Returning Checks with Insufficient Funds; Reimbursement of Collection Costs
Delinquent Personal Property Truces
Policy for Public Deposits and Investments
Alternative Claim Procedure for Refunds of Truc Payments in Excess of Tax Bill Amounts




Fiscal Management.
 

The Town Board of the Town of Cady has the specific authority, powers and duties pursuant to Secs. 60.10, 60.20, 60.22, 60.23, 60.40, 60.41, 60.42, 60.44, 60.45, 60.46, 60.47, 65.90, 66.0601,
66.0703, 74.12, Chs. 67 and 70, Wis. Stats., to manage, supervise and direct the fiscal operations
 
Finance
3-1-1


of the Town of Cady and to develop, maintain  and implement  a fiscal management  system for the Town.


Sec. 3-1-2	Preparation and Adoption of Budget.

(a)	Fiscal Year; Annual Budget. The Town of Cady fiscal year is the calendar year. The Town budget  shall be adopted  annually.
(b)	Preparation. The Town Board is responsible for preparation of the proposed  budget required under Sec. 65.90, Wis. Stats., with the assistsance of the Town Clerk and Treasurer: In preparing the budget, the Town Board may provide for assistance by any person.
(c)	Estimates of Budget. Each elected officer and each appointed officer responsible for a department, office, special office, committee, commission, agency, board or other special government unit of the Town of Cady shall file with the Town Clerk, by a date established by the Town Chairperson, the following for their department, office, special office, committee, commission, agency, board or other special government unit of the Town.
(1)	Prior years receipts,  revenues, disbursements  and expenditures.
(2)	Current years receipts,  revenues,  disbursements  and expenditures.
(3)	Estimated  receipts,  revenues,  disbursements  and expenditures  for next year.
(d)	Elements of Budget.  Each budget prepared by  and approved by the Town Board  shall
include the following:	(	'
(1)	All existing indebtedness.
(2)	All anticipated revenue from all sources for ensuing year.
(3)	All proposed  appropriations  for departments,  committees,  commissions  and boards,  active or reserve  accounts for next year.
(4)	All actual revenues and expenditures for preceding year.
(5)	All actual revenue  and expenditures for not less than six (6) months of current year.
(6)	All estimated revenues  and expenditures for the balance of the year.
(7)	All anticipated unexpended  or unappropriated  balances  and surpluses.
(8)	Such other information  as may be required by the Town Board and state law.
(e)	Elements in Budget Summary. Each budget summary prepared by and approved by the Town Board shall include the following:
(1)	All expenditures by major expenditure category for the proposed budget, the budget
in effect and the budget of the preceding year.
(2)	All revenues by major revenue service for the proposed budget, the budget in effect and the budget of the preceding year.
(3)	Any  financial source and use not identified  in Subsection  (e)(l) and (2) above.
(4)	All beginning and year end balances for the proposed budget, the budget in effect and the budget of the preceding year.




(
 
Finance
3-1-2


(f) Copies of Budget. The Town shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared  for distribution  to citizens.
(g)	Hearing. The Town Board shall conduct the budget hearing required under Sec. 65.90, Wis.  Stats.
(h)	Adoption. The Town Board shall adopt the Town budget. The Town meeting may either retain authority to approve any tax levy needed to support spending approved by the Town Board or may delegate the authority to approve a tax levy to the Board.
(i)	Amendment. The Town budget may be amended by the Town Board under Sec. 65.90(5), Wis.  Stats.
U)	Requests for Town Financial Donations from Outside Organizations. Community, civic, youth, sports, etc. organizations intending to make requests to the Town of Cady for donations and other forms of financial support shall follow the procedures prescribed in this Section:
(1)	Notification  for the donation  request  submittal deadline for consideration  under  the
annual budget preparation process .shall be published by the Town in the summer or fall of the year, either by newspaper publication, posting, Town website notification or a combination of any of these methods. Such notice shall provide information on the requirements that must be satisfied to request Town funding to help support programs  benefitting Town of Cady residents, youth  and/or senior citizens.
(2)	.  Generally,  such  requirements  are, but  are not  limited  to:
a.	Submittal of annual operational  costs of the program.
b.	The number of Town of Cady participants in the program.
c.	A list of supplies and/or services furnished to participants by the program.
d.	A list of supplies required to be provided by the participant.
e.	A  description  of  how  donation  monies  from  the  Town  would  be  used  and disbursed.
f.	A  list  of  all  other  sources  of  revenue  or  in-kind  donations  for  the  program, including any user fees required.
(3)	A funding request received  after the filing deadline prescribed  in the annual  notice
shall not be considered for that budget cycle.
(4)	It is solely the responsibility of the outside organization/program and its officers and administrators  to  furnish  and  submit  to  the Town  its  annual  funding  request  on  a timely  basis.
(k)	Budget Monitoring; Grants; Unexpected or Unbudgeted Expenditures.
(1)	The Town Clerk and subordinate Town employees are responsible for  monitoring expenditures, particularly in their area of supervision, to ensure that adopted budget authorizations  are not exceeded.
(2)	When a supervisor anticipates that unbudgeted expenses (unexpected or unplanned at the   time  of  budget   approval)   will  be  incurred   which   will   likely   exceed   the department's or program's budget, the supervisor shall:
 
Finance
3-1-2
 



(
a.	Notify the Town Chairperson and Town Clerk as soon as possible.
b.	Obtain Town Board approval and a budget amendment before such expenditure is authorized or incurred.
 
(3)	As part of their responsibilities, the Town Clerk and department heads/supervisors shall research and pursue grant opportunities. Because some grant applications require expenditure obligations by the Town in the form of matching funding or future financial obligations, the Town Clerk and/or department head/supervisor involved, before submitting grant applications, shall:
a.	Through the Town Clerk, inform the Town Board of the intended application.
b.	Through the Town Clerk, provide information to the Town Board regarding all possible fiscal impacts to the Town inherent in receiving or making application for such grant.



Sec. 3-1-3      Changes in Budget.

The adopted budget shall not be changed after approval of the budget except upon the recommendation of the Chairperson, Town Treasurer or Town Clerk and upon a roll call two­ thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership of the Town Board. Notice of such change shall be given by publication or posted within eight (8) days thereafter.

(
Sec. 3-1-4        Town Funds to Be Spent in Accordance
with Appropriation.

No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Town, nor  shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by Section 3-1-3 of this Chapter. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of any appropriation.shall revert to the general fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; ·but appropriations may be made by the Board, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.



Sec. 3-1-5         Annual  Financial Statement.

The Town Clerk annually shall prepare, and the Town Board adopt, a statement of the financial condition of the Town and present the statement to the annual town meeting.  In preparing the





(
 
Finance
3-1-5


preparing the statement, the Town Board may provide for assistance by any person.  The statement shall include the previous year's revenues and expenditures and the current indebtedness of the Town of Cady.

State Law Reference:	Sec. 60.41, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 3-1-6       Finance Book.

The Town Treasurer shall maintain  a finance book under Sec. 60.33(3), Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 3-1-7      Financial Audits.

A firm of certified public accountants may be employed as needed by the Town to conduct a detailed audit of the Town's financial transactions and its books, and to assist the Town Treasurer in the management of the Town's financial affairs. These auditors would be employed on a project basis.  The records audited shall, in addition to the Town financial records of the office of the Town Treasurer, include fiscal records of any other boards, commissions, officers or employees of the Town of Cady handling Town monies.

State Law Reference:	Secs. 60.43, 60.331 and 66.0605, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 3-1-8         Claims Against Town; Outstanding Checks Procedure.

(a)	legal Claims Against the Town.
(I)	The Town Board shall develop and maintain a policy and plan, pursuant to Sections
60.44 and 893.80, Wis. Stats., to manage and control any legal claims against the Town of Cady, its officers, its employees and its agents. Claims for money against the Town or against officers, officials, agents or employees of the Town arising out of acts done in their official capacity shall be filed with the Town Clerk as provided under Sec. 893.80(l)(b), Wis. Stats. The Town Clerk shall immediately contact the Town Chairperson regarding the claims. The Town Chairperson shall arrange any appropriate and necessary meeting of the Town Board for actions pursuant to Sections
60.44 and 893.80, Wis. Stats., to allow or disallow any claini.  The Town Chairperson
and/or Town Clerk shall, at his or her discretion, contact the Town Attorney regarding the claim prior to the meeting of the Town Board.
(2)	The Town Board shall allow or disallow the claim.  Notice of disallowance shall be made  as provided  under Sec. 893.80(l)(b), Wis. Stats.
 
Finance
3-1-8
(
(b)	Claims Procedure.
(1) The Town, having adopted a resolution to direct the Town Board to exercise village board powers  under Sec. 60.10(2)(c),  Wis. Stats., does now enact an alternative system of approving certain regular financial claims against the Town by virtue of the provisions of Sec. 66.0609, Wis. Stats.
(2)	Payments not in excess of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) may be made from the Town treasury after the Town Clerk audits and approves each claim as a proper charge and endorses his/her approval on the claim after having determined that the following conditions have been met:
a.	That funds are available therefor under the budget  approved by the Town Board.
b.	That the service covered by such claim has been authorized by the proper official, department head, board  or commission.
c.	That the service has been actually rendered in conformity with such authorization.
d.	That the claim is just and valid according to law. The Town Clerk may require the  submission of such proof and evidence to support the above as he/she may deem necessary.
(3)	The authority extended to the Town Clerk above shall apply only to the regular payroll checks of Town employees and the salaries of elected Town officials. All other claims against the Town will be examined and approved in accordance with the applicable law.
(4)	The Town Treasurer shall file with the Town Board, not less than monthly, a list of
the claims approved showing the date paid, name of claimant, purpose and .amount.	(
(5)	The Town Board  may  authorize  detailed  audits of its financial transactions  and
accounts by  a public  accountant licensed under  Ch. 442, Wis. Stats., and designated by the Town Board.	_
(c)	Outstanding Checks Procedures.	The following procedures  are to be followed for
oustanding checks:
(1)	The Town, after carrying a vendor check for ninety (90) days, will:
a.	Notify  payee.
b.	If the check has been lost, a stop payment will be placed at the bank and a new
check will be issued.
c.	A stop payment  will be issued on all vendor  checks dated over twelve (12) months.
(2)	All payroll checks are automatically void if not cashed within ninety (90) days of
issue.

State Law Reference:  Secs. 60.44, 66.0607 and 66.0609, Wis. .Stats.


Sec. 3-1-9	Disbursements from Town Treasury.

Disbursements from the Town treasury shall be made under Sec. 66.0607, Wis. Stats. No claim, account or demand for payment against the Town shall be paid until a voucher has been filed
with or prepared by the Town Clerk or the Town Clerk's report provides an invoice list. Each	(
 
Finance
3-1-9


check representing a disbursement or transfer of Town funds must be signed by the Town Treasurer, Town Clerk and Town  Chairperson, or authorized  deputies.

State Law Reference:   Sec. 60.45, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 3=1-10    Facsimile Signatures.

In lieu of the personal signatures of the Town Treasurer and Town Clerk (or authorized deputy thereof) and Chairperson (or Chairperson Pro Tern in the Chairperson's absence), there may be affixed on order checks the facsimile signatures of such persons adopted by them and approved by the Town Board, but the use of the facsimile signature shall not relieve such official from any liability to which he/she is otherwise subject, including the unauthorized  use thereof.

Cross-Reference:  Section 2-3-10.



Sec.. 3-1-11    Public Depositories.

The Town Board shall designate one (1) or more public depositories for depositing funds of the Town. These public depositories shall be approved financial institutions as noted  in  Sec. 66.0605, Wis. Stats. The Town Treasurer and the Town Treasurer's surety are not liable for loss, as defined under Sec. 34.01(6), Wis. Stats., or money deposited in the name of the Town in a designated public  depository.  Interest  accruing from Town money in a public  depository  shall be credited to the Town.   Designated  public depositories are as follows:
(a)	State Local  Government  Investment  Pool.
(b)	Citizens State Bank.
(c)	First National Bank of Baldwin     Spring Valley Branch.

State Law Reference:  Ch. 34 and Sec. 60.46, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 3-1-12	Temporary Investment of Funds Not Immediately Needed.

(a)	The Town Treasurer, under the policy direction of the Town Board, may invest any Town long-term funds and temporary funds not immediately needed, pursuant to Sections 66.04(2) and  219.05, Wis. Stats., and Section 3-1-22 of this Code of Ordinances.
(b)	The Town Board  and Town Treasurer shall use the following criteria in determining  the financial options available for investing  the financial assets of the Town:
 
Finance
3-1-12

(1)	The safety of the investment. .	(
(2)	The maturity  of the investment.
(3)	The liquidity of the investment.
(4)	The yield of the investment.
(5)	The other services available to the Town with the investment.

State Law Reference:  Secs. 66.0605 and 219.05, Wis. Stats.
Cross-Reference:  Section 3-1-21.



Sec. 3-1-13	Public Contracts and Competitive Bidding.

(a)	Definitions. In this Section:
(1)	"Public contract" means a contract for the construction, execution, repair, remodeling or improvement of any public work or building or for the furnishing of materials or supplies, with an estimated cost greater than Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00).
(2)	"Responsible bidder" means a person who, in the judgment  of the Town Board, is
financially   responsible   and  has  the  capacity   and  competence   to   faithfully   and responsibly  comply with the terms of the public  contract.
(b)	Advertisement for Bids.  Except as provided in Subsections (d) and (e), the Town may not enter into a public contract unless the Town Board, or a Town official or employee	
(
	designated by the Town Board, advertises for proposals to perform the terms of the public	
	contract by publishing a Class 2 notice under Ch. 985, Wis. Stats.  The Town Board may	
	provide for additional means of advertising for bids.  Pursuant to Subsection (a)(l) above,	
	this advertising requirement does not apply to the purchase of equipment; it applies only	
	to the purchase of materials or supplies expected to cost more than Twenty-five Thousand	
	Dollars ($25,000.00).	
(c)	Contracts to Lowest Responsible Bidder.  The Town Board shall let a public contract	
	for which advertising for proposals is required under Subsection  (b) to the responsible	
	bidder most advantageous to the Town.   Section 66.0901, Wis. Stats,, applies to public	
	contracts let under this Section.	
(d)	Contracts with Governmental Entities.  This Section does not apply to public contracts	
	entered into by a town with a municipality, as defined under Sec. 66.0301,(l)(a), Wis. Stats.	
	Municipality, for this Section is defined as the state or any department or agency thereof,	
	or any city, village, town, county, school district, public library system, public inland lake	
	protection and rehabilitation district, sanitary district, farm drainage district, metropolitan	
	sewerage  district,  sewer utility  district, water  utility  distrid, mosquito  control district,	
	municipal  electric  company,  county  or  city  transit  commission  or  regional  planning	
	commission.	



(
 
Finance
3-1-13


(e) Exception for Emergencies. Sec. 60.47(5), Wis. Stats., and this Section are optional with respect to public contracts for the repair and construction of public facilities when damage or threatened damage to the facility creates an emergency, as declared by resolution  of the Town Board, that endangers the public health or welfare  of  the Town.  This Subsection does not apply if the Town Board declares that the emergency no longer exists.
(f) Application to Work by Town. This Section does not apply to any public work performed directly by the Town.

State Law Reference:  Sec. 60.47, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 3-1-14      Receiving Money; Receipt for Same.

(a)	The Town Treasurer (or any Town office employee) shall not receive any money into the treasury from any source except on account of taxes levied and collected during the fiscal year for which he or she may then be serving, without giving a receipt therefor  in the manner specified by the Town Board.
(b)	Upon the payment of any money (except for taxes as herein provided), the Treasurer shall make out a receipt in duplicate for the money so received. The Treasurer shall charge the amount thereof to the treasury  and credit the proper account.  The payment of the money to any receiving agent of the Town or to the Town or to the Treasurer shall be safeguarded in such manner as the Town Board shall direct.

State Law Reference:   Sec. 66.0607, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 3-1-15     Statement of Real Property Status.

The Town Treasurer, Clerk and/or designee are authorized to prepare a Statement of Real Property Status letter to be used to compile and provide information typically requested for transfers of real property such as the amount of outstanding special assessments, deferred assessments, changes in assessments, amount of taxes, contemplated improvements, floodplain status, violation of the building and health codes and similar information. Any such information sought shall be provided to the person requesting it on said letter. The Town Treasurer, Clerk and/or designee may collect a fee, as prescribed in Section 1-3-1, payable at the time a request for compiling such information on said form. The Town Treasurer, Clerk and/or designee shall have a minimum of three (3) business days during the regular work week to satisfy such requests. Neither the Town of Cady nor its officials assume any liability when providing this service.



Sec. 3-1-16    liability of the Town for Acts of Agents.

No  agent  of  the  Town  of  Cady  having  authority  to  employ,  labor  or to purchase  materials, supplies or any other commodities, may bind the Town or incur any indebtedness  for which the
 
Finance
3-1-16


Town may become liable without approval of the Town Board. Each such employment of purchase order shall be drawn against a specific appropriation, the money for which shall be available in the Town treasury and not subject to any prior labor claims or material purchase orders at the time when such employment is negotiated or purchase order drawn. The Town Treasurer or Clerk shall keep a record of such employment and purchase orders and shall charge them against the proper appropriation.



Sec. 3-1-17     Accounts Receivable Billing Procedures.

Billings by the Town may be paid within thirty (30) days after  billing without interest. Thereafter, interest may be charged at the rate of one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) per month or any fraction thereof, until the following first (1st) day of November. Bills not paid on or before the first (1st) day of November may have added to the total amount due one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) of said charges and shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge and become a lien upon real estate.



Sec. 3-1-18      Purchasing and Reimbursement.

(a)	It is the intent of the Town of Cady to establish policies anc;l rules for purchasing and reimbursement of expenses incurred by Town personnel. "Town personnel" are defined as Town  officials,  Town  employees  and  workers,  and  others  assigned  to  conduct  Town	

(
	business.	
(b)	A  signed  and dated  receipt along with  a clear definition  of what  was purchased  shall be	
	filed with the Town Treasurer for all purchases made by Town personnel.	
(c)	General office and maintenance items/supplies for operations and/or maintenance of Town	
	property up to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be purchased by the Town Clerk or	
	Treasurer without Town Board approval provided the items were budgeted.	
(d)	Budgeted items up to Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) in value may be	
	purchased provided the Town Chairperson and the Town Treasurer approve the purchase.	
(e)	Items not specifically included in the budget and budgeted items over Two Thousand Five	
	Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) in value shall be brought to the Town Board for approval prior	

(f)	to purchase.
The Town Chairperson, Town Clerk or Town Treasurer are authorized to expend Town	
	funds necessary to respond to emergency situations.	
(g)	Long distance telephone calls made regarding Town business will be reimbursed.  A copy	
	of the telephone bill with the numbers that were called must be highlighted and filed with	
	the Town Treasurer	
(h)	Registration fees for attendance by Town personnel at workshops, seminars, conferences,	
	meetings and conventions are reimbursable expenses, if prior authorization is first obtained	
.  from  the  Town  Chairperson  or Town  Clerk.

(
 
Finance
3-1-18


(i)   Town workers shall be reimbursed for pre-authorized expenses only. Pre-authorization shall be obtained from the Town Board when such expense items are budgeted or not specifically budgeted.
U)    All reasonable and necessary travel expenses outside the Town incurred in the performance of Town duties may be reimbursed. When personal vehicles are used for Town business, mileage will be compensated/reimbursed at the rate established by the Internal Revenue Service.	Only the vehicle owner/operator of the vehicle will be reimbursed for vehicle travel expense. A Two Hundred and Fifty Dollar ($250.00) limit is applicable for all in­ state expenses. All out-of-state expenses and expenses over the Two Hundred and Fifty Dollar ($250.00) limit require  prior Town Board approval  following  a recommendation from the Town  Clerk.
(k)	When  attending out-of-town  seminars  and meetings,  the actual cost  of meals,  telephone
calls made for Town business, parking fees and lodging will be reimbursed. Hotel checkout times shall be observed to avoid late departure fees. The costs of personal telephone calls or in-room movies will not be reimbursed.
(1)	Membership dues in organizations pertaining to Town business will be reimbursed if budgeted.
(m)	All claims for reimbursement, including for mileage and telephone calls, shall be submitted
to the Town Treasurer on an expense sheet, with receipts for paid expenditures/purchases attached.
(n)	Purchases of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) or less may be paid by cash and the receipt attached
to the time sheet or expense sheet for reimbursement.

Cross-Reference:   Section 2-4-5.



Sec.. 3-1-19	Fee for Returning Checks with  Insufficient Funds; Reimbursement of Collection Costs.

(a)	There shall be a fee in accordance with the Town Board's current fee schedule for processing checks made payable to the Town that are returned because of insufficient funds in the account in question.
(b)	Collection costs and attorneys fees shall be added to the principal amounts of unpaid bills owed to the Town that are placed with collection agencies.



Sec. 3-1-20	Delinquent Personal Property Taxes.

(a)	Pursuant to the authority of Sec. 74.80(2), Wis. Stats., the Town hereby imposes a penalty of one percent (1%) per month or fraction of a month, in addition to the interest prescribed
 
Finance
3-1-20

by Sec. 74.80(1), Wis. Stats., on all overdue or delinquent personal property taxes retained	( for collection  by  the Town  or eventually  charged  back to the Town by  the County  for purposes of collection under Sec. 74.31, Wis. Stats.
(b)	This penalty of one percent ( 1%) per month or fraction of a month shall apply to any personal property taxes which are overdue or delinquent. In addition, if not paid by May 1st, the Town shall pursue the matter in small claims court.


Sec.  3-1-21	Policy for Public Deposits and Investments.

(a)	Purpose.
(1)	Purpose; Establishment of Policies. Cash and investments generally represent the largest asset on the Town's balance sheet, and the Town frequently has cash available for short-term, intermediate and long-term investments. Therefore, it is important that the Town establish a policy to ensure continuous prudent investment of available Town funds. It is in the interest of the Town of Cady to adopt a policy to insure continuous prudent deposits and investments of available Town funds. The Town Board of the Town of Cady establishes the following policies in the public interest for the deposit and investment of available Town funds.
(2)	Objectives.	The  primary  objectives,  in  priority  order,  of  the  Town's  investment
activities shall be:

















(b)	Public Depositories.
(1)	Depositories. The Town Board shall, pursuant to Section 3-1-11, designate one (1) or more public depositories, organized and doing business under the laws of this state or federal law, and located in Wisconsin, in which the Town Treasurer shall deposit all public monies received by her/him.
(2)	Limitations.	The  resolution   or  ordinance  designating  one  (1)  or  more· public
depositories  shall specify  whether  the monies  shall be maintained  in time  deposits subject to the limitations of Sec. 66.0603(lm), Wis. Stats., demand deposits or savings


(
 
Finance
13-1-21


deposits, and whether a surety bond or other security shall be required to be furnished under Sec. 34.07, Wis. Stats., by the public depository to secure the repayment of such deposits. Not more than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000) shall be deposited in any one (1) public depository, unless specifically authorized by the Town Board; however, there will be no deposit limit on funds deposited in the Wisconsin Local Government Pooled Investment Fund.
(3)	Deposits. The Town Treasurer shall deposit public monies in the name of the Town of Cady in such public depositories designated by the Town Board and subject to the limitations hereinabove  set forth.
(4)	Withdrawals. Withdrawals or disbursements by the Town Treasurer of monies deposited in a public depository shall be made as provided by Sec. 66.0607, Wis. Stats. The Town Treasurer is authorized, at her/his discretion, to process periodic payments through the use of money transfer techniques as set forth in Sec. 66.0607, Wis.  Stats.
(c)	Investment  Management.
(1)	Management. Authority to manage the Town's investment program is derived from the Town Board. Management responsibility for the investment program is hereby delegated to the Town Treasurer who shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of subordinate officials. Subject to the provisions of this policy, the Town Treasurer, under the direction of the Town Board, shall have management of and discretion in the investment of all Town funds that are not immediately needed and are available for investment.
(2)	Intent. It is the intent of the Town Board that the Town Treasurer utilize a wise and
prudent cash management system within the level of her/his expertise in such  a manner to insure maximum investment earnings, while at the same time be able to respond promptly to authorized expenditures. Safety, liquidity and yield will be the prime requisites for the investment of Town funds.
(3)	Scope.  This policy is limited in its application to funds which are not immediately
needed and are available for investment. Other funds, the investment of which  is subject to special federal and/or state laws and regulations, shall be invested in accordance with such laws and regulations to the extent they may be inconsistent with the provisions of this policy.
(4)	Responsibility.  In exercising her/his investment responsibilities, the Town Treasurer
shall exercise the care, skill, prudence and diligence  under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a similar capacity, having the same resources, and familiar with like matters in the management of a similar activity, with a like purpose.
(5)	Ethics and Conflicts of Interest.	Town  officials  and employees  involved  in the
investment process shall disclose personal business activity that could conflict with
 
Finance
13-1-21
 




proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to       (
make impartial investment decisions. Employees and investment officials  shall disclose to the Treasurer and Town Board any material financial interest in financial institutions that conduct business  within their jurisdiction.
 
(d)	Investment Types.  Under the general direction of the Town Board, the Town Treasurer is authorized and directed' to utilize investment options as set forth within these guidelines, and that the Town Treasurer shall take into consideration the following factors which are listed in order of priority to the investment decision:
(1)	Certificates of Deposit. Town funds may be invested in certificates of deposit maturing within three (3) years or less from the date of investment issued by any banks, savings and loan associations or credit unions which are authorized to transact business  in  the  State  of  Wisconsin.     The  financial  institutions  must  have  been









































c
 
Finance
13-1-21


highest by Moody's Investors Service, Standard & Poor's Corporation or other similar nationally  recognized  rating agency.
(e)	Safety.
(1)	In order to safeguard investments and deposits, the Town shall acquire of each public depository its annual financial statements and evaluate such statements as to the financial soundness of the depository. Also to be reviewed are other  pertinent financial information filed with regulatory  agencies.
(2)	The Town shall require, when investing in repurchase agreements, that collateral be
pledged by the depository in an amount equal to or greater than the amount of the repurchase agreements the Town has with such depository. In excess of FDIC coverage, the collateral shall be direct obligations of the United States, or of  its agencies if the payment of principal and interest is guaranteed by the federal govern­ ment, or obligations of the State of Wisconsin, or of the Town of Cady. Evidence of such collateral shall be provided by the depository.
·	(3)   Consideration shall also be given to the total amount of existing Town funds which are already in such depository and/or the capacity of the depository to handle the size of the deposit or investment with consideration of federal depository insurance and State of Wisconsin Guarantee Fund requirements. The Town will diversify its investments by security type and institution. With the exception of U.S. Treasury securities and authorized pools, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the Town's total investment portfolio will be invested in a single security type or  with  a  single financial  institution.
(f)	·Liquidity.
(1)	The maturity  of  any  investment  shall  be  determined  by  analyzing  the  following factors:
a.	Immediate cash requirements.
b.	Projected  expenditures.
c.	Available funds on hand.
d.	Maturing  investments.
e.	Anticipated  revenues.
(2)	Investments shall not extend beyond any recognized unfunded cash needs  of  the Town. Major consideration of maturity dates should be given to requirements of the payroll, debt service, and the monthly bills and claims.
(g)	Yield.
(1)	Yield shall be the final determining factor of the investment decision.
(2)	Bids shall be required  of  all investments  that exceed both  One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000) and a thirty (30) day or longer maturity date.  A minimum of three
(3)	bids from the Town's public depository list shall be acquired. Exceptions to the bid process include only the purchase of obligations of the U.S. Treasury and deposits in the Wisconsin Local Government Investment Pool, which shall be registered in the Town of Cady's name.
 
I

Finance
13-1-21

(h)	Miscellaneous.	(
(1)	Liability. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Town Treasurer and designee(s) who deposit(s) public monies in any public depository, in compliance with Sec. 34.05, Wis. Stats., is, under the provisions of Sec. 34.06, Wis. Stats., relieved of any liability for any loss of public monies which results from the failure of any public depository to repay to the public depositor the full amount of its deposits, thus causing a loss as defined in Sec. 34.01(2), Wis. Stats.
(2)	Definitions.  Words or phrases shall, insofar as applicable, have the meaning set forth
in Sec. 34.01, Wis. Stats., as amended.
(3)	Conflicts. This Section is enacted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 34 and Sec. 66.0603, Wis. Stats.   In case of conflict, the state laws shall prevail.
(i)	Definitions.  The following definitions shall be applicable in this Section:
(1)	Benchmark. A comparative base for measuring the performance or risk tolerance of the investment portfolio. A benchmark should represent  a close correlation  to the level of risk and the average duration of the portfolio's  investments.
(2)	Bid.  The price offered by a buyer of securities.
(3)	Broker. A securities professional who brings buyers and sellers together for a commission.
(4)	Collateral.  Securities, evidence of deposit or other property which a borrower pledges
to secure repayment of a loan; also refers to securities pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.
(5)	Coupon. Either:
a.	The annual rate of interest that a bond's issuer promises to pay the bondholder on the bond's face value; or
b.	A certificate attached to a bond evidencing interest due on a payment date.
(6)	Discount. The difference between the cost price of a security and its maturity when quoted at lower than face value. A security  selling below  original  offering  price shortly after sale also is considered to be a discount.
(7)	Diversification.	Dividing. investment  funds  among  a variety  of  securities  offering
independent returns.
(8)	Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP). The aggregate of all funds from political subdivisions that are placed in the custody of the Wisconsin State Treasurer for investment and reinvestment.
(9)	Market  Value.  The price  at  which  a security  is trading  and could presumably  be
purchased or sold.
(10)	Maturity. The date upon which the principal or stated value of  an  investment becomes  due and payable.
(11)	Portfolio.  The collection of securities held by an investor.
(12)	Rate of Return. The yield obtainable on a security based on its purchase price or its current market price.  This may be the amortized yield to maturity on a bond  the current  income  return.


(
 
Finance
13-1-21


(13)	Repurchase Agreement. A holder of securities sells these securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a fixed price on a fixed date. The security "buyer" in effect lends the "seller" money for the period of the agreement, and the terms of the agreement are structured to compensate his/her for this.
(14)	Safekeeping. A service to customers rendered by banks for a fee whereby securities are valuables of all types and descriptions are held in the bank's vaults for protection.
(15)	Treasury Bills. A non-interest bearing discount security issued by the U.S. Treasury to finance the national debt. Most Treasury bills are issued to mature in three (3) months, six (6) months or one (1) year.
(16)	Yield. The rate of annual income return on an investment, expressed as a percentage:
a.	"Income Yield" is obtained by dividing the current dollar income by the current market price of the security.
b.	"Net Yield" or "Yield to Security" is the current income yield minus any premium above par or plus any discount from par in purchase price, with the adjustment spread over the period from the date of purchase to the date  of maturity of the bond.

Cross-Reference:   Section 3-1-12.
State Law Reference:   Ch. 34 and Secs. 66.00601, 66.0603 and 66.0607, Wis. Stats.



Sec.. 3-1-22	Alternative Claim Procedure for Refunds of Tax Payments in Excess of Tax Bill Amounts.

(a)	Purpose and Intent. It is the declared intent of this Section that tax payments in excess of the tax bill amounts shall be refunded pursuant to the procedures established under this Section at the next regular monthly Town Board meeting following the payment.   Further, it is the declared intent that this policy shall be in full force and effect upon adoption by the Town Board, with the purpose of complying with Sec. 74.03(2), Wis. Stats.
(b)	Authority. This Section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to town boards under Sec.  60.44(2), Wis. Stats., to enact an alternative system for approving financial claims against the Town other than claims under Sec. 893.80, Wis.   Stats.
(c)	Required Procedures of Treasurer Upon Payment of Excess Amount Over Tax Bill Amount. Pursuant to Sec. 60.34, Wis. Stats., upon receipt of tax payments in excess of the tax bill, the Town Treasurer shall deposit as soon as practicable all payments in the name of the Town in public depositories designated by the Town Board. Upon verification by the Town Treasurer that the payment as deposited has cleared and not been returned as insufficient funds, but not later than ten (10) days after depositing, the Town Treasurer shall notify the Town Clerk in writing:  the name and mailing address of the taxpayer for whom a refund in excess of the tax bill amount is due, the amount of the refund in excess of the
 
Finance
13-1-22


tax bill,  the date payment  was received,  and  a statement  that  the  payment  as made  has cleared and not been returned  as insufficient funds.
(d)	Required Procedures of Clerk Upon Confirmation of Excess Payment of Tax Bill Amount.
(1)	Upon  written confirmation  from the Town Treasurer that  a taxpayer has made a tax
payment in excess of the tax bill amount, the Town Clerk shall approve a claim as a proper charge against the Town Treasury, and endorse his/her approval on the claim after having determined  that the following conditions have been complied with:
a.	The funds are available to pay  the claim, assuming the tax payment  has cleared and has not been returned.
b.	The Town Board has authorized the refund of excess tax payment  as established by  the adoption  of this Section.
c.	The refund is due on the amount noticed by the Town Treasurer as a tax payment in excess of the amount of the tax bill.
d.	The refund  is a valid claim against the Town, being a payment in excess of the tax  bill  amount.
(2) Further, the Town Clerk shall prepare monthly and file with the Town Board a list of claims paid under this procedure, listing the amount of the claims, the date paid, the name of the taxpayer/claimant, and that the payment was a payment of a refund for excess  tax payment.
(e)	Issuance of Disbursement from Local Treasury.  Upon approval of the claim (or proper
authorization) by the Town Clerk under the procedures listed in Subsection (d), a refund	( check payable to the taxpayer/claimant named in the claim or authorizati.on and in the
amount approved shall be written by the Town Clerk and countersigned by the Town Chairperson and Town Treasurer as required by Sec. 66.042, Wis. Stats., unless facsimile signature approved by the Town Board is used, shall be issued at the next subsequent monthly Town Board meeting following the date the tax payment was received by the Town Treasurer as noticed by theTown Clerk in Subsection (c).
(f) Mailing or Delivery of Refund Check to Taxpayer/Claimant. Upon issuance of the proper countersigned refund check, pursuant to the procedures in this Section, the refund check shall be delivered to the taxpayer;/claimant or mailed to the last known address of the taxpayer/claimant by the Town Clerk or Treasurer.














(
 
Title 3	Chapter 2

Special  Assessments





 
3-2-1
3-2-2
3-2-3
3a2•4
3-2-5
3-2-6
3-2-7
3-2-8
3-2-9
3-2-10
3-2-11
3-2-12
3-2-13




Sec. 3-2-1
 
Town Board May Levy Special Ass'essments Resolution  and Report Required
Costs That May Be Paid by Special Assessment
Exemptions; Deductions
Notice of Proposed  or Approved  Project Board Actions After Hearing
Combined  Assessments
Board's Power to Amend,  Cancel or Confirm Special  Assessment Where Cost of Improvement is Less Than Assessment
Appealed  Assessments  Payable When Due Special Assessment  a Lien on Property Special  Charges  Permissible
Miscellaneous  Provisions




Town  Board  May  levy Special  Assessments.
 

(a)	The Town of Cady by resolution of its Town Board may levy and collect special assessments upon property in a limited and determinable area for special benefits conferred upon such property by any municipal work or improvement and may provide for  the payment  of all or any part of the cost of the work or improvement.
(b)	The amount  assessed  against  any property  for any work or improvement  which does not
represent an exercise of the police power shall not exceed the value of the benefits accruing to the property therefrom, and for those representing an exercise of the police power,  the assessment  shall be upon  a reasonable basis as determined by the Town Board.

State Ltlw Reference:   Section 66.0701, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 3-2-2	Resolution and Report Required.


(a) Prior to making any such special assessments, the Town Board shall declare by preliminary resolution  its  intention  to  exercise  such powers  for  a stated  municipal  purpose.    Such
 
Special Assessments
3-2-:1.
(
resolution  shall  describe  generally  the  contemplated  purpose,  the limits  of  the  proposed
assessment district, the number of installments in which the special assessments  may be paid or that the number of installments will be determined at the hearing required under Section 3-2-5 of this Chapter and direct the proper municipal  officer or employee to make a report thereon:   Such resolution  may limit the proportion  of the cost to be assessed.
(b)	The report required by Subsection  (a) shall consist of:
(1)	Preliminary  or final plans  and specifications.
(2)	An estimate of the entire cost of the proposed  work or improvement.
(3)	An estimate as to each parcel of property  affected of:
a.	The assessment of benefits to be levied.
b.	The damages to be awarded for property taken or damaged.
c.	The  net  amount  of  such  benefits  over  damages  or  the  net  amount  of  such damages over benefits.
(4)	A statement that the property against which the ass.essments are proposed is benefited, where the work or improvements constitute an exercise of the police power. In such case, the estimated required under Subsection (b)(3) shall be replaced by a schedule of the proposed· assessments.
(5)	A copy of the report when completed  shall be filed with the Town Clerk for public inspection.


Sec. 3-2-3     Costs That May be Paid by Special Assessment.                (

The cost of any work or improvement to be paid in whole or in part by special  assessment on property may include the direct and indirect cost thereof, the damages occasioned thereby, the interest on bopds or notes issued in anticipation of the collection of the assessments, a reasonable charge for the services of the administrative staff of the Town and the cost of any architectural, engineering and legal services, and any other item of direct or indirect cost which may reasonably be attributed to the proposed work or improvement. The amount to be  assessed  against  all property for any such proposed work or improvement shall be apportioned among the individual parcels  in the manner designated by  the Town Board.



Sec. 3-2-4        Exemptions; Deductions.

(a)	If any property deemed benefited shall, by reason of any provision of law, be exempt from assessment therefor, such assessment shall be computed and shall be paid by the Town.
(b)	A parcel of land against which has been levied a special assessment for the sanitary sewer
or water main laid in one of the streets upon which it abuts shall be entitled to such deduction or exemption as the Town Board determines to be reasonable and just under the


c
 
Special Assessments
3-2-4


circumstances of each case, when a special assessment is levied for the sanitary sewer or water main laid in the other street upon which such corner lot abuts. Under any circumstance, the assessment will not be less than the long way of such lot. The Town Board may allow a similar deduction or exemption from special assessments levied for any other public improvement.



Sec. 3-2-5	Notice of Proposed or Approved Project.

On the completion  and filing of the report required  in Section  3-2-2(b)(5)  of this Chapter, the Town   Clerk   shall  give  notice   stating  the  nature   of  the  proposed   or  approved   work   or improvement,  the general boundary lines of the proposed assessment district, the place and time at which the report may be inspected and the place and time at which all interested persons, their agents  or  attorneys  may  appear  before  the  Town  Board  or  Committee  thereof  and  be  heard concerning the matters contained in the preliminary  resolution  and report.   Such notice shall be posted in not less than three (3) public places and a copy of said notice shall be mailed to each interested person whose post office address is known.  The hearing shall commence not less than ten (10) days and not more than forty (40) days after the publication  or posting of said notice.



Sec.. 3-2-6	Board Actions After Hearing.

(a)	After the hearing, the Town Board may approve, disapprove, modify or re-refer the report to the designated officer or employee with such directions as it deems necessary  to change the plans and specifications so as to accomplish  a fair and equitable assessment.
(b)	If an assessment be made against any property and an award of compensation or damage be made in favor of the property, the Town Board shall·assess only the difference between such assessment of benefits  and the award of compensation  or damage.
(c)	(1)	If the work or improvement has not.been previously authorized or approved, the Town
Board shall approve the work or improvement and, by resolution, direct that the same be done and paid for in accordance with the report finally approved.
(2) If the work  or improvement has been approved by the Town Board  or work commenced or completed prior to the filing of the report or prior to the hearing, then the Town Board shall, by resolution, confirm the report as made or modified and provide for payment  in whole or in pait by assessment.,
(d)	The Town  Clerk  shall  publish  the  final resolutions  as required  in  Section  3-2-5  of this
Chapter.
(e)	After the publication of the final resolution, any work or improvement provided for and not yet authorized shall be deemed fully authorized and all awards of compensation or damage and all assessments made shall be deemed duly and properly made, subject to the right of appeal by  Section 66.0701(12), Wis. Stats., or any other applicable provision  of law.
 
Special  Assessments
3-2-7
(
Sec. 3-2-7	Combined  Assessments.

If more than a single improvement is undertaken, the Town Board may combine the assessments as a single assessment on each property affected except that the property owner may object to any one (1) or more of said improvements.



Sec.   3-2-8		Board's Power to Amend, Cancel or Confirm Special  Assessment.

If, after completion or after the receipt of bids, the actual cost of any work or improvement is found to vary materially from the original estimate, or the assessment is void or invalid for any reason, or if the Town Board determines to reconsider an assessment, it is empowered, after giving notice as required in Section 3-2-5 to amend, cancel or confirm any prior assessment, and notice of this amending, canceling or confirming be given by the Town Treasurer as provided in Section 3-2-6 of this Chapter.



Sec. 3-2-9        Where Cost of Improvement is less Than Assessment.

If the cost of the work or improvement is less than the assessment levied, the Town Board,
without notice or hearing, shall reduce each ssessment proportionately.	If the assessment has	( been paid either in part or in full, the Town shall refund the property owner such overpayment.



Sec. 3-2-10     Appealed Assessments Payable When Due.

Pursuant to Subsection (12)(F) of Section 66.0701, Wis. Stats., it shall be a condition to the maintenance of any appeal that any assessment appealed shall be paid when due and payable and upon default in payment  any such appeal shall be dismissed.



Sec. 3-2-11     Special Assessment a Lien .on Property.

Pursuant to Subsection (13) of Section 66.0701, Wis. Stats., any special assessment levied under this Chapter shall be a lien on the property against which it is levied on behalf of the Town or appropriate utility district. The Town Board shall provide for the collection of such assessments and may establish penalties for payment after the due date. The Town Board shall provide that all assessments not paid by the date speCified shall be extended upon the tax roll as a delinquent tax against the property and all proceedings in relation to the collection of such delinquent taxes shall apply to such assessment, except as otherwise provided by statute.
 
Special Assessments
3-2-12


Sec. 3-2-12	Special Charges Permissible.

(a)	In addition to all other methods provided by law, special charges for current services may be imposed by the Town Board by allocating all or part of the cost of the property served. Such may include snow and ice removal, weed elimination, street sprinkling, oiling  or tarring, repair of sidewalks or curb and gutter, garbage and refuse disposal, sewer service and tree care or removal. The provision for notice of such charges shall be optional with the Town Board except that, in the case of street, sidewalk, curb or gutter repair,  twenty
(20) days' notice by posting such notice in three (3) places in the Town and a copy of such
notice mailed to every interested person  whose post office address is known, at least ten
(10) days before the hearing or proceeding.   Such notice shall specify that on a certain date a hearing will be held by the Town Board as to whether the service in question shall be perfo1med.
(b)	Such special charges shall not be payable in installments.	If not paid within the period
fixed by the Town Board, such delinquent charge shall become a  lien  as provided  in Section 3-2-11 of this Chapter.
(c)	Section 3-2-2(a) of this Chapter shall not be applicable to proceedings  under this Section.



Sec. 3•2-13	Miscellaneous   Provisions.

(a)	If any assessment or charge levied under this Chapter is invalid because such statutes are found  to be unconstitutional, the Town Board may thereafter reassess such assessment or charge pursuant to the provisions  of any applicable law.
(b)	The Town Board may, without notice or hearing, levy and assess all or any part of the cost
of any work or improvement upon the property benefited if notice and hearing is waived in writing by property owners affected.
(c)	Notwithstanding  any other provision  of law or this or other Ordinance or resolution, it is
specifically intended and provided by this Chapter that the Town may levy special assessments for work or improvement against the property benefited either before or after the approval of the work plans and specifications, contracting for the work or completing the work or improvement.
 
(




























(
 
Title 3	Chapter 3

Public Records





 
3-3-1
3-3-2
3.3.3
3.3.4
3.3.5
3-3-6
3.3.7
3-3-8
3.3.9




Sec.. 3-3-1
 
Definitions
Duty to Maintain Records Legal  Custodian(s)
Public Access to Records Access Procedures
Limitations  on Right to Access Retention and Destruction of Records Specific Records Retention Provisions Confidentiality of Assessor Information




Definitions.
 

(a}  Authority.  Any of the following Town of Cady entities having custody of a Town record: an office, elected  official,  agency, board  commission,  committee, council,  department  or
. public  body  corporate  and  politic  created  by  constitution,  law,  ordinance,  rule  or  order;  or a  formally  constituted  subunit  of  the  foregoing.	·
(b)	Custodian. That officer, department head, division head, or employee of the Town designated under Section 3-3-3 or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any Town records or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who is required by this Section to respond to requests for access to such records.
(c)	Record. Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority. "Record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computer tapes), and computer printouts. "Record" does not include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at a public library.
 
Public Records
3-3-1
(
(d)	Direct  Cost.	The  actual  cost  of  personnel  plus  all  expenses  for  paper,  copier  time,
depreciation  and  supplies.
(e)	Actual Cost.   The total  cost of personnel  including wages,  fringe benefits  and all other
· benefits and overhead related to the time spent in search of records.



Sec. 3-3-2	Duty to Maintain Records.

(a)	Except as provided under Sections 3-3-7, 3-3-9, each officer and employee of the Town shall  safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her predecessor or other persons  and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his or her office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession or  control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
(b)	Upon  the expiration  of  an officer's term of office or an employee's term of employment,
or whenever the office  or position of employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the Town Clerk. If a vacancy occurs before a successor  is  selected  or  qualifies,  such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the Town Clerk, on behalf of the succes­ sor, to be delivered to such successor upon the latter's receipt.
(

Sec. 3-3-3	legal Custodian(s).

(a)	Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the records of his or her  office, but the official may designate the Town Clerk to act as the legal custodian.
(b)	Unless provided in Subsection (c), the Town Clerk or the Town Clerk's designee shall act as  legal custodian for the Town and for any committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of the Town Board. The following offices or  authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the individual so named.

Authority	Designated Legal Custodian

 
General Town Records (including Board Records)
 
Town Clerk
 

Financial Records	Town Treasurer

Building Code Records	Building Inspector




(
 
Public Records
3-3-3


(c)	For every authority not specified in  Subsections (a)  and  (b),  the  authority's  chief administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may designate an  employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(d)	Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or her absence or in  the absence of his or her designee, and each legal custodian shall send notice  of the designated deputy to the Town Clerk.
(e)	The Town Clerk shall establish criteria for establishing the records system and shall cause
the department/office  records system to be reviewed on an annual basis.



Sec.. 3-3-4	Public Access to Records.

(a)	Except as provided in Section 3-3-6 any person has a right to inspect a record and to make or receive a copy of any record as provided in Sec. 19.35(1), Wis. Stats.
(b)	Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office hours.
(c)	If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are kept, the records will be available for inspection  and copying upon at least forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
(d)	A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to Town employees to inspect, copy or abstract a record.
(e)	The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose _other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
(f)	A requester shall be charged a fee as established in Section 1-3-1 to defray the cost of copying records.
(1)	If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the actual and necessary cost of  photographing  and photographic processing shall be charged.
(2)	The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in printed form on paper, such  as films, computer printouts and audio- and video-tapes, shall be charged.
(3)	If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall also be charged.
(4)	There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual cost therefor exceeds Fifty Dollars ($50.00), in which case the actual cost shall be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester. Records which require more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) of labor and materials to procure will require a two-thirds (2/3) payment in advance, which is nonrefundable. In cases where the labor takes more than one (1) hour to locate the record, a Ten Dollar ($10.00) charge per hour will be added to the copying cost.
(5)	The legal custodian  shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees and shall require a
cash  deposit  adequate  to  assure  payment,  if  such  estimate  exceeds  Five  Dollars ($5.00).
(6)	Elected and appointed  officials of the Town shall not be required  to pay for public
records  they  may  reasonably  require  for  the  proper  performance  of  their  official duties.
 
Public Records
3-3-4
(
(7)	The legal custodian may provide copies of a record  without  charge or at a reduced
charge where he or she determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
(g) Pursuant to Sec. 19.34, Wis. Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. This Subsection does not apply to members of the Town Board.



Sec. 3-3-5	Access Procedures.

(a)	A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally; but a request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced under Sec. 19.37, Wis. Stats.  Except as provided below, no	
	request may be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified
or to state the purpose of the request.  No request may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment  of a fee is required under Section 3-3-4(f)(6).	A	(
.
	requester may be required to show acceptable identification whenever the requested record	
	is kept at a private residence or whenever security reasons or federal law or regulations so	

(b)	reqmre.
Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and without delay,	
	either fill the request  or notify  the requester  of the  authority's  determination  to deny  the
request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor.  If the legal custodian, after conferring	
	with the Town Attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be unduly	
	time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to itemize his or her	
	request in a manner which would permit reasonable  compliance.	
(c)	A request for a record may be denied as provided in Section 3-3-6.  If a request is made	
	orally, the request  may  be denied orally unless  a demand  for a written  statement  of the	
	reasons denying the request is made by the requester within  five business days of the oral	
	denial.	If a written request is denied in whoie or in part the requester shall receive a	
	written statement of the reasons for denying the request.  Every written denial of a request	
	shall inform the requester that, if the request for the record was made in writing, then the ·	
	determination   is   subject   to   review   upon   petition   for   a  writ   of   :mandamus   under	
	Sec.  19.37(1), Wis. Stats., or upon application to the attorney general or a district attorney.	



(
 
Public Records
3-3-6


Sec. 3..3..5	limitations on Right to Access.

(a)	As provided  in Sec. 19.36, Wis. Stats., the following records  are exempt from inspection under  this  Chapter.
(1)	Records specifically  exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or authorized to be  exempted from disclosure by state law;
(2)	Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law  enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state;
(3)	Computer programs and files, although the material used as input for a computer program/file or the material produced as a product of the computer program is subject to inspection; and
(4)	Pursuant to Sec. 905.08, Wis. Stats., a record or any portion of a record containing information qualifying as a common law trade secret.  "Trade secrets" are defined as unpatented, secret, commercially valuable plans, appliances, formulas, or processes which are used for making, preparing, compounding, treating or processing articles, materials or information which are obtained from a person and which are generally recognized  as confidential.
(b)	As provided by Sec. 43.30, Wis. Stats., public library circulation records are exempt from inspection  under this Section.
(c)	In responding to a request  for inspection  or copying of a record which is not specifically
exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the Town Attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he or she determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1)	Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which were necessary and
given in order to obtain the information contained in them.
(2)	Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(l)(a), Wis. Stats., records of current deliberations after a quasi­ judicial  hearing.
(3)	Pursuant  to  Sec. 19.85(l)(b)  and  (c),  Wis.  Stats.,  records  of  current  deliberations
concerning employment, dismissal, promotion, demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any Town officer or employee, or the investigation of charges against a Town officer or employee, unless such officer or employee consents to such disclosure.
(4)	Pursuant to Sec.  19.85(1)(d), Wis. Stats., records concerning current strategy for crime
detedion or prevention.
(5)	Pursuant  to  Sec. 19.85(1)(e),  Wis.  Stats.,  records  of  current  deliberations   or negotiations  on  the purchase  of  Town  property,  investing  of Town  funds, or other Town business whenever  competitive or bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
(6)	Pursuant to Sec.  19.85(1)(f), Wis. Stats., financial, medical, social or personal histories
or disciplinary  data of specific persons which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon the reputation of any person referred to in such history  or data.
 
Public Records
3-3-6
(
(7)	Pursuant to Sec. 19.85(1)(g), Wis. Stats., communications between legal counsel for
the Town and any officer, agent or employee of the Town, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to current litigation in which the Town or any of its officers, agents or employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are privileged under Sec. 905.03, Wis. Stats.
(8)	Pursuant to Se.c.  19.85(l)(h), Wis. Stats., requests for confidential written advice from an  ethics board, and records  of advice given by such ethics board on such requests.
(d)	If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public  from the  record  before release.	The custodian shall confer with the Town Attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the Town Attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the judgment of the custodian and the Town Attorney, there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.



Sec. 3-3-7	Retention and Destruction of Records.

(a)	Historical Records.   Under  Sec.  19.21(4)(a), Wis. Stats., municipalities  must notify  the State Historical  Society of Wisconsin  (SHSW) prior to destroying records.   However, the	

(.
	SHSW has waived the required sixty (60) days notice for any record marked "W" (waived	
	notice).  SHSW must be notified prior to destruction of a record marked  "N" (non-waived).	
	Notice  is also required  for any record not listed in this Section.	
(b)	Microfilming or Optical Imaging of Records.  Local units of government may keep and	
	preserve  public  records  through  the  use  of microfilm  providing  the microfilm  or optical	
	imaging meets the applicable standards in Sec. 16.612, Wis. Stats.  Retention periods and	
	estimated  costs  and benefits  of converting  records  between  media  should be  considered.	
	After verification,  paper records converted  to microfilm  or optical imaging  should be	
	destroyed.  The retention periods identified in this Section apply to records in any media.	
(c)	Destruction After Request for Inspection.  No requested records may be destroyed until	
	after the request is granted or sixty (60) days after the request is denied.  If an action is	
	commenced under Sec. 19.37, Wis. Stats., the requested record may not be destroyed until	
	after a court order is issued and all appeals have been completed.  [See Sec. 19.35(5), Wis.	
	Stats.]	
(d)	Destruction  Pending  Litigation.	No  record  subject  to  pending   litigation   shall  be	
	destroyed until the litigation is resolved.	
(e)	Review and Approval By Public Records and Forms Board.	This  Chapter  and  the
retention  periods  of  less than  seven  (7) years  have  been  reviewed  and  approved  by  the	
	Public Records and Forms Board.	

(
 
Public Records
3-3-7


(f)	Legend.   The following terms shall be applicable in Sections 3-3-7 and 3-3-8:
(1)	Records Description. Provides a brief description of the records. Group specific items such as forms into logical groups that have the same function or pm;pose.
(2)	Period of Retention. Refers to the time that the identified records must be' kept until destruction.

CR		Stands for creation which usually refers to receipt or creation of the record.
FIS		Stands  for  current  fiscal  year  and  the  additional  amount  of  time  as indicated.	·
EVT	Stands for event· and refers to an occurrence that starts  the  retention "clock ticking." Close of contract, termination of employees, and disposition of a case are common events.
P	Stands for permanent  retention.

(3)	Time.  Is expressed in years unless specifically identified as month or day.
(4)	Authority. Refers to any specific statutory, administrative rule, or specific regulation that determines retention of the record. In most cases this will be blank because units of  government have discretion to establish a time period.
(5)	SHSW Notify.  Refers to whether or not the State Historical Society of Wisconsin has
waived the required statutory notification prior to destruction of records.


W	Means records are not historical and the required notification is waived. N	Means  the records  may  have  secondary  historical  value  and  therefore SHSW   notification	is   required	on  a  case-by.:.case	basis   prior   to
destruction.
N/A   Means not applicable and refers to those circumstances where a local unit of government is retaining a record permanently.



Sec. 3-3-8	Specific Records Retention Provisions.

(a)	Accounting Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of  the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice
 

 
Accounts Payable: Purchase invoices Vouchers
 

FIS+ 7 years	w
FIS+ 7 years	w
 
Public Records
3-3-8

(
 
Accounts Receivable:
AIR invoices Receipts Collection blotters
 

.FIS + 7 years	w
FIS+ 7 years	w
EVT + l year (after audit)	w
 

(b)	Board of Review Records.	The  following  public  records  may  be  destroyed  after  the expiration  of the designated  retention  period:

 


Records

Form of objection to property assessment and supporting documentation

Minute book of Board of Review

Proceedings of the Board of Review on audio taps or as stenographic notes including any transcriptions thereof

Notice  of  Determinations of the Board of Review
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice

EVT + 7 years (after final action by
Board of Review or
completion of appeal)	w



CR+ 7 years	N

EVT + 7 years  (after final action by Board of Review  or completion
of appeal

w

EVT + 7 years (after final action by the Board of Review or
completion of appeal	w
 

(c)	Budget and Audit Records.   The following public records may be destroyed  after the expiration  of the designated  retention  period:

 


Records

Budget worksheets

Minutes of the board of estimates
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice

FIS+ 3 years	w



Permanent	NIA
 



(
 
Public Records
3-3-8


 
Final budget

Audit  reports  Permanent
 
Permanent	N/A

N/A
 

(d)	Building Permits and Inspection Records.   The following  records  may be  destroyed after the expiration  of the designated retention period:

 


Records

Applications  and permits

Code Compliance inspection-reports
Inspection  address file Certificates  of
occupancy

Energy  calculation worksheets

State approved commercial  building plans

Permit fee receipts



Permit ledger

Town attorney's case file, copy

Quarter section maps, copies

Records of the Zoning Board of Appeals (includes minutes  of board  and supporting documents  submitted  to Board,  if  applicable).
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice

EVT (Life of structure)	w


EVT (Life of structure)	w

EVT (Life of structure)	w


EVT (Until superseded)	w



CR+ 3 years




EVT + 4 years	w

FIS + 7 years (provided
record has been audited)	w

CR+ 7 years	w

EVT + 1 year (after case
has been closed)	w-


EVT (Until superseded)	w








Permanent	N/A
 
Public Records
3-3-8
(
 
Records of the Plan
Commission (includes minutes  of
meetings  of Commission
and supporting documents submitted to the commission)
 








Permanent	NIA
 

(e)	Election Records. All materials and supplies associated with an election may be destroyed according to the following schedule unless there is a recount or litigation pending with respect  to the election:

 


Records

Voter serial number slips



Applications for absentee ballots




Forms associated with election such as tally sheets,
inspector's    statements and  nomination  papers   .

Official canvass statements

Registration  and
poll lists Nonpartisan primaries and elections

Registration and poll lists Partisan
primaries  and general
election
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice

EVT + (14 days after a primary) (21 days after an
election)	w

EVT + (90 days after the election) (22 months after the election for federal
offices)	w



EVT + (90 days after the election) (22 months after the election for
federal offices)	w

EVT + (10 years after the
election	w

EVT + (2 years after the election for which they
were created)	w



EVT + (4 years after the election for which they were created)


(
 
Public Records
3-3-8


 
Cancelled registration cards

Election notices




Proofs  of publication and  correspondence relative  to publications

Campaign  registration statements



Campaign finance reports
 
EVT + (4 years after
cancellation)	w

EVT + (1 year after the election)  (22 months for
federal elections)	w



EVT + (1 year after the election) (22 months for
federal elections)	w

EVT + (6 years after termination by the
registrant)	w

EVT + (6 years after
date of receipt)	w
 

(f)	Engineering and Public Works Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after  the expiration of the designated retention period:

 


Records

Field notes Benchmark  books
Section corner monument logs

Aerial photographs Town maps
Water, storm, and sanitary sewer main maps

Profile & grade books
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice

Permanent	NIA

Permanent	NIA



Permanent	NIA

EVT (Until superseded)	w

Permanent	NIA




Permanent	NIA

Permanent	NIA
 
Public Records
3-3-8
(
Excavation  plans of
private utilities	Permanent	NIA

Index to maps	Permanent	NIA

Preliminary  sub-	EVT (Until  super-
division plats	seded by final plat)	w

Final subdivision
plats	Permanent	NIA

Annexation plats	Permanent	NIA

Assessor's plats	Permanent	NIA

Structure plans for Town buildings and
bridges	EVT (Life of the structure)	N

Annual reports	Permanent	NIA

Records of the Plan	(
Commission
(includes minutes  of meetings  of the Commission and  supporting  documents submitted to the
commission)	Permanent	NIA

Records of the Zoning
Board of Appeals  (if created) (includes minutes  of
the meetings of the
Board and supporting documents submitted to
the Board)	Permanent	NIA

House number and
address change file	Permanent	NIA

Street vacations and	EVT (Retain for active
dedications, copies	reference life)	w


,,
 
Public Records
3-3-8


Permits  (includes permits for the excavation  of streets by private utility











TV  sewer inspection
records	EVT (Until superseded)	w

State highway  aide
program records	FIS+ 7 years	w

(g)	Fidelity Bond Records.	The  following  public  records  may  be  destroyed  after  the expiration  of the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice
 

Oath of office	EVT + 5 years (after the term of service covered by the oath
has ended	w

(h)	Insurance Records and Policies.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice
 
Policy	FIS+ 7 years	w

Policy bids,
unsuccessful	EVT + 1 year	w

Claims	EVT + 7 years	w
 
Public Records
3-3-8


(i)		Journals, Registers and Ledger.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration  of the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice
 
Receipts journal	FIS + 15 years	w

Voucher/order register	FIS + 15 years	w

General journal	FIS + 15 years	w

Journal voucher	FIS + 15 years	w

Appropriation journal	FIS + 15 years	w

Appropriation  journal
voucher	FIS + 15 years	w

General ledger	FIS + 15 years	w

Trial balance	EVT (Until audited)	w	(
(j)		Legal Opinions.	Legal opinions rendered shall not be destroyed and  shall be retained permanently.
(k)	Licenses and Permits.	·The  following  public  records  may  be  destroyed   after  the
expiration  of the designated retention period.

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice
 

Liquor and beer related license
applications	EVT + 4 years	w

Other license
applications	EVT + 3 years	w

Receipts	CR+ 4 years	w

License stubs:
All liquor and
beer related	CR+ 4 years	w
c
 
Public Records
3-3-8

 

Other


Dog  licenses monthly reports to County Clerk
 
CR+ 3 years	w




CR+ 3 years	w
 

(I)	Municipal Court Records. The legal custodian, as defined in Sec. 19.33, Wis. Stats., of the following records concerning the Town of Cady Municipal Court (if created), or his or her designee(s), may destroy the following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention  period:

 


Records

Audio tape recordings  of trials or juvenile  matters



Municipal  Court case files

Municipal Court case files, Town Attorney's copies

·	Municipal  Court minutes record

Municipal  Court record



Municipal  Court judg­ ment docket a record of all money judgment
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice

EVT (Until expiration of statute of limitations to appeal
to circuit court)	w

EVT + 6 years (after
entry of final judgment)	w



EVT + 6 months  (after
entry of final judgment)	w

EVT + 5 years (after
entry of final judgment)	w

EVT + 5 years (after
entry of final judgment)	w



EVT + 20 years (after
final docket entry)	w
 

(m)	Payroll Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention  period:

 


Records

Payroll support record
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice

FIS+ 2 years	w
 
Public Records
3-3-8
Employee's withholding	EVT + 5 years (after	c
allowance certificate	being superseded)	w

Employee's WI. with-
holding exemption	EVT + 5 years (after
certificate	being superseded)	w

Employee  enrollment	EVT + 2 years (after and waiver  cards	being superseded or
terminated)	w

Employee earning
records	FIS+ 5 years	w

Payroll check
register	FIS+ 5 years	w

Payroll distribution
record	FIS+ 5 years	w

Payroll voucher	FIS+ 5 years	w

Cancelled  payroll
checks	FIS+ 5 years	w

Wage and Tax Statement	FIS+ 5 years	w

Report of WI. Income
Tax	FIS+ 5 years	w

Employer's Annual Reconciliation of WI Income Tax withheld
from wages	FIS+ 5 years	w

Federal  deposit tax
stub	FIS+ 5 years	w

Quarterly report of federal income tax
withheld	FIS+ 5 years	w


(
 
Public Records
3-3-8


 
Annual report of federal income tax withheld

State's  quarterly report of wages paid

Monthly  memorandum report

Quarterly report, payroll  summary

Premium due notices
 



FIS+ 5 years	w


FIS + 5 years	w


FIS+ 5 years	w


FIS + 5 years	w

FIS + 5 years	w
 

(n)	Public Safety Department Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention period:

 


Records

Traffic  citations (and accompanying
documentation)  sent through Town Municipal  Court

Ordinance  Citations

All accounting records Electronic  recordings
of court proceedings which were appealed

Court statistical reports

Arraignment  calendars
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW  Notice





EVT + 1 year (after
closed)	w

EVT + 2 years (after
closed)	w

CR+ 7 years	w




EVT + 7 years	w



CR+ 7 years	N

CR+ 7 years	w
 
Public Records
3-3-8
(
Warrant and commitment
listings	CR+ 7 years	w

Municipal  Court
correspondence	CR +.7 years	w

Electronic  recordings of court proceedings
which were not appealed	EVT + 6 months	w

Personnel records	EVT + 8 years	w

Property  inventory
records	EVT + 8 years	w

Citizen complaints
against police officers	EVT + 8 years	w

Investigation  and citation  records:
arrest records	EVT + 8 years	w
incident records	EVT + 10 years	w
fingerprint cards	EVT + 8 years	w
evidence cards	EVT + 10 years	w
work schedules	CR+ 7 years	w
accident reports	EVT + 4 years	w
investigation reports	EVT +  10 years (from date
of closing investigation)	w

Audio and video tape recordings:

Police dispatch  audio
tapes	CR+ 120 days	w

Police video tapes	CR+ 120 days	w

Information teletype
messages	CR+ 30 days	w

Medical records, re:
occupational	EVT + 30 years	w

(
 
Public Records
3-3-8


Training records  for
exposure control	CR+ 3 years	w

(o)	Public Works Projects and Contracts.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice
 

Notice to contractors	EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)	w

EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)	w

Certified check	EVT (Retain until contract has been signed
and return to bidder)	w

Bid bond	EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)	w
EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful  bidders)	w

 
Bidder's proof of responsibility·
 
EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)	w

EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful  bidders)	w
 

Bids	EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)	w

EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)	w

 
Affidavit of organization  and authority
 


EVT + 7 years (after
completion of project)	w

EVT + 2 years (for
unsuccessful bidders)	w
 
Public Records
3-3-8

Bid tabulations	EVT + 2 years	w	(


Performance  bond



Contract	EVT + 7 years (after
completion  of project)

EVT + 7 years (after	w
	completion  of project)	w

Master project files	
EVT + 20 years (after	
	life of structure)	N

Blueprints	
EVT (Until superseded by the as-built tracings)	

w

As-built tracings	
EVT (Life of the project)	
N

(p)	Purchasing Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention  period:

Authority
Records	Period of Retention	SHSW Notice
Purchase requisitions	EVT + 1 year (after	(
PO issued)	w

Purchase orders	FIS+ 7 years	w

Receiving report	FIS+ 7 years	w

Bids, successful	EVT + 7 years (after
contract has expired	w

Bids, unsuccessful	EVT + 1 year (after
after PO issued)	w

Inventory of property	EVT (Retain until
superseded	w

(q)	Real  Property  Records.	The  following  public  records  may  be  destroyed  after  the expiration  of the designated  retention  period:




(
 
Public Records
3-3-8


 


Records

Deeds
Opinions of title Abstracts  and
certificates of title

Title insurance policies

Plats Easements Leases

Vacation  or alteration of plat
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice

Permanent	NIA

Permanent	NIA



Permanent	NIA



Permanent	NIA

Permanent	NIA

Permanent	NIA

EVT + 7 years (after
termination  of lease)	w



Permanent	NIA
 

(r)	Sewer and Water Utility Records  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration  of the designated retention period

 


Records

Water stubs

Receipts of current billings

Customer's ledgers of municipal  utilities

All other utility records

Water quality laboratory tests (deep well water analysis detail and summary reports; chemical and bacteriological
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice

FIS+ 2 years	w


FIS+ 2 years	w


FIS+ 2 years	w


CR+ 7 years	w
 
Public Records
3-3-8
analysis of municipal	c
drinking water detail and	EVT + 5 years (if
summary reports;	information  has been municipal  drinking water	transferred  to a fluoride analysis; and	permanent  test  site
water quality control	file location) EVT + 1
readings	year	w

Maps showing the location and physical
characteristics of the	EVT (Until map is
utility plant	superseded)	w

Engineering records	EVT (Until record is in connection with	superseded or 6 years construction projects	after plant is retired
provided mortality data
are retained)	w

Operating records:
Station pumpage records	CR+ 15 years or EVT +
3 years (after the source
is abandoned)	w

Interruption records	CR+ 6 years	w

Meter rest records	EVT (see PSC 185.46)	w

Meter history records	EVT (Life of meter)	w

Annual meter accuracy
summary	CR+ 10 years	w

Pressure records	CR+ 6 years	w

Customer records:
complaint records	CR+  3 years	w
customer deposit	EVT + 6 years (after
refund	w

meter reading
sheets or cards	CR+ 6 years	w
billing records	CR+ 6 years	w
(
 
Public Records
3-3-8

Filed rates and rules	Permanent	w

 
Analyses of any water samples taken  from the water  system
 


EVT + 10 years (pursuant
to NR  109.12)	w
 

(s)	Special Assessment Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice
 

Preliminary  resolution	CR + 2 years after
created	w

 
Report on special assessment  project
 
CR + 2 years after
created	w
 

 
Waiver of special assessment notice and hearing
 
EVT + 1 year (after final resolution is
approved)	w
 

Final resolution	Permanent	NIA

 
Certified  special assessment roll
 
EVT (Retain until all assessments are
collected)	w
 

Statement of new
special assessments	CR+ 5 years	w

 
Special assessment payment register
 
EVT (Retain until all assessments are
collected)	w
 

(t)	Street and Highway Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice
 

 
Street operations file
 
CR + 2 years after
created	w
 
Public Records
3-3-8
( 
Street and sidewalk
maintenance and repair	CR+ 25 years	w
























c















(u)	Tax Calculation Records.	The following public records may be destroyed  after the expiration of the designated retention period:

Authority
Records	Period of Retention	SHSW Notice

Escrow account list	EVT (Retain until
superseded)	w

(
 
Public Records
3-3-8


Receipts	
FIS+ 7 years	w

Receipt stub book	
FIS+ 7 years	w

Tax collection blotters	
EVT (Until audited)	w

Statement of taxes remaining  unpaid	
EVT (Retain with tax roll)	

w

Tax settlement receipt	
FIS+ 5 years	w
Municipal  treasurer's settlement	

FIS+ 5 years	
w

Personal  property  tax
\'	roll	FIS + 15 years	N

(v)	Treasurer's Records.  The following public records may be destroyed after the expiration of the designated retention period:

 


Records
 
.	Authority
Period of Retention	SHSW Notice
 

Minute books	Permanent	NIA

Audio tapes		CR + 1 year; 90 days if made solely for the purpose
of drafting the minutes	w

Ordinances	Permanent	NIA

Resolutions	Permanent	NIA

Ordinance book	Permanent	NIA

Affidavits  of
publication	CR+ 3 years	w



Sec. 3-3-9	Confidentiality  of Assessor  Information.

(a)	Adoption.  This Section  adopts by reference,  Sec. 70.47(7)(af), Wis. Stats., income and expense information provided by the property owner to an assessor for the purposes of establishing the valuation for assessment purposes by the income method of valuation shall
 
Public Records
3-3-9
(
be confidential and not a public record open to inspection or copying under Sec. 19.35(1),
Wis. Stats.
(b)	Exceptions.   An  officer  may  make  disclosure  of  such information  under  the  following circumstances:
(1)	The assessor has access to such information in the performance of his/her duties;
(2)	The Board of Review may review. such information when needed, in its opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment;
(3)	Another person or body has the right to review such information due to the intimate
relationship to the duties of an office or as set by law;
(4)	The officer is complying with a court order;
(5)	The person providing the income and expense information has  contested  the assessment level at either the Board of Review or by filing a claim for excessive assessment under Sec. 74.37, Wis. Stats., in which case the base records are open and public.









(





























(	I
 















   7





I"	I	n	 lati




1		Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals Automobile and Motorcycle Races, Shows and
Exhibitions

Chapter 3	Designation and Regulation of ATV Routes
 
Title 7	Chapter	1

licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals





 
7-1-1
7-1-2
7-1-3
7-1-4
7-1-5
7-1-6
7-1-7
7-1-8
7-1-9


7-1-10
 
Dog Licenses Required; Definitions Rabies Vaccination Required for License
Issuance of Dog and Kennel (Multiple Dog) Licenses
Late Fees
Rabies Quarantine
Restrictions on Keeping of Dogs, Cats, Fowl and other Animals Barking Dogs and Crying Cats
Impoundment of Animals
Keeping of Exotic Animals; Protected Animals, Fowl, Reptiles and Insects
Penalties




1	Dog license Required; Definitionsg
 

 
(a)




(b)
 
License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town of  Cady  to own, harbor or keep any dog more than five (5) months of age after July 1 of the license year without complying with the provisions of this Chapter relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the same.
Definitions.  In this ChaDter. unless the context or /subiect matter otherwise require:
(1)	Owner. Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat and the occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or to which it customarily returns daily for a period of ten (10) days; such person is presumed to be harboring or keeping the dog or cat within the meaning of this Section.
(2) 4t Large. To be off the premises of the o\vner and not under he control of some person either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or  cat within an automobile of  its owner, or in an automobile of any other person with the consent of the owner of said dog or cat, shall be deemed to be upon the owner's premises.
(3)	Dog.  Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
(4)	Neutered.  A dog or cat having nonfunctional reproductive C?rgans.
(5)	Animal.  Mammals, reptiles and birds.
(6)	Cruel. Causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable injury or death.
 









7-3
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-2


requirement does not apply to a dog during competition or training, to a dog while hunting, to a dog securely confined indoors or to a dog securely confined in a fenced area. The substitute tag shall be of a durable material and contain the same information as the rabies vaccination tag. The requirements of this paragraph do not apply to a dog which is not required to be vaccinated under Subsection (a).
(f) Duplicate Tag. The veterinarian may furnish a new rabies vaccination tag with a new serial number to an owner in place of the original tag upon presentation of the certificate of rabies vaccination. The veterinarian shall then indicate the new tag number on the certificate and keep a record in the file.
(g)	Cost.  The owner shall pay the cost of the rabies vaccination and the cost associated with
the issuance of a certificate of rabies vaccination and the delivery of a rabies vaccination tag.



Sec.	1-3	Issuance	Dog  Licenses

(a)	Dog licenses.
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town of Cady to own, harbor or keep any dog more than five (5) months of age without complying  with  the  provisions  of Sec. 174.05 through Sec. 174.10, Wis. Stats., relating to the listing, licensing and tagging of the same.
(2)	The owner of any dog more than five (5) months of age on January  1 of any year, or
five (5) months of age within the license year, shall annually, or on or before the date the dog becomes five (5) months of age, pay a license tax and obtain a license.
(3)	The minimum license tax under this Section shall be in accordance with the Town Board's current fee schedule.
(4)	Upon payment of the required license tax and upon presentation of evidence that the
dog  is  currentlv  immunized   a12:ainst  rabies,  as  required  bv  Section 7-1-2  of  this
-	...	"'=-'	.....	"'
Chapter, the Town Treasurer or his/her deputy shall complete and issue to the owner
a license for such dog containing all information required by state law. The Town Treasurer or his/her deputy shall also deliver to the owner, at the time of issuance of the license, a tag of durable material bearing the same serial number as the license, the name of the county in which issued and the license year.
(5)	The owner shall securely attach the tag to a collar and the collar with the tag attached shall be kept on the dog for which the license is issued at all times, except as provided in Section 7-1-2(e).
(6)	The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to the dog by means of a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed. Any law enforcement or humane officer shall seize, impound or restrain any dog for which a dog license is required which is found without such tag attached.  Each day that any dog within the Town











 
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-5


impounded. All officers shall cooperate in the enforcement of the quarantine. The Town Clerk shall promptly post in at least three (3) public places in the Town notices of quarantine.
(b)	Exemption of Vaccinated Dog or Cat from Town Quarantine.  A dog or cat which is
immunized currently against rabies, as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence, is exempt from the Town quarar1tine provisions of Subsection (a) if a rabies vaccination tag or substitute tag is attached to the dog's or cat's collar.
(c)	Quarantine or Sacrifice of an Animal Suspected of Biting a Person or Being Infected or Exposed to Rabies.
(1)	Quarantine or sacrifice     dog or cat.  A law enforcement, humane or animal control
officer shall order a dog or cat quarantined if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person, is infected with rabies or has been in contact with a rabid animal. If a quarantine cannot be imposed because the dog or cat cannot be captured, the officer may kill the animal. The officer may kill a dog or cat only as a last resort if the owner agrees. The officer shall attempt to kill the animal in a humane manner and in a manner which avoids damage to the animal's head.
(2)	Sacrifice of other animals. A law enforcement, humane or animal control officer may order killed or may kill an animal other than a dog or cat if the officer has reason to believe that the animal bit a person or is infected with rabies.
(d)	Quarantine of Dog or Cat.
(1)	Delivery to isolation facility or quarantine on premises of owner. A law enforcement, humane or animal control officer who orders a dog or cat to be quarantined shall deliver the animal or shall order the animal delivered to an isolation facility as soon as possible but no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the original order is issued or the officer may order the animal to be quarantined on the premises of the owner if the animal is immunized currently against rabies as evidenced by a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or other evidence.
(2)	Health risk to humans.  If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there"
is reason to believe that the animal bit a person, the custodian of an isolation facility or the owner shall keep the animal under strict isolation under the supervision of a veterinarian for at least ten (10) days after the incident occurred. In this paragraph, "supervision of a veterinarian" includes, at a wjnimum, exan•jnation of the animal on
thP  -firct  rl1_:11:1    n-f  lcAlr:lt rYYl     n.n  th.o  1'-lcd-  rl -,:r  f""'\f'   ;eo,-..1.-,,t- ........ ....,,     n-n.4  r"!>-r..      r.."t"lo.   11 \  ;-ni-0 10-- 't"!l.r-r  rln-,:1
\...1..1.V   .J...l.l.J\..  u.u.J  V.l.  .lJV.J.U\..l.V.u,  V.11  U.lV .lU0l ua.y Vl l.::')VlUl.lVH  auu Vl! Vl!V \ .1) 11JLV.l VVll.1115 uay.
If the observation period is not extended and if the veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat has not exhibited any signs of rabies, the animal may be released from quarantine at the end of the observation period.
(3)	Risk to animal health.
a.	If a dog or cat is ordered to be quarantined because there is reason to believe that
the  animal  has  been  exposed  to  a rabid  animal  and  if  the  dog  or  cat  is not
currently immunized against rabies, the custodian of an isolation facility or the











 
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-:1-6


(1)	Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the Town.
(2)	Assaults or attacks any person or destroys property.
(3)	Is at large vvithin the limits of the Town.
(4)	Habitually  barks  or  howls  to  the  annoyance  of  any  person  or  persons.   (See Section  7-1-7)
(5)	Kills, wounds or worries any domestic animal.
(6)	Is known by  such person  to be infected  with rabies  or to have been  bitten  by  an animal known to have been infected with rabies.
(7)	In the case of a dog, is unlicensed.
(b)	Vicious Dogs and Animals.
(1)	For purposes of enforcing this Section, a dog shall be deemed as being of a vicious disposition if, within any twelve (12) month period it bites two (2) or more persons or inflicts serious injury to one ( 1) person in unprovoked circumstances off the owner's premises. Any vicious dog which is found off the premises of its owner other than as hereinabove provided may be seized by any person and, upon delivery to the proper authorities, may, upon establishment to the satisfaction of a court of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of said dog, by testimony under oath reduced to writing, be killed by the law enforcement or animal control authorities.
(2) No person shall harbor or permit to remain on his/her premises any animal  that  is habitually inclined toward attacking persons or animals, destroying property, barking excessively  or making excessive noises or running after automobiles.
(c)	Animals Running at large.
(1)	No person having in his/her possession or ownership any animal or fowl shall allow the same to run at large within the Town. The owner of any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall keep his/her animal tied or enclosed in a proper enclosure so as not to allow said animal to interfere with the passing public or neighbors. lrny animal running at large unlicensed and required by state law or Town Ordinance to be" licensed shciJl be seized and impounded by a humane or law enforcement officer.
(2)	A dog shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a leash and under
control of a person physically able to control it. All dogs shaJI be leashed or under the direct control of their owners in areas within the Town of Cady not zoned agricultural.
(d)	O\vner's  Liability   for   Damage  Caused  by  Dogs;  PenaltiesiJ	The   provisions    of
Sec.  174.02, Wis. Stats., relating  to the owner's liability for damage caused by dogs together with the penalties therein set forth are hereby adopted a11d incorporated herein by reference.



Sec. 7-1-7	Barking Dogs and Crying Cats.

(a)		It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort









 
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-8


impounded has bitten a person, the animal shall be  retained in  the Animal Shelter  for fourteen (14) days for observation purposes. Within such times, the owner may reclaim the animal upon payment of impoundment fees, such fees to be established by resolution of the Town Board.  No animal shall be released from the pound without being properly licensed if so required by state law or Town Ordinance.
(d)	Sale of impounded Animals.  If the owner doesn't reclaim the animal within seven (7)
days, the animal warden may sell the animal to any willing buyer.
(e)	Town Not liable for Impounding Animals. The Town and/or its animal control agency shall not be liable for the death of any animal which has been impounded or disposed of pursuant to this Section.



Seca	Keeping Of  Exotic Animals;  Protected Animals,
Fowl, Reptiles and Insects.

(a)	Intent.
(1)	Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of the Town of Cady in adopting this Section to protect the public safety, health and general welfare from the safety and health risks that the unregulated keeping or harboring of exotic animals can pose to the community and to protect the health and welfare of permitted exotic animals held in private possession. By their very nature, exotic animals are vvild and potentially dangerous, and, typically, do not adjust well to a captive environment. This Section shall be liberally construed in favor of the Town's right and authority to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(2) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person  to own, possess,  maintain, harbor, bring into the Town, have in one's possession, act as a custodian for, or have custody or control on an exotic animal, except in compliance with this Section.
 
(b)
 
Definitions.	The follmvim definitions and terms shall be a.pp.licable in this Section,
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural
number;  and  the  plural  number  includes  the  singular  number.	The  word  "shall"  1s mandatory  and not permissive; the word  "may" is nonmandatory  and discretionary:
(1)	Animal.   For purposes  of this Section, shall mean exotic animals.
(2)	Animal Control Officer. Law enforcement officers, Building Inspector, Town Chairperson, animai control officers, humane society employees, or any other person designated by the Town of Cady to enforce or assist in the  enforcement  of  this Section.
(3)	Animal Shelter. Any premises designated or used by the Town for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals found in violation of this Section, or of any other Town ordinance regulating the keeping of and care of animals. Included within this definition are animal shelters whose services are secured by the Town through contract or intergovernmental  agreement.
 










 
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-:1-9


1.	Edentata, including anteaters,  sloths and armadillios.
m.	Viverridae, including mongooses,  civets and genets.
n.	Game cocks and other fighting birds.
o.	V aranidae, including only water monitors  and crocodile monitors.
p.	Any other type of dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, fowl, or reptile.
*	Species listed on the United States Department of Agriculture's dangerous species list.
(7)	Humane Society. The Humane Society of Pierce/St. Croix, Inc.  or  similar organization.
(8)	Own/Owner/Owning. Any person, corporation,  partnership,  limited  liability corporation, organization, association, joint venture, trust, or other legal entity who possesses, harbors, keeps, controls, boards, or has in his/her custody an exotic animal in the Town, and any officer, member, shareholder, director, employee, agent or representative thereof. Any animal is being harbored if it is being fed and/or sheltered by such party.
(9)	Section.  The same meaning  as "this Ordinance."
( l 0)	Solid Surface. A surface constructed of cement, concrete, metal, asphalt, fiberglass
or similar such hard, impervious  surface.
(11)	Town.  The Town  of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin.
(12)	Town Board.  The Town Board  the Town of Cady, and authorized committees and
subunits thereof.
(c)	Compliance  with Federal Regulations.
(1)	Federal Code Requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm  or corporation to buy, sell or offer for sale a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the Department of Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered  Species Act of 1969 (Public Law  135, 9lst Congress).                        "
(2)	Regulation of the Importation of Birds.  No person,  firm or corporation  shall import or cause to be imported into this Town any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk, owl or eagle. This Subsection  shall  not be  construed  to forbid or restrict the importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof
li::::i.o-"Alli:1   r-rd1Pr-t.ar1  -fryr  llC'P  hu  rn,ar1r-1.:ln  Tnrf ".ln  l\.T'ltlA-ne>  f"nr  f"'"ArA1'Ylnn1'l1  n11-r-niA00.0  n-r  1n
J..'-"6U..1..--1.J     VV.l.l.VVl-VU.  .LV.l.   UUV  LI      J.  i..L.L.l.V.l..l'-'U..l.l  ..LJ.l.U.l.U..LJ.   .l "tU.L.lV.lJ...:l  .l.V.1  VV.l.V.l.l.lV.U.lU.l  _lJUJ. }'V0VlJ  V.l  .1.l.l
the preservation  of their tribal customs and heritage.
(d)	Exotic Animal  Permit Requirement - Application for Permit.
(1)	Saie, importation, Transfer, Purchase and/or Gifting of an Exotic Animal. It shall
. be unlawful  for any  person  to:
a.	Import, transfer, sell, own, or purchase an exotic animal in the Town without first obtaining a permit from the Town Board as prescribed  by  this Section, unless exempt from such permit requirement.
b.	Sell, transfer, deliver, or give an exotic animal to any other person in the Town without first obtaining a permit from the Town Board as prescribed by this Section, unless exempt from such permit requirement.







 
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-9


6.	The name and address of the veterinarian providing veterinary care to the exotic animal and a certificate of good health for the exotic animal from that veterinarian
7.	A plan for the prompt and safe recapture of the exotic animal if the exotic
animal escapes. Each applicant/permittee shall have a plan for the quick and safe recapture of the exotic animal if the animal escapes, and, if recapture is impossible, then a plan for the destruction of the exotic animal.
8.	In the case of exotic animals included on the United States Department of Agriculture's dangerous animal list, proof of having obtained a minimum of one year's, paid in full liability insurance in an amount not less than Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) for each occurrence for liability damages  for destruction of or damage to property and death or bodily injury to a person caused by the exotic animal. [Failure to at all times keep such liability insurance in full force and effect during the life of the permit shall immediately terminate the validity of such permit; it is the responsibility of the permittee to immediately notify the Town Clerk, in writing, of any changes in his/her insurance status, validity or carrier]. The Town of Cady shall be listed as a co-insured solely for the purpose of notice of cancellation of such insurance policy.
9.	Copies  of  all  United  States  Department   of  Agriculture,   United   States
Department ofinterior, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, and any other state or federal pennits/ licenses issued to the applicant approving of or governing the applicant's possession of the species for which a Town exotic animal permit is being sought.
10.	Exotic animal permit application fee in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
per animal.
11.	Any other information required by Town authorities to properly consider th application.
b.	Certified Information.  The applicant shall certify in writing that:
1.	The applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
2.	The applicant has not been convicted of or found responsible for violating a local or state law prohibiting cruelty; neglect, or rnjstreatment of animals or has  not \.vithin the last ten ( 10) years been convicted for possession, sale or use of  illegal narcotics or controlled substances.
3.	The facility and the conditions in which the exotic animal will be kept are
in compliance with this Section and all other applicable state and local regulations.
4.	The  applicant  has  regularly  provi ed  veterinary  care to the exotic  animal
when needed and will provide such care in the future.
5.	Proof that a licensed veterinarian has spayed or neutered the exotic animal.










1-1s:
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-9


(4)	Permit Renewal; Issuance Criteria.
a.	Exotic animal permit renewal applications shall be submitted to the Town Clerk on  or before November  15 of the pern1it year.
b.	Along  with  each  permit  renewal  application,  the  applicant  shall  submit  the
required renewal fee, a current certificate of good health for the animal(s), update in full all information required for the original permit, and provide proof of the required continued paid-up liability insurance [such proof of insurance shall be no more than thirty (30) days old.]
c.	The Town Board shall consider renewals in the same manner as with the issuance of  original permits.
d.	The Town Board shall not issue or renew a permit if it determines that:
1.	The applicant has been convicted of cruelty to animals within the previous ten (10) years;
2.	The applicant has failed to provide, withheld or falsified any required permit
application or renewal information; or
3.	The applicant is, or has been, unable to comply with the requirements necessary to obtain a permit or has failed to comply with the provisions of this Section at any time during the permit year.
(5)	Permit Revocation.	The Town Board may  revoke  a permit  for violation  of  this
Section after giving written notice of the reasons for revocation to the permit holder. The Town shall give the permittee notice, by certified mail with receipt requested, of intent to consider revocation of the exotic animal permit. The Town shall give the permittee an opportunity to respond to the notice and address the issues identified at an open, noticed Town Board meeting, after which the Town Board shall make its determination, with the reasons therefor included in the record of the Board's meeting.
(6)	Permit Transfer. If an owner can no longer properly care for his/her exotic animal, that person may only transfer his/her exotic animal to another person who has been issued a valid exotic animal permit by the Town Board, An owner/permittee shall notify the Town Clerk of any changes central to the validity of the permit, including the death of the exotic animal.
(f)	Confinement Standards for Exotic Animals.
 
f\.1i)
 
Prohibited Confinement.  An exotic animal shall not be tethered, leashed, chained outdoors, or allowed to nm at large.
 
(2)	Confinement Standards.
a.	All exotic animals governed by this Section shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure that has a floor, a secure roof and sides, constructed and maintained so as to securely confine the animal and provide sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom of movement. Inadequate sp3:ce may be indicated by evidence of animal debilitation, stress, abnormal behavior patterns, or the professional opinion of a veterinarian, a qualified animal trainer, or experts
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-9


a.	Be an insulated, moisture-proof and windproof structure of adequate area to accommodate the need of the animal for adequate freedom of movement;
b.	Contain a solid floor of no less than four (4) inches thick to prevent the animal from escaping;
c.	Incorporate  a roof  design  with independent  fencing separate from and located
between  the roof and floor of the enclosure so as to prevent escape in the event high winds blow off the roof over the enclosure;
d.	Locate the entrance to the building in which the animal is housed facing away from prevailing winds; and
e.	Have a self-closing door over the human and animal entryway during the winter months to protect the animal from cold temperatures.
f.	In addition to the structural requirements of the animal's indoor enclosure area, the owner of an animal shall:
1.	Ensure that the indoor enclosure area remains at an ambient temperature that will  maintain the good health of the exotic animal;
2.	Provide proper ventilation of the indoor structure by natural or mechanical means to provide fresh air for the animal and to prevent moisture condensation;
3.	Ensure that the animal has natural or artificial lighting and adequate heat and ventilation to properly provide for the health of the animal at all times;
4.	Ensure that the animal has proper bedding in sufficient quantity for insulation against the cold and dampness and that is changed regularly; and
5.	Maintain the indoor enclosure area in good repair to protect the animal from injury and to prevent escape.
(g) Notification Signs. All owners/permittees of an exotic animal(s) shall have continuously posted and displayed at each normal entrance onto the premises where an exotic animal is kept a conspicuous sign, clearly visible, and easily readable by the public, warning that there is an exotic animal on the premises. At least one such sign shall be located within twenty  (20)  feet  of  the  animal's  confinement  area  using  the  words   "BEWARE  OF
 	", with the last word to indicate the type of exotic animal that is being confined. In addition, the permittee shall conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that adequately informs children of the presence of an exotic animaL
(h)	Escape and Liability for Escape.
(1)	Notification of Escape.
a.	An owner/permittee shall immediately notify the Town Chairperson, local Humane Society, the Town's animal control officer and the County Sheriffs Department of the escape of any exotic animal for which a permit is required
b.	No person may intentionally release an exotic animal.  If an exotic  animal  is released by any party, authorized or unauthorized, the owner/permittee is liable for  all expenses associated with  efforts to recapture  the  animal,  and may,  in addition,  be subject to a fo.rfeiture.
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-9


c.	If an exotic animal is confiscated due to the animal being kept in contravention of this Section, the animal's owner is required to post a security bond or cash deposit with the Town and/or animal controi authority in an amount sufficient to guarantee payment of all reasonable costs expected to be incurred in caring and providing for the animal, including, but not limited to, the estimated cost of feeding, medical care, and housing for at least thirty (30) days. The posting of the bond or cash deposit shall not prevent the Town or animal control authority from disposing of the animal as permitted by law at the end of the thirty (30) days.
d.	,-'\n exotic animal may be returned to its owner only if, to the satisfaction of the
Town Board, the possessor has a valid Town exotic animal permit, has corrected the conditions resulting in the confiscation, and has paid in full the cost of placement and care of the animal while under the care and control of the Town or Humane Society.
e.	If the owner of a confiscated exotic animal cannot be located or if a confiscated
anim::il rem::iins unclaimed, the Town or Humane Society may, at its discretion, contact an approved facility, such as an institution accredited  by  the American Zoo and Aquarium Association (AZA), allow the animal to be adopted by a party who can satisfy the permit requirements of  this Section, or may euthanize the animal  as permitted  by law.
f.	If an escaped exotic animal cannot be recaptured safely and is posing a threat to
public health and safety, authorities may  euthanize  the  animal  as permitted  by law.
(k)	Animai Care.
(1)	No owner shall fail to provide an exotic animal in his/her care with sufficient food, potable water, or shelter when needed.
(2)	Humane Treatment.  No person shall ill-treat, beat, torment or otherwise abuse an
exotic animal.
(1)	Incidents Causing injury.
(1)	Notification. All incidents in the Town in which an exotic animal m3ures or  is suspected of injuring any person or domesticated animal shall be reported by the permittee to the Town Chairperson or Town Clerk within two (2) hours  of  the incident.
 
(,2')
 
1I1"..lab"MI""ry. 'T..."ne owner or an exon··c an1.ma11s, a.ii o' e respons1.v._1,e .Lor au" expenses m•
 
curre.r..l.
 
as a result of an injury inflicted or suffered by an exotic animal, whether expenses are incurred by the family of the victim, the victim, the Town or on behalf of the animal involved.
(m)	Sanitation.
(1)	Fecal Matter; Odor. Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, or controls an exotic animal shail be responsible for keeping his/her property properly dean of fecal matter and to keep obnoxious odors under control.








 
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-9


to Subsection (p)(l 1) below on or before January 30, 2006. This prohibition shall not apply to animals being transported through the limits of the Town of Cady within a one (1) hour period of time. A pup born to a female wolf/dog hybrid so registered shall be removed from the Town of Cady before it has reached the age of five (5) months. Wolf/dog hybrids permitted in the Town of Cady shall be confined as set forth  in this Subsection.
(3)	Removal; lmpoundment. Whenever  any person is charged with harboring, keeping or maintaining a wolf/dog hybrid in the Town of Cady which has not been registered on or before January 30, 2006, that person shall remove said animal from the Town of Cady until a trial on the citation. If said animal has not been so removed within forty-eight (48) hours of the service of the citation, the said animal may be impounded as directed by the Town Board until the trial on the citation. In that case, the owner of any such animal shall pay all expenses incurred due to such impoundment, including but not limited to the cost of shelter, food, handling  and veterinary  care. If it is determined by plea or trial that said animal is a wolf/dog hybrid not registered pursuant to Subsection (p)(l 1) on or before January 30, 2006, it shall be  removed from and not returned to the Town of Cady.
(4)	Confinement Requirements. The owner of any wolf/dog hybrid permitted to be kept in the Town of Cady, and the owner of any property on which such wolf/dog hybrid is kept, shall see that the animal is at all times confined according to the minimum requirements of this Subsection. A vvolfidog hybrid may be l<ept only in enclosures that meet the following minimum requirements:
a.	The first enclosure shall be constructed of not less than nine- (9-) gauge galvanized chain link fencing, with mesh openings not greater than  two  (2) inches, which shall be securely anchored by stainless steel or copper rings, placed at intervals not greater than six (6) inches apart, to a poured concrete base as described herein. Such enclosure shall be not less than five hundred (500) square feet in area, plus two hundred fifty (250) square feet for each additional canined animal kept therein. Such enclosure shall be the location in which any wolf/dog hybrid is primarily kept.
b.	The first enclosure shall extend to a height of not less than eight (8) feet, and shall be surrounded from ground !evel to a height of not less than four (4) feet by one=quarter (1/4) inch galvanized mesh screening.
c.	The first enclosure shall have a full top, which shall also be constructed of not less than nine- (9-) gauge chain link fencing with mesh openings not greater than two (2) inches, and which shall be securely anchored to the sides of the enclosure. The entire base of the first enclosure shall be a poured concrete slab floor at least four (4) inches thick.
d.	The second enclosure shall consist of a securely anchored fence at least eight (8) feet in height, which shall entirely surround the first enclosure,  and no part  of











 
 
Licensing of Dogs and Regulation of Animals
7-1-9


(9)	Abandonment or Negligent Release.  No person shall willfully or negligently release or  abandon a wolf/dog hybrid as defined herein within the Town.
(10)	Nonconforming Enclosures. As to any person keeping wolf/dog hybrids in existing enclosures in the Town  of  Cady  on  the  date  of  passage  of  this  Section, Subsection (p)(4) shall take effect on January 30, 2006; for all other persons, said Subsection shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication as provided by law. The remaining provisions of this Subsection shall take effect and be in force from and after passage and publication  as provided by law.
(11)	Wolf/Dog Hybrid Registration. All owners of any wolfidog hybrid in the Town of Cady shall, on or before January 30, 2006, and annually thereafter on or before January 30th of each year, register such animal and provide a current color photograph of such animal with the Town Clerk's office and pay an annual registration of Fifty Dollars ($50.00). At the time of registration, each owner of any wolf/dog hybrid kept within the Town limits shall provide to the Town Clerk proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any acts of property damage, personal injury or other liability incurred by virtue of any injury or damage inflicted  by such wolt/dog hybrid. Such insurance shall name the Town of Cady as co-insured solely for the purpose of notice of cancellation of such insurance policy.
(12)	Warning   Sign.	The  owner  or keeper  of  a wolf/dog  hybrid  shall  display  on  the
prernises on which such animal is kept signs warning that there is a wolf/dog hybrid on the property as provided herein. Such signs shall be visible and capable of being read within at least twenty (20) feet of their placement, but shall not be more than two
(2) square feet in area, and shall state in bold, capital letters, on a white background, the following: "WAR.NING  -WOLF/DOG HYBRIDS  PRESENT". One such sign shall be placed in the front yard of any property on which any wolf/dog hybrid is kept, and additional such signs shall be placed on all gates or doors providing access through the second (outermost) enclosure required above.



Sec. 7-1-10	Penalties.

 
(a)
 

 
(1) Anyone who violates Sections 7-1-1, 7-1-2, 7-1-3, 7-1-4, 7-1-5, 7-1-6 or 7-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances or Chapter 174, Wis. Stats., shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) and not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the first offense and not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and not more than Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) for any subsequent offenses.
(2)	An owner who refuses to comply with an order issued under Section 7-1-8 to deliver an animal to an officer, isolation facility or veterinarian or who does not comply with
 
Title 7	Chapter 2

Automobile	and M	orcycle Races,    and Exhibitions






Regulation and Licensing of Automobile  and Motorcycle Races, Shows and Exhibitions




Sec. 7 2=1	Regulation and Licensing of Automobile and Motorcycle Races, Shows and Exhibitions.

(a)	Definitions. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanmgs:
(1)	Automobile.	A motor  vehicle with  a shipping weight  of more than  one thousand
(1,000) pounds and designed primarily for the purpose of transporting persons rather than property but which does not have a passenger-carrying capacity sufficiently large to bring it within the definition of "motor bus."
(2) Motorcycle. Any two (2) or more wheeled motor-driven or power-driven cycle or motorized  bicycle.
(3)	General Purpose Fire Extinguisher. An extinguisher capable of putting out Type A,
B or C fires.
(b)	Applicability. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all private or public  races, shows or exhibitions involving any motorized vehicle in the rown or Lady whether specifically licensed, in all or part, by another ordinance or not.
(c)	license Required.
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct or operate any automobile, motorcycle or motorized vehicle race, show or exhibition ("race, show or
=-vh h + 11..'Y\ 11 \  n1'ho+har .f11...,..  -n1"' "<1r:ita.  A"'i'4  -nn"h.l1  r;)tt.ci.nrl'=l-nf"o.cii.    nrhAfl""'lP."1"' -f"l"'AP.  r\1'"  -fAr -:lrlrr11tt..::lnr"P
VAll.lU.ll.1V11            YY .l.1\,,.1ll.l\..J.l     .J.V.l    1.--'1...l  YUL\..'    Vl.   l'U.LIJ..l.V   U\..L\,,.;l..lUU..!.lVV'    VY  J...lV\.J..J.VJ..     .J..1.VV    '-..1'.1.      .J...V.I.     '-1.\....J..l.1...L..l.t-\.U...1..I.-'""
to which  a fee is charged, without having first secured a license therefor, from the
Town Board.
(2)	Any person, firm or corporation intending to conduct a race, show or exhibition shall present an application therefor in writing to the Town Board giving the name of the applicant (person, firm or corporation) desiring to conduct said show, race or exhibition and designating the place where said show, race or exhibition is to be held.
(3)	No license shall be granted unless the applicant has first complied with all of the provisions of this Chapter.
 
Automobile and Motorcycle Races, Shows and Exhibitions
7-2-1.


State of Wisconsin, at a security presence rate of one (1) security guard per one thousand (1,000) patrons, with a minimum of four (4) such security personnel at each event.
(5)	Race Track Guard Fencing.  The perimeter of the curved portion  of the race track
shall be protected by a standard, corrugated highway guard rail, mounted approximately fifteen (15) inches above the ground on 6" x 8" inch pressure-treated wooden posts, except where such portion of the track curve is needed for an access or exit path, or the equivalent of such guard rail.
(6)	Ambulance Service. The applicant/licensee shall provide the Town Board with a notarized copy of a contract for ambulance service at the facility. Such ambulance service shall be in full compliance with all  applicable regulatory and certification requirements of the Wisconsin Statutes and the Wisconsin Administrative Code. In the event the contract is voided or the licensing/certification  of the ambulance service is suspended or terminated, then the license granted under this Chapter shall be automatically suspended until such time as suitable ambulance service in accord with the provisions of this Chapter is obtained. A licensed ambulance shall be on hand at all times during racing sessions.
(7)	Insurance. No license shall be issued until the applicant has on file with the Town Clerk of the Town of Cady, and in fuH force at all times, a public liability insurance policy with minimum coverage amounts of Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) per person and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence,
(8) Parking Areas. The licensed premises shall provide sufficient on-site parking to accommodate all patrons attending an event. Such parking areas shall be  fully graveled or surfaced. Parking on grass or dirt does not meet the standards of this Section.
(9)	Stationary Noise Limits - Maximum Permissible Sound Levels.
a.	Noise  from  a  licensed  premises  shall  not  exceed  the  following  standards  for maximum sound pressure levels measured  at the property line.

 
Zoning	Noise Rating-Daytime


Residential	70 db
Corr1"Y}11ercial/	75  db Agriculture
 
Noise Rating-Nighttime
(after 6:00 p.m.)

60 db
70 db
 
Industrial	100 db	100 db

b.	Ambient noise is the all-encompassing noise associated with a given source, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far, but excluding the noise source being measured. Ambient noise by 5 db in any octave band to be designated excessive.










 
 
Title 7 > Chapter 3


Designation and Regulation of All Terrain Vehicle
Routes

Sec. 7-3-1 TITLE AND PURPOSE

The title of this ordinance is the Town of Cady All-Terrain  Vehicle Route Ordinance.  The plll JJOSe of this ordinance is to establish all-terrain vehicle routes in the town and to regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles in the town.


 

The Town Board of the Town of Cady, St Croix County, Wisconsin has the specific authority to adopt this All-Terrain Vehicle Route Ordinance under s23.33 (8) (b) and ( 11) Wis. Stats

Sec. 7-3-3 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE

The Town Board of Cady, St Croix County, Wisconsin, by this ordinance, adopted on proper notice with a quorum and roll call vote by a majority of the Town Board present and voting, provided the authority for the town to designate all-terrain vehicle routes in the town and to regulate the use of those routes and all-terrain vehicles in the tO\vn.

Sec. 7-3-4  OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES

Pursuant to s.23.33 (4) (d) 4, Wis. Stats, except as otherwise provided in s.23.22
(4)	Wis. Stats, no person may operate an all-terrain vehicle on the roadway portion of any highway in the town except on roadways that are designated as all terrain vehicle routes by this ordinance.  Operation of all-terrain vehicles on a roadway in the town that is an
all-terrain vehicle route is authorized only for the extreme right side of the roadway
except that left turns may be made from any part of the roadway that is safe given prevailing conditions.	On paved  roadway aii-terrain vehicles must be operated on the paved portion of the roadway and not on the gravel shoulder.

Sec. 7-3-5 DESIGNATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES


The foliowing routes are designated all-terrain vehicle routes in the town:

All roads in the Town of Cady that are properly signed as all terrain vehicle routes, excluding dead-ends and driveways.  Dead ends may be used only by town residents and only to access designated routes.
 
Designation and Regulation of All Terrain Vehicle Routes
7-3-7

Sec. 7-3-7  ENFORCEMENT

This ordinance may be enforced by any law enforcement officer authorized to enforce the lmvs of the State of Wisconsin.

Sec. 7-3-8 PENALITES

The penalties under s.23.33 (13) (a). Wis. Stats, are adopted by reference.



 


This ordinance is effective when all-terrain vehicle routes signs are posted by the local ATV clubs and the routes will be open year round, but can be discontinued at any time by the decision ofthe Cady Tovm Board.

 


Stats.
 
The town clerk shall properly post this ordinance as required under s 60.80, Wis.
 

Revised and adopted this	6th	_day of_  June	, 2011 TOWN OF CADY



an	Carla Greiber, Clerk, Attest
 

 

AN ORDINANCE REGARDING LICENSING OF NONMETALLIC MINING SITES AND OPERATIONS

Final Adoption  Version

The Town Board  of  Supervisors of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin,  do ordain as follows:



SECTION I.	CREATION OF PROVISIONS.

Title 7, Chapter 3 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances is created to read  as follows:



Title 7	Chapter 3

Nonmetallic	ining Sites and Operations





 
7-3-1
7-3-2
7-3-3
7-3-4
7-3-5
7-3-6
7.3.7
7-3-8
7-3-9
7-3-10
7-3-11
7-3-12
7-3-13
7-3-14
7-3-15
7-3-16
 
Auth01ity; Findings; Purpose Applicability  and  Scope; Interpretation Definitions
Operations License
Operations License  Application  Requirements License Application  Required  Information Small Site License
Minimum  Standards of Operation
Annual Report Inspections Financial  Security
Damage to Private Water Supplies
Mining  Agreement
Insurance  and Indemnification Renewal  of Operations Licenses
Violations,  Enforcement  Procedures  and Penalties
 

Sec. 7-3-1	Authority;  Findings;  Purpose.

(a)	Statutory Authority. This Chapter  is adopted  pursuant  to  powers  granted the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin by the Town's adoption of village powers under Sections 60.10 and 61.34, Wis. Stats., the Town's legal ability to require a highway use agreement under Section 349.16, Wis. Stats., the Town's authority under Section  66.0415,  Wis.  Stats.,  to  regulate offensive industry, and any other authority, without limitation, under the Wisconsin Statutes and/or Wisconsin Administrative Code. Any amendment, repeal	or re-creation of  the Wisconsin Statutes and/or Wisconsin Administrative Code relating to this Chapter made after the effective date of this Chapter is incorporated herein into this Chapter by reference on the effective date of the amendment,  repeal  or re-creation.
(b)	Findings.
(l) Nonmetallic mining operations and associated activities can have both direct and indirect adverse impacts on the Town.
(2)	While nonmetallic mining operations can make important contributions to the state and local economy, there is  a substantial likelihood that nonmetallic mining activities will cause short-term and  long-term damage to the physical environment.  Nonmetallic  mining  operations can have adverse impacts on surface water and groundwater and, particularly	if blasting and crushing/processing operations are undertaken on the site, can generate ha1mful levels of noise and dust and other potentially  harmful materials.
(3)	Nonmetallic mining sites can have negative impacts on area property values and farmland preservation efforts, and on landscape  and aesthetics.
(4)	Nonmetallic mining sites can have detrimental impacts if not properly
screened or planned for proper reclamation. Nonmetallic mining operations can be a source of light pollution.
(5)	Nonmetallic mining sites and associated operations can present safety concerns to the public if not properly secured and may constitute an attractive  nuisance.
(6)	Nonmetallic  mining  sites and associated operations can present public
health concerns; respirable crystalline silica has been identified as a possible health-threatening substance, with increased toxicity occuring with  freshly-fractured  silica.
(7)	Truck   traffic   from   operations   can   cause   extraordinary   wear   on
highways, roads and streets,  and  generate  off-site  impacts  including, but not limited to, safety concerns for children and other members of the public who also rely on local transportation  assets.
(8)	The  Town  of  Cady  recognizes  that  while  certain  aspects  of  mining
operations are subject to federal, state and/or county regulations.  there
 
are no comprehensive federal, state and/or county regulations addressing all aspects of nonmetallic mining operations; many aspects of nonmetallic mining have thus been left unregulated, with potential adverse impacts to the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Cady.
(c)	Purpose.  The purpose of this Chapter, without limitation, is to:
( 1) Provide reasonable minimum and unifonn standards for all nonmetallic mining operations and associated operations in the Town of Cady;
(2)	Require licenses and adherence to standards for nonmetallic mining operators in order to protect public health and safety, and preserve the scenic beauty and community aesthetics of the Town's environment and landscapes;
(3)	Implement and facilitate the planning objectives of the Town of Cady Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to Sec. 66.1001, Wis. Stats., as a statement on community goals and values and as a means to meeting the consistency requirement prescribed by the State's comprehensive planning law;
(4)	Establish a fair and efficient process  for the review and approval of applications, and assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of nonmetallic mining and related facilities and operations;
(5)	Provide,  through  licensing,  a  legitimate  and  reasonable  means  of
accountability to minimize potentially hazardous or dangerous impacts, when possible,  on the community from nonmetallic mining and associated  operations;
(6)	Protect the habitat of federal and state identified endangered species if present;
(7)	Safeguard Town policies in regard to farmland, blufflands,  and open
space protection;
(8)	Protect the public from damage to both the quality and quantity of surface and ground waters and wetlands;
(9)	Require  construction  and  operating  compliance  with  all   other applicable federal, state, county and town regulations;
(10)	Protect the transportation resources of the Town;
(11)	Prevent or minimize adverse impacts from both on-site and off-site operations associated with nonmetallic mining, including a significant loss of property values; and
(12)	Promote the general welfare of the people of the Town of Cady.



Sec.. 7-3-2	Applicability and Scope; Interpretation.

(a)	General Scope and Applicability. This Chapter shall apply to all nonmetallic mining sites, operations and associated activities within the Town of Cady except as provided in Subsections (b) and (c) below.
 
(b)	Exempt Activities and Operations.	This Chapter shall not apply to the following excavation activities and nonmetallic mining operations:
(1)	Excavations   for  building  construction   purposes  conducted  on  the
building site.
(2)	Grading work conducted for preparing a construction site other than a nonmetallic mining site, or restoration work to land following a natural disaster or flood.
(3)	Excavations or grading by a person solely for domestic or farm use at that person's residence or farm.
(4) Excavations or grading conducted for the maintenance, repair, construction	or reconstrnction of a highway, railroad or other transportation facility where the excavation or grading is entirely within the property boundaries of the highway, railroad or other transportation  facility.
(5) Borrow pits and disposal sites for transportation-only projects  as defined in Section 7-3-3(b)(4).
(6) Nonmetallic mining at nonmetallic mining sites where less than one (1) acre of total affected acreage will occur over the entire life of the mme.
(7)	Removal from the earth of commodities or products that contain only
incidental amounts of nonmetallic minerals/soils, such as forest products, Christmas trees or plant nursery stock, ornamental or garden plants, or agricultural crops.
(8)	Any  activities  required  to  prepare,  operate  or  close  a  solid  waste
disposal under Subchs. II to IV of Chapter 289, Wis. Stats. or a hazardous waste disposal facility under Chapter 291, Wis. Stats., that are conducted  on the property on which the facility is located; however, a nonmetallic mining reclamation ordinance and the standards established under Sec. 295.12(1)(a), Wis. Stats., shall apply to activities related to solid waste or hazardous waste disposal that are conducted at a nonmetallic mining site that is not on the property on which the solid waste or hazardous waste disposal facility is  located such as activities to obtain nonmetallic minerals to be used for lining, capping, covering or constructing berms, dikes or roads.
(9)	Nonmetallic  mining  with  a limited  purpose  and  duration  through  a
contract with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) that imposes reclamation requirements. The duration of the exemption shall be specific to the length of the WisDOT contract for construction of a specific transportation project.
(10)	Dredging  for  navigational  purposes,  to  construct  or  maintain  fa1m
drainage ditches and for environmental contamination remediation and disposal of such dredging spoils.
 
(c)	Existing Nonmetallic Mining Operations; Registration.
(1)	Nonmetallic construction-grade sand and gravel mining operations in existence and regularly in use prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall not be required to be licensed under this Chapter, provided said mine operates under its 01iginal reclamation plan approved by the County, and the reclamation plan and operations at the site are not modified or expanded in any way subsequent to the adoption of this Chapter. Within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Chapter, the owner or operator of the existing nonmetallic construction-grade sand and gravel mining site shall register the site with the Town Clerk pursuant to this Subsection.
(2)	If the mining operations and/or area covered  by the 01iginal county­
approved reclamation plan  are modified and/or the operations  at the site are expanded or modified in any manner from their original means of operation and/or purpose, the mine and associated operations shall be considered a new operation subject to the licensing requirements, and full compliance with the standards, of this Chapter.
(3)	Such licensing exemption under this Chapter does not  create  a complete site exemption from compliance with other applicable federal, state, county and local regulatory requirements, standards and ordinances separate from this Chapter, nor docs such exemption prohibit enforcement of other nuisance-type regulations necessary to protect the public welfare.
(4)	Such nonmetallic construction-grade sand and gravel mining operations
in existence at the time of enactment of this Chapter and meeting the criteria of this Subsection shall be required to be registered with the Town Clerk. In registering the site, the owner or operator of such site shall provide  the following information:
a.	Ownership info1mation as prescribed in Sec. 7-3-6(h);
b.	An accurate map of the site;
c.	A listing of any hazardous materials or hazardous and toxic substances, including fuel supplies, that will be stored, used or produced on-site and a description of the measures to be used for seeming and storing these materials; and
d.	A   copy   of   the   county-approved   site   reclamation   plan   and
documentation  that the site is in compliance  with  such  require­ ments.
(d) Liberal Interpretation of Chapter. The provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Town of Cady. This Chapter shall not be construed to he a limitation or a repeal of any other power or authority now granted to or possessed by the Town of Cady.
 
(e)	Abrogation.
(1)	It is not intended that this Chapter repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere	with any easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements created p1ior to the effective date of this Chapter.
(2)	Except as is set forth expressly herein, it is not the inLenL of the Town
Board to abrogate, annual or repeal any other ordinance oC the Town of Cady or to alter the applicability of laws which arc of statewide concern within the Town of Cady. To the extent that a conflict arises between this and any other ordinance, rule or  regulation. the more restrictive provision shall control.
(f)	Town as Regulatory Body. By adoption and enforcement of this Chapter, the Town of Cady shall not  be deemed to be a partner or agent of any person or party to which a license or permit is granted hereunder.



Sec. 7-3-3	Definitions.

(a)	Interpretation of Definitions. For the purposes of this  Chapter and any license or pe1mit issued in accordance herewith, the following terms, phrases, words and their de1ivations in this Section shall have the meaning given herein unless otherwise specifically provided for in this Chapter or unless the context clearly indicates othe1wise or unless such meaning would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town of Cady. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words in plural number include words in the singular number. and words in the singular number include the plural number.  The word  "shall" is mandatory, and not merely directory.
(b)	Chapter Definitions.  The following definitions shall apply in this Chapter:
(1)	Adjacent Landowner/Property. Any property within one (1) mile [five thousand two hundred and eighty (5,280) linear feet] of a proposed nonmetallic mine site regardless of whether there is a shared property boundary or a residence or structure on the property.
(2)	Application.	All  necessary  and  appropriate  documentation  that  an
applicant must submit in order to receive a license or permit under this Chapter.
(3)	Best Management Practice.  A method or technique that has been
consistently shown as producing results superior to others than those achieved with other means, and that is viewed as a performance benchmark within that professional field.
(4)	Borrow Site.  An area outside  of  a transportation  project  site  from
which stone, soil, sand. or gravel is temporarily excavated for use at the project site, except the tenn does not include commercial sources.
 
(5)	Buffer. An undisturbed vegetated area measured from the mine site border into the mine site, in which no nonmetallic mining activities, structures or roads can occur except for the construction and maintenance of a vegetated  berm.
(6)	Commercial Use. A use that involves the exchange  of  cash,  goods or services, baiter, forgiveness of indebtedness, or any other enumeration in exchange for goods, services, ente1tainment, or the right to occupy space over any period of time.
(7)	Complete Application. An application that contains all  information, rep01ts, verifications, fees and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an application as determined by Town reviewing  authorities under the requirements  or this Chapter.
(8)	Computation of Time.  In computing any period  of time prescribed  or
allowed in this Chapter, the day of the act or event from which the period of time begins shall not be included, but the last day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.  If the period of time presc1ibed or allowed is less than seven
(7) days, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded from
the computation.
(9)	Construction-Grade Sand and Gravel Mining.
a.	This industry and use is generally defined in NAICS Code 212321 and specifically comprises establishments primarily engaged in operating construction-grade sand and gravel pits, dredging for construction-grade sand and gravel, and/or washing, screening, or otherwise	preparing construction-grade aggregate  that  is predominantly produced and used for local construction purposes. Specifically excluded are industrial sand mining and related uses generally defined in NAICS Code 212322 and in Subsection (b)(14) below.
b.	Examples of such construction-grade  aggregate uses arc:
1.	Concrete.
2.	Asphalt.
3.	Concrete or asphalt road construction.
4.	Building  or dimension stone.
5.	Decorative stone.
6.	Retaining walls or revetment rock.
7.	Roofing granules.
8.	Railroad ballast.
9.	Agriculture-related  uses such a field lime and  bedding  sand for livestock.
10.	Small quantities of sand and/or gravel used for other purposes
such as sand for icy roads, water filtration systems in septic systems, and landfills.
 
(10)	Engineer, Registered Professional.   A person  who is registered  as a professional engineer pursuant to Sections 443.04 and 443.09, Wis. Stats.
(11)	Entity.	Any	individual,	corporation,	partnership,	association,
governmental unit or other legal entity which seeks a license or pennit under this Chapter.
(12)	Geologist, Registered. A person who is registered as a professional geologist pursuant to Sections 443.037 and 443.09, Wis. Stats.
(13)	Hazardous   Waste.	Any  solid  waste  as  defined   by   the  Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources in Section 291.0 l, Wis. Stats.. identified as hazardous under Section 291.05(1 ). (2), (4) or (5), Wis. Stats., and/or is listed as a hazardous waste or a hazardous/toxic substance in NR 661.03 and/or NR 661.24, Wis. Adm. Code.
(14)	Industrial Sand Mining. This industry and use is generally defined in NAICS	Code 212322 and specifically comprises establishment.;; primaiily		engaged in operating industrial-grade sand pits/mines, dredging for indust1ial-grade sand, and washing, screening or otherwise preparing indust1ial-grade sand for sand used for industrial abrasive. blasting, filtration, foundries, glass, molding and g1inding uses. Specifically included in this definition are silica sand mining, quaITying and/or beneficiating. Specifically excluded are construction-grade sand and gravel mining as defined in NAICS Code 212321 and Subsection (b)(9) above.
(15)	Landowner. The person who has title to land in fee simple or who holds a land contract for the land. A landowner is not a person who owns nonmetallic mineral iights to land, if a different person possesses title to that land in fee simple or holds a land contract for that land.
(16)	Legal Holiday. Any statewide legal holiday specified by state law and other holiday recognized by the Town Board.
(17)	Mine Site (Nonmetallic Mine Site). Includes the following:
a.	Land from which mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals will be, or are proposed to be, regularly or intermittently extracted for sale or use by the operator and/or any land on which is or will be located any structures, equipment, storage facilities, stockpiles, washing, drying, dewatering, transfer, transload or screening facilities, plivate roads, rail spurs, conveyors or haulage ways associated with nonmetallic mining operations;
b.	All  storage  and  processing  areas  whether  contiguous  or  not  to
areas actually excavated for nonmetallic mining;
c.	Areas where grading or regrading is necessary;
d.	Areas affected by nonmetallic mining activities. such as the contruction, improvement, operation and maintenance of private roads, conveyor systems, or haulage ways:
 
e.	Areas where nonmetallic mining refuse is deposited:
f.	All contiguous lands to the nonmetallic mining operation under common ownership or control of the owner or operator;
g.	Areas where nonmetallic mining reclamation activities are caITied out or structures needed for nonmetallic mining reclamation, such as topsoil stockpile areas, revegetation test plots, or channels or ponds for surface water diversion are located.
(18)	Mining Operation. Operations or activities for the extraction from the
earth of mineral aggregates and nonmetallic minerals and related operations or activities, including, but not limited to, excavation, grading, or dredging if the purpose of those operations or activities is the extraction of mineral aggregates and nonmetallic minerals and related processes including, but not limited to. stockpiling. crushing. screening, scalping, dewatering, blending or transloading. It does not include removal from the earth of products or commodities that contain only minor or incidental amounts of nonmetallic mining minerals such as agricultural crops, commercial sod, ornamental or garden plants. forest products, Christmas trees or plant nursery stock.
(19)	Modification.	The  addition,  removal,  or  change  of  any  of  a  site's
boundaries or physical or visually discemable components, facilities or aspects of a nonmetallic mining site and/or associated operations, such as processing facilities and equipment, screening or transload facilities, rail spurs or haulage ways, lighting, scales, equipment sheds and shelters, fuel storage, telecommunications antennas, landscaping, fencing, changing the color or materials of any visually discernable components, vehicular access, parking, and/or upgrade or replacement of equipment for different or more modern equipment. A modification shall not include the replacement of equipment components where the replacement is identical to the component  being replaced or for any matters that involve nonnal repair and maintenance without making significant (as determined by the Town) additions. removals, or changes.
(20)	North American  Industry  Classification  System  (NAICS).	The
standard definitions used by federal agencies in classifying business establishments. NAICS was developed by the federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to supplant the prior Standard Indust1ial Classification (SIC) system. NAICS is also used by the U.S. Census Bureau.
(21)  Nonmetallic Minerals.  A product, commodity  or material consisting
principally of naturally occuning, organic, inorganic, nonmetallic, non­ renewable matelial. Nonmetallic minerals include, but arc not limited to, stone, rock, sand, gravel, asbestos, silica, beryl, diamonds, clay, coal, shale, feldspar, peat and talc.
 
(22)	Nonmetallic Mining. Means all or any of the processes, methods of approach, applications and means utilized, both mechanically and otherwise, including, but not limited to, crushing, screening, blasting, grading and scalping to cause the occtmence of one (l) or more of the following:
a.	Industrial sand mining;
b.	Construction-grade  sand and gravel mining;
c.	Extraction from the earth of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals for off-site use, sale or exchange, including diilling and blasting as well as associated activities such as excavating, dredging and/or grading of such materials.
d.	Manufactming or processing operations that may involve the use of equipment for the crushing, screening, separation, drying, pressing, dewatering, or blending of the mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals obtained by extraction from the mining site or with materials transferred from off-site.
e.	Manufactming processes aimed at producing nonmetallic products for sale or use by the operator.
f.	Stockpiling of nonmetallic minerals or finished products for sale or use off-site, and the stockpiling of waste materials.
g.	Transporting,	transfering	or	transloading	of	the	extracted
nonmetallic minerals, finished products or waste materials to/from the extraction, processing and/or storage site; included within this definition is transp01tation of extracted materials to or from an extraction site, whether by trucking over state, county or Town roads or highways, by means of a conveyor belt system, or by any other means, whether or not the nonmetallic mine site from which or to which said transportation is maintained is within or outside of the Town of Cady.
h.	Disposal of waste materials.
i.	Reclamation of the extraction site.
(23)	Nonmetallic Mining Refuse. Waste soil, rock, vegetation and other waste material resulting from a nonmetallic mining operation.  This term does not include merchantable by-products resulting directly from or displaced by the nonmetallic mining operation.
(24)	Officials.   All Town officers, employees, agents, representatives  and
private consultants hired by the Town.
(25)	Operator. Any person who is engaged in, or who has applied for or holds a license to engage in nonmetallic mining operations, whether individually, jointly or through subsidiaries. agents. employees, contractors, or subcontractors. For purposes of this Chapter, the operator shall also be considered the applicant for required licenses and permits, unless otherwise specified in a specific application.
 
(26)	Operations License (License). The license required of nonmetallic mining operators in this Chapter to conduct nonmetallic mining and associated operations in the Town.
(27)	Persons. Any of the following entities: natural persons: corporations: partnerships; associations; limited liability companies: finns; bodies politic; joint stock company, association, public or private corporation; any federal, state, county, municipal, town, municipal utility, municipal power district or other governmental entity; cooperative; estate; trust; receiver; executor; administrator or any other fiduciary: any representa­ tive appointed by order of any court or otherwise acting on behalf of others; or any other entity of any kind which is capable of being sued.
(28)	Reclamation. The rehabilitation of an extraction  site including,  but not limited to, removal of nonmetallic mining refuse, grading of the site, replacement of topsoil, stabilization of soil conditions, establish­ ment of vegetative cover, control of surface water and  groundwater, prevention of environmental pollution, and, if practical. restoration of plant, fish and wildlife habitat.
(29)	Town. The Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, and its officials.
(30)	Town Board. The Town of Cady Board of Supervisors (Chairperson included).
(31)	Town Roads. Roads dedicated to the public, owned and maintained by the Town of Cady for the purpose of facilitating public travel under Chapter 82, Wis. Stats., and includes the meaning of "town highway" as that term is defined in Ch. 990, Wis. Stats.
(32)	Town Road Exceptional Maintenance. Maintenance above and beyond "nonnal maintenance" which is caused by Town road use by motor vehicles and heavy equipment by the operator in conjunction with the  construction,  operation,  maintenance,  and/or reclamation  of a nonmetallic mining site. What constitutes exceptional maintenance shall be detennined upon the basis of a study of the Town roads, at the applicant's expense, to be used for hauling at or immediately after the effective date of this Chapter, the purpose which shall be to determine the baseline condition of the tight-of-way and pavement, its remaining useful life and any repairs or improvements required in order to facilitate the anticipated weight and volume of traffic to and from the nonmetallic mining site. Upon the basis of regular annual inspections by the Town or inspections on a periodic basis performed as a result of perceived damage to any given portion of Town roads to be used for hauling, if it is determined by the Town that maintenance or repairs are necessary beyond those included under the classification of "normal maintenance 11   and the costs thereof shall be borne by the operator.
(33)	Town Road Normal Maintenance.   Such recmTing  or non-recunfog
maintenance  of the right-of-way,  roadbed, or pavement  of any or all
 
portions of the designated Town roads as are occasioned by normal wear and tear, weather conditions (both anticipated and unanticipated), and other factors taken into account in establishing both the remaining useful life of a Town road in accord with accepted highway maintenance practices used by  the Town in accord with Wisconsin Department of Transporation standards and to meet or exceed the remaining useful life of a highway.
(34)	Waste Material. The non-marketable by-product that results directly from or is displaced by extraction or that is a by-product of a manufacturing process that is scheduled for disposal at the extraction site or some other site as part of a reclamation  plan.



Sec. 7-3-4	Operations license.

(a) license Requirement. No person shall operate a nonmetallic mining site and/or associated facilities in the Town of Cady without first obtaining an Operations License from the Town Board.
(b)	license Term.
(1)	Term. An Operations License shall be valid for a two (2) year period, commencing on the date the license is issued by the Town and ending on the second anniversary of the issuance of the license.
(2)	Renewals.  An Operations License may be renewed pursuant to Sec.
7-3-15 below.
(c)	license Amendment. If the Town Board has authorized and issued an Operations License, the operator may request an amendment to that license during the license term. License amendment requests shall be  reviewed under the same procedures as the original license application.
(d)	license Revocation. An Operations License may be revoked pursuant to the procedures in Sec. 7-3-16.
(e)	license Transfer.
(1)	Transfer Criteria; Compliance with Conditions. An Operations License shall not be transfeITed to a new operator unless piior written permission has been given by the Town Board, which shall be granted by the Town Board if  the new operator agrees to comply with all conditions in place with the current operator and if the new operator provides all financial assurances as may be required by the  state, county or Town of Cady.
(2) Assumption of Mining Agreement Requirements. Ir the current operator has entered into a Mining Agreement pursuant to Sec. 7-3-13, the cmTent license shall not be transferred unless the new operator agrees in writing with the Town to assume all of the obligations. without exception, under said Mining Agreement and to abide by and
 
comply with all of the terms and conditions set forth in said Mining Agreement.



Sec. 7-3-5	Operations license Application Requirements.

(a) Application Submittal; Application Fee; Summary Statement. An applicant for an Operations License shall submit fifteen ( 15) copies of required application  materials, including all required documentation under Sec. 7-3-6, to the Town Clerk, accompanied by the payment of the application fee of Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) and the required deposit for the Base Administrative Escrow Account per Subsection (b)(3) below. Such fees shall be payable to the Town of Cady. The application shall include a summary statement of the proposed operation, signed by the operator and the landowner, provided the landowner is a person other than the operator.
(b)	Preliminary Review by the Town.
(1)	Preliminary Review. The Town Clerk shall forward the application to the Town Board for review to determine if additional information or professional recommendations are necessary to properly evaluate the application.	If no additional information or expertise is deemed necessary to properly evaluate the application, the Town Board shall schedule the application for consideration under Subsection (d) below.
(2)	Consulting Professionals; Additional Information.
a.	The Town Board may, at the applicant's expense, employ or retain the services of an engineer, planner, geologist, soils scientist, hydrologist, attorney, accoustical expert or other professional experts ("retained experts"), or designated Town employee. necessary to review and evaluate the application and report to the Town Board, in writing, whether additional information is required for review of the application and to determine whether  the application meets the standards of this Chapter.
b.	The Town Board or its retained experts may request that the applicant submit additional information if the Town Board or its retained experts determine that an application is incomplete or inadequate.
c.	Once the applicant has submitted all required information, or any additional requested application information, the retained expert(s) shall report to the Town Board, in writing. on whether the application meets the requirements of this Chapter. The Town retains the iight to request additional application information throughout the review process.
 
d.	The application shall be considered as being officially submitted when all of the application information requirements, including the payment in full of all required fees, are complied with.
(3)	Base Administrative  Escrow Account.
a.	At the time an application is to be filed with the Town, the applicant shall execute for the benefit of the Town an agreement agreeing to pay and provide adequate financial security as required herein.
b.	The applicant operator shall deposit with  the Town Clerk funds necessary to reimburse the Town for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and consultation (retained experts), or a designated Town employee, to the Town in connection with the review of the application, and including the construction,	inspection and modification of the site once permitted.	The escrow account funds may also be used by the Town to cover copying and reproduction costs of documents and public records requests related to the application and/or license. Such deposit to the Base Administrative Escrow Account shall be in addition to any other application and compliance fees required by the Town or other regulatory authority.
c.	The   initial   deposit   amount   shall   be   Five   Thousand   Dollars
($5,000.00), to be deposited with the Town Clerk within five (5) days of filing an application for an Operations License.
d.	The Town shall maintain a separate Base Administrative Escrow Account for all such funds. The Town's consultants/experts, or designated Town employee, shall invoice the Town for services provided in reviewing the application, including costs associated with construction or an approved modification and/or inspections and monitoring, and such invoices shall be provided to the operator.
e.	If at any time in the process this escrow account has a balance of
less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), the operator/applicant shall immediately upon notification from the Town replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance restored to a minimum of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00). Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the Town before any further review or consideration is taken on the application.
f.	In the  event  that  the  remaining  amount  held  in  escrow  by  the
Town is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the conclusion of the process, the remaining balance shall be promptly refunded to the operator.
g.	The  total  amount  of  escrow  funds  needed  as  set  forth  in  this
Subsection may vary with the scope and complexity of the project,
 
the completeness of the application, and other information as may be needed to complete the necessary review. analysis and inspection of any construction for compliance with the conditions of license.
(c)	Public Hearing.
( 1) Hearing Requirement. A public hearing shall be scheduled and conducted on the license application if the preliminary application requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied.
(2)	Publication of Hearing  Notice; Notification of Nearby  Property Owners.
a.	Notice  of  the time, place  and purpose  of such hearing  before  the
Town Board shall be given by publication of a Class 2 Notice as prescribed by the Wisconsin Statutes a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the public hearing in the official Town newspaper and by legal posting.
b.	Notice  of the time, place and purpose  of such public  hearing  shall
also be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, members of the Town Board, and the last known owners of record as listed in the office of the Town Assessor who are owners of property in whole or in part situated within one-half mile (2,640) feet of the boundaries of the applicant's parcel, said notice to be sent at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such public hearing.
c.	After publication and notice, the applicant may request. in writing
submitted a minimum of five (5) business days prior to the noticed hearing date, a one (1) month postponement of the public hearing before the Town Board for good cause, provided, however, that the notice of the rescheduled hearing shall again be provided pursuant to this Subsection.
d.	All estimated costs associated with noticing public hearings shall be paid by the applicant to the Town Clerk at the time of making application.
e.	At the Town Board's discretion, the Board shall have the option to
set and hold an additional public hearing(s) at a subsequent regular or special Town Board meeting(s); such optional additional public hearing(s) may be necessary if significant new facts have now been made available. Such hearing(s) shall be noticed and conducted as prescribed in this Subsection.
f.	Failure to fully comply with the notice to adjacent property owners
shall not, however, invalidate any previous or subsequent action on the application.
 
(3)	Additional Notice  Requirements  for  Floodplain/Shore/and  or Exclusive Agricultural Zoned Parcels.
a.	In the event the subject property lies within a floodplain zoning
district, notice of the public heating and a copy of the application under this Chapter shall also be mailed to the District Office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, at least ten (10) days before the hearing, in accordance with  NR  l l 6.20(2)(c),  Wis. Adm. Code. This shall be done  whether  or  not  the  applicant  is also required to seek a rezoning or conditional use pennit for the parcel separate from the application  for  an  Operations  License from  the Town  of  Cady.
b.	In the event the subject property lies within a shoreland zoning jurisdiction, notice of the public hearing and a copy of the application under this Chapter shall also be mailed to the District Office of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, at least ten ( 10) days before the hearing, in accordance with NR 115.05(6)(h), Wis. Adm. Code. This shall be done whether or not the applicant is also required to seek a rezoning or conditional use permit for the  parcel separate from the application for an Operations License from the Town of Cady.
c.	In the event the subject property is currently zoned in an exclusive
agricultural zoning classification, notice of the public hearing and a copy  of the application shall also be given to the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, in accordance with Section 91.75, Wis. Stats. This shall be done whether or not the applicant is also required to seek a rezoning or conditional use permit for the parcel separate from the application for an Operations License from the Town of Cady.
(4)	Public Hearing Procedures.   The public  hearing  shall  be  conducted
pursuant to the hearing guidelines found in Sec. 2-3-14 or the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances. A written record of the public hearing shall be made by the Town Clerk.
(d)	Town  Board  Determination.
(1)	Town Board Meeting Agenda Notice. Once the application is complete, any repmt(s) from a retained expe1t(s) has been completed and submitted, all required fees have been paid, and the public hearing under Subsection (c) above has been held, the Town Clerk shall place the application on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the Town Board.	If a special meeting is warranted, the applicant shall pay the additional costs incmTed for the special meeting.
(2)	Town  Board  Evaluation.	The   Town   Board   shall   evaluate   the
application for license issuance, re-issuance or denial of the license and for any  conditions  to  be  attached  to the  license.   Included  in  such
 
evaluation shall be review and consideration or the application materials and information received by the Town from the operator, additional infonnation required of the applicant by the Town, the general public hearing testimony, and any other pertinent infonnation received from the applicant, any federal, state or county  regulatory body or from any other interested persons. Additionally, it is required that specific consideration by the Town Board he given to the following reports and considerations in its evaluation for licensure, in its dete1mination against licensure, and its evaluation regarding placing any conditions to be attached to the license including. hut  are  not limited to, the following, with the Town Board's finding reflected in the official record:
a.	Any relevant written reports, recommendations and/or verifications received by the Town from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources or any other federal, state, county or local authority.
b.	Any relevant written reports and recommendations received by the Town from any engineers, attorneys or other experts retained by the Town.
c.	Any relevant written reports and recommendations received by the
Town from the applicant.
d.	The potential short-term and long-term adverse or positive effects and impacts of the proposed nonmetallic mining site  and associated operations based on the proposed location, including, but not limited to, its effects or impacts on the following:
1.	Existing roads, bridges, culverts, traffic flow, intersection safety, traffic patterns, and designated access routes and Haul Routes.
2.	Surface water quality and drainage.
3.	Groundwater quality and drinking water quality.
4.	Air quality and dust issues.
5.	Adjacent   wetlands,	floodplains,   forests,	agricultural	and unique lands.
6.	Current  and  future  land  uses  and  neighborhood  land  use compatability,  for the site and for adjacent landowhers.
7.	Current  and  future  property  values,  for  the  site  and  for adjacent landowners.
8.	Long-term farmland preservation and protection of productive
agricultural lands.
9.	Soil erosion.
10.	Stonnwater management  and erosion control.
11.	Applicable zoning regulation(s) compliance.
12.	Consistency  with  the  planning  goals  and  objectives  of  the Town Comprehensive Plan.
 
13.	Town  appropriations  and  revenues.
14.	Public health, safety and welfare of Town  residents.
15.	Noise and light pollution generated from the  site.
16.	Landscaping  and  aesthetics.
17.	Existing area topography  and existing vegetation, including, but not limited to, blufflands and production agriculture areas.
18. Existing  wildlife  habitat,  including  any  presence   of  any endangered or protected species.
19. Sufficiency of required monitming.
e.	The past license compliance record of the operator at other similar sites and facilities in the State of Wisconsin and other states.
f.	Consideration  whether  the  uses,  land  values  and  enjoyment  or
property of adjacent landowners will in any significant and foreseeable manner be substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the proposed nonmetallic mining operation.
g.	The potential for the applicant, based on the application mate1ials submitted and other information received by the Town to fully comply with the standards enumerated in this Chapter, with any conditions approp1iate and necessary for inclusion in the license, and with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
(3)	Town Board Decision; Approval Conditions.
a.	The Town Board may grant the Operations License  if  it determines that the operation of the nonmetallic mining mine and associated activities will be consistent with the minimum standards and public purposes of this Chapter and the Comprehensive Plan, and with any conditions the Town Board may attach to the license. If the Town Board denies the  license application. the applicant may	request an appeals hearing  under  the  provisions  of Section 7-3-16.
b.	The Town Board shall make,  and record  in the minutes  of  the
Town Board or in a separate w1itten report or resolution, findings of fact and may impose and require any conditions the  Town Board finds necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare when approving and issuing an Operations License.
c.	If  an  application  is  denied,  the  reasons  shall  be  stated  in  the
minutes of the Town Board or in a separate written report or resolution.  A copy shall be provided to the applicant.
(e) Reapplication. No application for an  Operations License  which  has  been denied in whole or  in part by the Town Board shall be  resubmitted  for  a period of  one ( 1) year from the date of such denial, except on  the grounds that substantial new information or proof of changes that would result in compliance with applicable standards and conditions arc included  in the resubmitted    application.
 
Sec. 7-3-6       license Application  Required Information.

All applicants for a nonmetallic mining Operations License shall submit a complete application. Incomplete applications will be returned  to the applicant and a valid application shall not be considered to have been submitted until all required application materials have been received by the Town and required fees paid. Failure or refusal of the applicant to provide any required information or failure or refusal to appear or be represented at any public hearings  or Town Board or Plan Commission meetings at which the application is a noticed topic shall be grounds for denial thereof. In addition to any other information requested by the Town, applicants shall submit, at a minimum, all of the following information in order  to facilitate a proper review of the application; all such information provided shall be a public record under the laws of the State of Wisconsin:
(a)     Project  Summary.     A   complete   signed   summary   description   or  the
proposed nonmetallic mine and associated operations, including a comprehensive explanation of activities that would take place on the site. An explanation shall be provided whether the proposed operation will primarily be a construction-grade sand and gravel mining operation or an industrial sand mining operation.
(b)	Ownership and Applicant  Information.
(1)	Operator Information.
a.	The name, address, landline and cellphone telephone number(s), fax  number  and  e-mail  address  of  the  operator  or the  proposed
nonmetallic mining operation.
b.	If the applicant is a type of corporate entity, such information shall be included for all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant; all officers and directors of a corporate applicant; all members of any limited liability company applicant.
c.	If the applicant is a corporation, the date and state of incorpora­
tion, the name and address of any registered agent(s),  and  the name and address of any shareholder(s) who individually or jointly owns or controls more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in said corporation.
d.	If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest, the application shall specify the name of the entity and the above required name, address and contact information of any general partner(s ).
e.	The original signature of the applicant operator.
(2)	Property  Owner/Lessor Information.
a.	The name, address, landline and cellphone telephone number(s), fax  number  and  e-mail  address  for  all  owners  or  lessors  or the
 
land on which the proposed mmmg operation  would occur. consistent with records maintained by the Town Assessor.
b.	If the owner/lessor is a type of corporate entity, such  information
shall be included for all partners or limited partners of a partnership owner/lessor; all officers and directors or a corporate owner/lessor; all members of any limited liability company owner/lessor.
c.	If the  owner/lessor  is  a  corporation,  the  date  and  state   of
incorporation, the name and address of any registered agent(s), and the name and address of any shareholder(s) who individually or jointly owns or controls more than ten percent ( l (VJr;) of the stock in said corporation.
d.	If owner/lessor is a partnership, joint venture or any other type of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest, the application shall specify the name of the entity and the above required name, address and contact information of any general partner(s).
e.	Proof  that  all property  taxes  on the  property  are  cmTent.
f.	The original signature of the property  owner(s).
(3)	Agent and Consultant(s) Information. The name, address, landline and cellphone telephone number(s), fax number and e-mail address of any authorized agent for the project and all consultants whose services are being used with the application and post-approval construction (engineer, attorney, contractor, surveyor, soil scientist, geologist, hydrologist, land use planner, landscaper, etc.).
(4)	Lease Information.  If the proposed operation is subject to a lease, a
copy of a fully executed lease and/or similar agreement or option between the landowner and the operator who will engage in mining operations on the proposed site.
(5)	Local Contact Representative. The operator shall designate, and provide	information for, a local contact representative who will be available either on-site or with an office in Dunn, St. Croix, Polk, Chippewa, Barron or Eau Claire County. Said contact representative shall be available by telephone or in person during the hours the mine is in operation. Correspondence, communications or verbal directives from Town representatives to facilitate compliance with license terms to the local contact representative shall have the same auth01ity as with the licensed operator.
(6)	Business  Record Information.
a.	Complete info1mation on whether the applicant/operator has previously operated a nonmetallic mining or processing operation in the State of Wisconsin or any other state, and. if so, the location or such mines or operations. Included shall be infonna­ tion on the p1ior experiences, if any, of the applicant/operator in
 
the ownership, lease, operation, maintenance and closure/ reclamation of any nonmetallic mining sites elsewhere, citing specific dates of ownership/operation and closure.
b.	Included with such information  shall be a statement on whether
the operator has ever had a pennit, license or zoning permit for a nonmetallic mining or processing operation revoked or suspended, or been subject to any type of enforcement action, corrective order or penalty from a federal, state, county or local regulatory body. Such infonnation shall include rulings or adjudications against an operator or the operator's agent, principal or predecessor in administrative or judicial proceedings. If so, the reason(s) for such actions, and their status or resolution, shall be explained in writing, along with the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension, revocation or enforcement action.
(c)	Site Information and Maps.
(1)	Site Map.
a.	A certified survey map (CSM), plat of survey, or other reasonably accurate and complete map of the proposed site, with parcel identification numbers, drawn to scale and prepared by a land surveyor registered by the State of Wisconsin.
b.	The certified survey map or other reasonably accurate and complete map shall also show the entire area contiguous to the proposed mine site owned or controlled by the operator even though only a portion of said area is included in this application.
c.	Property   boundary   lines,  roads,   streams  and   water   courses,
drainageways, marshes, rock outcroppings, wooded areas. blufflands, railroad tracks, utility lines and other significant features on or adjacent to the proposed site shall be accurately depicted.
d.	A  supplemental   site  map   depicting   the   type,   location,   and
dimensions of all proposed landscaping, ponds, berms, vegetation and fencing. If the Visual Impact Statement  required  in Subsection (c)(4)b below reveals there is vegetation on or adjacent to the project site that must be retained for screening of the site, the applicant operator shall document how such vegetation will be protected throughout the operational life of the site.
(2)	Aerial Photograph.	An  ae1ial  photograph  of  the  proposed  site  at  a
scale of one (1) inch equals six hundred and sixty (660) feet (1:660), signed by both the operator and the landowner.
(3)	Location  of  Existing  Buildings  and  Structures.	The    location,
elevation, dimensions and use within the proposed site of all existing
 
buildings and other structures, equipment, stockpiles, storage, existing culverts and drainpipes, natural gas lines, parking areas, and electric and communications infrastructure, whether overhead or underground.
(4)	Location of Proposed Buildings, Facilities and Structures; Visual Impact Assessment.
a.	For all proposed buildings, other appurtenant structures, facilities,
ponds,	berms, stormwater and erosion control structures, equipment, stockpiles, storage and parking areas within the site proposed		for licensing, the following information shall be provided, as applicable:
l.   Location;
2.	Height above pre-existing grade;
3.	Dimensions as constructed;
4.	Color;  and
5.	Intended  uses  of such structures  and  facilities.
b.	The applicant operator shall provide a Visual Impact Assessment, which shall include:
1.	A  Zone  of  Visibility  Map  which  indicates  locations  or  a
radius from which the operating site may be seen:
2.		A pictorial representation of "before and after" view from key viewpoints in the Town as may be approp1iate, including, but not limited to, state and county highways and parks; other public lands or designated histmic  sites;  and  any  other location where the site is visible to a large number of visitors or residents.
(5)	Location of Nearby Buildings and Structures.  The location  and use
of existing structures within five hundred (500) feet of the  boundmies of the proposed  site.
(6)	Topographic Map.	A  topographic  map  or  maps  of  the  mine  site
extending two (2) miles beyond the site boundaries at contour intervals no wider than ten (10) feet showing the boundaries of the site, the location and total acreage of the site, and the name of all roads within two (2) miles of the site.
(7)	Well Location Map. A map on which all residential, agricultural, commercial and municipal wells within two (2) miles of the boundaiies of the site in all directions are marked and assigned a numerical identification of the location.
(8)	Zoning Compliance Statement; Consistency with Town Comprehen­
sive Plan.
a.	Information regarding the current zoning of the proposed mine site and on adjacent properties, and a statement addressing any rezoning, conditional use permit or variance that will he necessary from the approp1iate zoning authorities for the use contemplated.
 
b.	A statement addressing how the proposed nonmetallic mmmg operations and site will be consistent and compatible with the goals, objectives and community values identified in the Town of Cady Comprehensive Plan, and whether any rezonings, conditional use/special exception permits, variances or land divisions required by appropriate zoning authorities can be obtained and whether the consistency standard of Sec. 66.1001, Wis. Stats., can he met. If there are issues of incompatibility, an explanation shall be provided.
(9)	Floodplain, Shore/and or Wetland Zoning Information. If applicable,
information regarding the current floodplain, shoreland and/or wetland zoning of the proposed mine site or the existence of  such  zoning within five hundred (500) feet of the site. If such zoning conditions exist, the Town will require a statement from the governing zoning authority addressing whether the proposed development will hamper flood flows, impair floodplain storage capacity, cause a need for wetlands remediation, or cause danger to human, animal or aquatic life. If applicable, infonnation or a map showing the tloodland and shoreland boundaries and the contour line lying a vertical distance or two (2) feet above the elevation of the one hundred ( 100) year recurrence flood interval, or where such data is not available, two (2) feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record within the exterior boundaries of the proposed site and within five hundred (500) feet therefrom.
( l 0)  Surface Waters and Drainage Information; High Water Elevations.
a.	The location and name of all surface waters, including lakes, private and/or public ponds, streams (including  intennittent streams and headwaters), drainage ditches. wetlands, drainage patterns, and other water features on the site and within two (2) miles of the site.
b.	High water elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes. flowages and
wetlands within the boundaries  of the proposed  site and within five hundred (500) feet therefrom shall be shown.
(11)	Proposed	Lake	and	Stream	Improvements	or	Relocation.
Information on any proposed lake and stream improvement or relocation, and notice of application for approval by the Division of Environmental Protection, Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, if applicable.
(12)	Soil Tests; Erosion Control; Stormwater Management.
a.	A description of the distribution, depth and type of topsoil not only of the area of the site proposed for mining and for which an application is being submitted, but also of the entire acreage of land  contiguous  with  the  proposed  mine  site that  is owned  or
 
leased by the same landowner/lessor, as well as the geological composition and depth and width of the nonmetallic deposit.
b.	Soil tests and reports, of a type as required by the Town Engineer, for the design of roadways, haulways, stonnwater detention/­ retention and drainage facilities, on-site septic disposal systems, and erosion control facilities. Included shall be corn plete desc1iption of the depth, distribution and type of topsoil on the proposed site as well as the geological composition and depth and width of the nonmetallic deposit.
c.	Complete   plans   on   proper   erosion   control   and   stormwater
management measures to  be  utilized  at the  site, with  ve1ification tht such plans meet the standards of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative  Code and applicable county and local regulations.     [Cross-Reference:  Sec.  7-3-8(b)(l) J.
(13)	Transfer,	Drying,	Pressing,	Manufacturing,	Transload	and
Processing Facilities. For drying, pressing, manufacturing, transfer, transload and processing facilities within the Town of Cady, a map identifying the location, with accompanying repo1t, of all other non­ contiguous sites within the Town of Cady and any other municipality or town, if any, that will contribute extracted material to the same transfer, drying, pressing, manufacturing, transloading, or processing facility to which the site for which the operator seeks a license.
(14)	Site Reclamation Plan.  A copy of the approved or conditionally approved applicable County or Town nonmetallic mining  reclamation plan for the proposed site that complies with or exceeds the  require­ ments  of  Chapter  295, Wis.  Stats., and NR  135, Wis.  Adm.  Code.
(15)	Project/Site Name. The common useage name for the proposed nonmetallic mining site and associated operations.
(16)	Non-Contiguous Contributing Sites. A map identifying the location
of all non-contiguous sites within the Town and nearby communities, if any, that will contribute extracted material to the same processing facility to which the site for which the applicant seeks a license under this Chapter will also contribute.
( 17)  Threatened	or	Endangered	Species   Assessment.	With	an
application, verification shall be provided to the Town  from  the Wisconsin Department of Natural  Resources  that  the  proposed  site  is not the habitat of  a  Federal  or State endangered  species.  specifically, but not limited to, the Karner  blue  butterfly  ( Lycaeides  melissa samuelis Nabokov), the presence of which will require a survey to be conducted by qualified individuals to  determine  if  wild  lupine  plants that support the species are present on the parcel. The presence of the Karner blue butterfly may require  special  permits  and   remediation plans  approved  by  the  Wisconsin  Department  of  Natural  Resources.
 
(d)	Operations Plan.
(1)	Operations Timeline. Dates of the:
a.	Planned  start  of  site preparation;
b.	Planned commencement of mining and/or processing operations at the site;
c.	Phasing of mining and reclamation activities at the site; and
d.	Anticipated date of cessation of operations at the site.
(2) Mining, Machinery and Processing Information. Description of mining methods, machinery and equipment to be used for extraction, processing, drying and transportation of the extracted material, and the sequence of operations.
(3)	Volume of Material Estimates.
a.	Estimated volume of material to be extracted from the proposed site  over the life of the mine.
b.	Estimated volume of material to be extracted from the proposed site during the next calendar year, and over five (5) years ..
c.	If the proposed site is intended to be used solely as  a drying, pressing, processing, transload or transfer facility, the amount of product, and its sources, that will be processed or pass through the site over the life of the site and for the next calendar year.
(4)	Locations of Structures, Stockpile Areas, and Road Access Points. The proposed locations within the site of all future buildings and other structures, equipment, stockpiles, storage, berms, ponds, road access points, and parking areas.
(5)	Transportation Report; Off-Site Trucking and Rail Routes.
a.	A detailed transportation report addressing the issues identified in Section 7-3-8(b)(l0) and also presenting plans on the number of projected truck trips per day, per week and per month and truck weight/loads that will be generated by the nonmetallic mining site. Each segment of an ingress/egress trip shall be counted as separate trips for purposes of this report.
b.	The names, addresses and contact information of any transporters
who will be auth01ized by the operator or be independent contractors for the operator to transport materials and product to and from the proposed site. Included shall be full disclosure of any prior record of violations, citations or forfeitures involving such transporters and drivers.
c.	Identification of all proposed off-site trucking and railroad routes, together with the frequency of traffic and the common schedule of travel to be used for transp01ting extracted matetials or products to or from the site. The Town shall be informed at the time of license application of any intended proposals by the applicant to
 
have a railroad spur extended to the proposed site. [Cross­ Reference: Section 7-3-8(b)(10)].
(6)	Estimated Water Use; Recycling.
a.	Estimated water use (water budget), including an estimate of the amount of daily water use, anticipated water sources, and methods for disposing of water, including methods used for on-site retention/infiltration, control of run-off meeting ten-year flood standards, and recycling. Specific data shall be provided regarding the amount of water to be recycled on-site, method of recycling, and estimated water loss due to evaporation.
b.	A detailed plan shall be provided for the use of any high-capacity
wells at the site, including copies of the required permits from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the full application submittal to the WisDNR.
(7)	Hazardous Materials and Fuel Storage and Use. A listing of any hazardous materials or hazardous, toxic substances, including fuel supplies and petroleum products, that will be stored, used or produced on-site and a description of the measures to be used for securing and storing these materials.   [Cross-Reference:   Section 7-3-8(a)(8)].
(8)	Chemicals; Flocculents. A listing of all chemicals, their intended use, and approximate quantities to be stored on-site and to be used in the manufacturing or processing operations or in controlling dust, and their proposed method of storage and use. If the operator seeks to change or add chemicals after the issuance of a license, the Town shall be notified in writing by the operator a minimum of seven (7) days prior to any such change or addition. Specifically, a list of any floccu­ lent/polyacrylamides to be stored or used at the site shall be provided with the application, along with detailed information on the quantities to be used and the manner in which such flocculents would be utilized.
(9)	Security. Plans explaining security measures at the proposed site, including, but not limited to, security cameras and alarms, fencing, warning signage, access control, etc.
(10)	Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan addressing how the require­ ments  of  Section 7-3-8(b)(3)  will be met.
(11)	Lighting Plan. A lighting plan addressing how the standards of Section 7-3-8(b)(6) will be met.
(e)	Documentation Demonstrating Compliance with Minimum Standards.
(1)	Compliance with Minimum Standards of Operation. The operator shall provide the documentation necessary, as determined by the Town, to demonstrate that the nonmetallic mining site and its associated operations can fully comply with the minimum operating standards prescribed in Sec. 7-9-8 and any other requirements  imposed by the
 
Town as a condition of licensing or separately by other regulatory authorities. Included with the initial application shall be foll reports and approvals information from other regulatory authotities necessary for a nonmetallic mining site and for license issuance under this Chapter.
(2)	Water Baseline Conditions and Proposed Operations Information.
With the application for an Operations License, the operator shall submit a report on how federal, state, county and local water quality­ related standards and regulations will be met with the proposed application, including, but not limited to, addressing the specific operations issues in Sec. 7-3-8(c). For mining operations commencing after the effective date of this Chapter, the operator shall also provide information establishing baseline conditions at the site before mining operations commence, including:
a.	The groundwater elevation across the site;
b.	The groundwater quality at the site for lead, arsenic and any other toxic metal that may reasonably be believed to be present in the area or in the type of deposit from which the extraction will be made; and
c.	The base flow of surface water within two (2) miles of the site.
(f)	Special Exceptions to Application Requirements. The operator may request a special exception from the application infonnation requirements of this Section if the applicant can demonstrate that the information required can be provided by alternative means or is not necessary or pertinent for an evaluation of the particular mining operations and associated activities contemplated, and that the public health,  safety and welfare will not be adversely affected thereby.



Sec. 7-3-7	Small Site license.

(a)	Purpose. As an alternative to an Operations License under this Chapter for limited sites, a Small Site License may be utilized for nonmetallic construction-grade sand and gravel mining operations, such as typically exist with construction-grade sand and gravel pits in the Town of Cady used, for example, as a source for road and driveway gravel. A Small Site License provides for a system of licensing and compliance with best management practices without the need to satisfy all steps necessary for an Operations License due to the small scale and limited impact on the community, property	values, Town infrastructure, and the environment of such operations.
(b)	Eligibility. Nonmetallic construction-grade sand and gravel mining operations that meet the following criteria may be eligible to apply for a
 
Small Site License in lieu of an Operations License, provided the following criteria can be satisfied:
(1)	The nonmetallic mining operation consists of less than ten (10) acres of  total affected acreage over the life of the mine, pit or processing facility  on the site.
(2)	The nonmetallic mining operation does not employ blasting or use of explosives more than three (3) times per year.
(3)	The nonmetallic mining operation does not involve nightime operations or the processing of materials from off-site.
(4)	The nonmetallic mining operation  produces only construction-grade sand  and gravel.
(5)	The nonmetallic mining operation does not involve mining at a depth below the point that is ten ( 10) feet above the groundwater table.
(c)	Term. Small Site Licenses shall be subject to renewal every five (5) years pursuant to the procedures in Sec. 7-3-15, and  subject to  the  inspection, financial assurance, and enforcement provisions of Sections 7-3-10, 7-3-11 and  7-3-16.
(d)	Operations Standards.
(1)	For nonmetallic  mining operations that qualify for a Small Site License, the Town Board may grant a Small Site License if the operator submits information and certifications showing compliance with the following:
a.	Payment  of  a registration  fee  of  Fifty  Dollars  ($50.00).
b.	Ownership and applicant information required by Sec. 7-3-6(b).
c.	A reasonably  accurate map  of  the  site  and  areas  of  mining  or excavation.
d.	Information on the current zoning status of the site, including, if applicable, shoreland, wetland and floodplain zoning information.
e.	Operations information  as prescribed  in Sec. 7-3-6(d)(l)-(3).
f.		Compliance  with  Town blasting  ordinances.	[Cross-Reference: Title 7, Chapter 4 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances].
g.	A statement agreeing to comply with the restrictions on compres­
sion brake use as found in Sec. 7-3-8(a)(6).
h.	Agreement to notify the Town of regulatory  violations  per Sec.
7-3-8(a)(9).
L		Copies are filed with the Town of reclamation plans approved by the County and all other regulatory permits required by other federal, state or county agencies for the nonmetallic mining operation.
J.	A  certification   that  the   operator  will   use   best   management
practices  to control  dust, noise, light, surface water  runoff  and other off-site impacts from the operation.
(2)	Except  as  required  in  Subsection  (d)(l)  above.  operators  seeking  a Small  Site  License  shall  not  be  required   to  comply  with  other
 
 
 
application,  licensing  and  operations  requirements  of  this  Chapter pertaining to sites for which an Operations License is require.



Sec. 7-3-8       Minimum Standards of Operation.

The Town Board may grant a license for nonmetallic mining and associated operations if the applicant can demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and that the following minimum standards of operation can be completely and consistently met. Compliance with such requirements and standards are conditions of license issuance and licensure continuance:
(a)	General Compliance Standards.
(1)	Site Boundary Identification. The operator shall clearly mark the boundaries of the entire licensed site, with appropriate safety notices and warnings against trespassing. The "no trespassing" signs shall be posted around the entire site perimeter at an appropriate distance for posting but no less than two (2) conspicuous places for every forty
(40) acres within the site.  Signs shall be sized at a minimum to meet
the provisions  of Section 943.013(2), Wis. Stats.	[Cross-Reference: Subsection (b)(2) below].
(2)	Local Compliance Verification. The operator shall file with the Town Clerk (as required by this Chapter, separate agreement or at the Town's request) appropriate verification of compliance with all requirements and standards of this Chapter, and with any additional requirements made a condition of the Operations License.
(3)	Blasting Activities; Use of Explosives. No blasting or bumping shall occur without  specific written authorization from the Town and the operator shall have first obtained a blasting permit from the Town pursuant to applicable Town ordinances. [Cross-Reference: Title 7, Chapter 4 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances].
(4)	Compliance with Other Federal, State, County and Local Permit Requirements.
a.	The  operator  shall  provide  written  verification  that  all  other
applicable  federal, state, county and local permits,  licenses  and approvals required for the nonmetallic mining operation have been or, only with the consent of the Town Board, will be obtained in a timely manner  as a condition of  Operations License issuance prior  to the commencement  of  operations.	Copies  of  all such pennits, licenses and approvals shall be filed with the Town Clerk as  part  of  the  application  review  process.		Any  anticipated conflicts  with  applicable  federal,  state,  county  or  Town  laws, ordinances,  codes,  rules  and  regulatory  requirements  shall  be explained, with particular attention to safety and environmental-
 
related  areas of potential noncompliance.	Examples  of possible required permits, licenses and approvals applicable to nonmetallic mining sites (usually from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources,  county or zoning authorities)  are, but not limited to: Air  Permits,  Stonnwater  Permits,  High  Capacity  Well  Permits, Cultural Resources Assessments, Zoning-Related  Permits, and, if near  surface  water,  Shoreland,  Floodplain  or  Wetland  controls, including  Dredging  Permits,  Pond  Permits  and  Grade  Permits [pursuant to Chapters 30 and  31, Wis. Stats., and NR  103, NR 115, NR  116, NR  117, NR  135, NR 216, NR 340, NR 400 and
NR 440, Wis. Adm. Code].
b.	Full compliance with such requirements from other regulatory bodies shall be a condition of license under this Chapter.
(5)	Equipment Backup Alarms. The operator shall minimize the use of backup alarms on trucks and heavy equipment as much as possible, and use "white noise" or low tone backup alarms to the extent permitted under federal and state regulations.
(6)	Use of Engine Compression Brakes (Jake Brakes).
a.	The use of engine compression brakes (commonly known as "jake brakes") by trucks is prohibited on all Town roads pursuant to Sec. 10-1-41 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances (when adopted) and shall also be applicable as a condition of an Operations License to all trucks entering or leaving the nonmetallic mining site, except in extreme emergency situations. The operator shall take appropriate steps to inform all truck drivers and independent contractors	providing services at the site of the required compliance with this Subsection, Sec. 10-1-41 of the Town  of Cady Code of Ordinances (when adopted) and all other applicable traffic codes. If a truck driver and/or his/her employer disregards this regulation, the operator shall take proper steps to correct the practice or cease using the services of any such truck  driver, his/her employer or tmcking company that refuses to comply.
b.	In addition, violators shall also be subject to forfeitures pursuant to Sections 10-1-41 and 10-1-50 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances (when adopted).
(7)	Semi-Annual and Annual Meetings  With Town Board.   Dming  the
first two (2) years of a licensing period, the operator shall, at a minimum, meet with the Town Board every six (6) months, in open session, at a properly noticed regular or special Town Board meeting to discuss and review operations at the site, possible issues and any necessary corrective actions. Thereafter, such meetings shall be held annually. Such semi-annual meetings shall occur annually in May/June and November/December and annual meetings in May/June.  It shall be the sole responsibility of the operator to contact the Town Clerk and
 
request placement of such appearance on a Town Board meeting agenda.
(8)	Storage of Hazardous Materials, Chemicals and Fuels; Contaminat­ ing Spills; Emergency Responder Training.
a.	All   hazardous   materials,   chemicals   and   petroleum   products
maintained on-site shall be stored in state-approved fuel storage containers and shall be in accordance with federal standards for storage and fueling areas. All such storage of liquid hazardous materials, chemicals  and petroleum products shall provide leak­ proof containment not less than 125% of the tank volume. Plans for such containment facilities shall be submitted to the Town for Town Board approval as part of the application process.
b.	When  fueling  trucks  or mobile  tank  trailers  are used  to  refuel
equipment on-site, all fueling shall occur on a fueling absorption pad to minimize any leakage.
c.	In addition to contacting all other approp1iate regulatory offi­ cials/agencies, the operator shall contact the Town Chairperson and/or Town Clerk as soon as possible, but not later than two (2) hours, after the occurrence of a hazardous waste or chemical spill, leak or contamination incident of any kind, or in the event of an improper release of any chemical, dust or particles above levels permitted by applicable federal, state, county or local regulations.
d.	The operator shall provide, and pay any costs therefor, an initial
training and site visit  of emergency responders for site-specific dangers, chemicals and hazardous matelials that may require special or additional precautions dming an emergency response situation.
(9)	Notice of Regulatory Violations or Changes to Approved Plans. The
operator shall notify and file with the Town Clerk any modifications or amendments to approved plans, suspensions, revocations, notices of violation, citations, or other enforcement actions taken by any other governmental and/or regulatory body against the nonmetallic mining operation within the Town of Cady. This information shall be submitted to the Town within seven (7) days of ocClmence. Such violations, if confomed, shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(b)	Off-Site Impacts Standards.
(1)	Erosion  and  Stormwater  Control  Measures;  Sediment  or  Wash Ponds.
a.	The operator shall unde1take all measures necessary for the control
of surface water runoff from the nonmetallic mining site and operations in order to prevent pollution and erosion of sediment onto neighboling properties and/or into surface water and groundwater.   [Cross-Reference:   Sec. 7-9-6(c)(12)].
 
b.	Included in this requirement is compliance with all state, county and town erosion control standards pursuant to NR 216 and NR 151, Wis. Adm. Code. A copy of the compliance plan shall be filed with the Town Clerk with the application for an Operations License. Inspectors of the state, county and town may enter the licensed site at any time during daylight hours to inspect  for proper compliance with these standards.
c.	If the nonmetallic mine site has areas adjacent to the site that are being used for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, the operator shall construct all measures necessary to control surface water runoff from entering or leaving the licensed site or otherwise causing contamination of surface water and groundwater.
d.	The site shall be internally drained to a standard approved by the Town Engineer; the Town Board may authorize a temporary modification of the internal drainage requirement dming the initial constrnction phase of the mining site. Runoff generated from the mining operation shall be contained in sediment or infiltration ponds of a type and design approved by the Town Board. Any wash or settling ponds that have chemicals introduced into them, including but not limited to flocculents, shall have ten (l0) feet of separation distance to bedrock and to the groundwater elevation, and shall have an impervious liner. Unless engineering studies are presented for Town Board approval for an acceptable design alternative, such ponds shall have, at a minimum an impervious liner consisting of a concrete bottom  lining and clay side lining.
(2)	Required Fencing.  The operator shall fence the entire outer boundary
of the licensed site to prevent unauthorized access to the site.  [Cross­ Reference:   Subsections (a)(l) above and (b)(4)e belowj.
(3)	Required  Landscaping,  Buffer  Area(s),  Berming  and  Screening.
Pursuant to the required landscaping plan under Sec. 7-3-6(d)(l0):
a.	The operator shall provide and maintain a buffer area a minimum of two hundred (200) feet in depth along all bordering property lines and public roadways. Mining activity, parking, stockpiling, or storage is not permitted  in such buff eryards.
b.	The operator shall screen the mining, storage, processing and parking operations on the licensed site from public view to the maximum extent practicable through the use of berms, additional setbacks or other measures. Prior to construction, the Town shall be consulted with on the design and configuration of berm construction and placement, which shall require Town Board approval prior to construction. Earthen benns shall be constructed in a manner to provide for a substantial reduction in sound at the property boundary.  Included in the berming and screening design
 
should be the planting of shrubs, small trees and other vegetation (excluding the use of non-native or invasive species) along the berm to reduce noise levels and aesthetically improve the site. Gaps will be permitted in the berm, with gates, to provide for proper ingress/egress to the site.
c.	The  existing  perimeter   tree  canopy  at  the  highest  points   of
elevation shall be retained to reduce the amount of dust leaving the proposed mine site and maintain the visual appearance and aesthetics of the site. Plantings on berms shall be properly maintained and dead plantings shall be promptly replaced.
d.	Noxious  weeds  shall  be  controlled  on  the  site,  with  particular
attention directed to buffer areas.
e.	In addition to, or with the prior approval of the Town Board as an alternative to the above fencing requirement, the  Town  Board, upon request, may determine that the be1ming and screening plan is sufficient and that the fencing requirement be inapplicable.
(4)	Hours of Operation.
a.	The operator shall limit nonnal hours of mining site operations to a maximum of eleven (11) hours per day, Monday through Friday, during daylight hours and not earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m., whichever is more restrictive, to minimize off-site impacts to area residents. Operations shall not be conducted at any time on state-recognized holidays, Saturdays or Sundays. During such hours prohibited for mining or processing activities, other noise-producing activities on the site, such as equipment repairs, are also prohibited.
b.	The operator may submit a plan for extended hours as part of a
Mining Agreement for Town Board approval, if the operator can demonstrate that additional hours for a limited term are necessary due to extraordinary or emergency circumstances and would be consistent with the objectives of protecting the public health, safety and welfare and quality of living objectives of this Chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.
(5)	Coordination with Local School Bus Schedules;  Traffic Conditions; Speed/Weight   Limits.
a.	The operator shall obtain a current bus schedule from all school
districts which operate scheduled bus services for students residing in the Town of Cady on any roads used by trucks servicing the nonmetallic mining site. The operator shall  ensure  that  trucks from the mining site shall not interfere with the safety of children being taken to or returning from school, or the safety of residents and commuters at times when traffic volume from commuters going to and from work is the highest.
 
b.	Trucks serv1crng the site shall not pass tractors and other agricultural implements or low speed vehicles [as defined in Sec. 340.01(27h), Wis. Stats.] traveling on town roads. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall limit the auth01ity of the Town Board to reduce speed or weight limits on Town roads in accordance with the Wisconsin Statutes.
(6)	Lighting; Lighting Plan.
a.	The operator shall limit night lighting on the licensed site to that which is minimally necessary for security and shall, wherever possible, be shielded from illuminating off-site areas, including the use of full light cutoff shrouds so that no light is directed upwards or at other adjacent properties.
b.	If night operations are auth01ized by a Mining Agreement, the
operator shall comply with the standards prescribed in Town ordinances establishing outdoor lighting standards. A lighting plan shall be  submitted to the Town for review as part of the application process. Every effort consistent with legal requirements for aerial safety shall be made to minimize illumination of the night sky.
c.	Portable lighting units shall only be used temporarily as necessary to illuminate work areas.
d.	Upon written complaint of light pollution made to the Town Board, the Town shall notify the operator, who shall take necessary steps to mitigate the light pollution by redirecting the lighting and taking other reasonable steps to address the complaint.
(7)	Dust Control Measures.  The operator shall utilize all necessa1y dust
control measures specified in NR 415.075, Wis. Adm. Code. Additionally, the operator shall have and submit to the Town an established protocol for additional dust control measures when the National Weather Service has issued a high wind warning for the area.
(8)	Air Quality Standards; Air Monitors.
a.	Operators of nonmetallic mining operations that process silica sand for indust1ial use shall be responsible for conducting and funding monitoring of respirable c1ystalline silica by a third-party selected and contracted for by the Town. Monitoring shall utilize web­ linked,	real-time laser dust measurement, data collection, calibration, and daily filter analysis for respirable c1ystalline silica.
b.	If an applicant is applying for an Operations License for a nonmetallic mining operation that includes a frac-sand processing plant, the operator shall be required to monitor post-licensing the ambient level of airborne particulate matter of respirable (PM40) and Total Suspended Particulates (TSP) as measured using a web­ linked,  real-time  laser  respirable  particulates  monitor  equipped
with a respirable dust cyclone and 5.0 µm PVC gravimetric filters and by the standards contained in 40 CFR part 50 (2011), Appendix B, at the boundaiy line of the licensed site or an alternative method approved by the Town Board.
 
c.	The type and number of monitors needed, the location of the monitors, and frequency and duration of the monitoring program shall be detennined by the Town, after consultation with the Town's retained experts and the operator, and be reflected in the Mining Agreement. At a minimum, monitors  shall be  installed and maintained  at the operator's expense, and the site shall have a minimum of four (4) automatic and continuous and four (4) laser respirable particulate monitors, kept properly maintained and functioning, appropriately located on the borders of the mine site and	a web-linked weather station that provides real-time measurements of wind speed and direction, precipitation, and temperature at the mining site.
d.	Data analysis shall be designed to exclude background sources of dust by linking the on-site weather station wind direction measurements to perimeter real-time dust monitors required by this Subsection.
e.	Monthly readings and data from the Total Suspended Particulates (TSP) monitors shall be provided to the Town within ten (10) days of the end of the month and also be posted on a website (or at a location) designated by the Town.  The real-time laser respirable particulate monitors and weather station shall be web-linked to permit continuous public access to the  data.  The  gravimetric filters shall be collected daily for mass and crystalline silica analysis and the monitors' logged particulate concentrations, recorded not less than every ten ( 10) seconds, shall  be  posted every day on a website designated by the Town. The results of the laboratory analyses shall be be provided  to the Town within ten (10) days of the end of the month and also be posted on a website designated by the Town.
f.	If the real-time  laser respirable  particulate  monitors  show  an
exceedance of 35 micrograms per cubic meter of PM40 in  any thirty (30) minute period, the operator shall evaluate and implement additional best management practices to reduce PM4 0 emissions below thirty-five (35) micrograms per cubic meter. Air monitoring results indicating in excess of three (3) micrograms per cubic meter of respirable crystalline silica [fifteen (15) minute average concentration -  downwind perimeter minus upwind perimeter] shall require an alert to the Town and require that the operator implement additional effective best management practices in order to provide acceptable air concentrations.
g.	If the air monitors show an exceedance of 150 micrograms per cubic meter of TSP in any twenty-four (24) hour period, the operator shall evaluate and implement additional best management practices to minimize TSP.
h.	The Town may, at its discretion and at the operator's cost, order additional readings or samplings by a Town-designated indepe­ ndent testing service at any time deemed necessary to protect the public health and safety.
 
(9)	Off-Site Noise.
a.	The operator shall control off-site noise levels to the maximum extent practicable by using best management practices, but noise levels shall be consistently maintained at or below 60 decibels (dba) at the site boundary. Such measures include, but are not limited to, control of engine compression braking as required by Section 10-1-41 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances, use of "white noise" back up alarms, and proper maintenance of required berming and mufflers on mining equipment/trucks.
b.	Backup generators shall be operated only during power outages and  for testing and maintenance purposes.
c.	Excluded from this noise standard are temporary projects being done at the site on drainage ditches, screening berms, or road ditches.
(10)	Transportation Routes; Town Haul Routes; Road Assessments.
a.	Neither the operator nor its employees or independent contractors shall utilize roads owned or maintained by the Town of Cady to transport materials to or from the licensed site or otherwise in connection with the prope1ty, including with empty vehicles unless a Town road haul route has been agreed upon and approved by the Town Board. To the greatest extent reasonably possible, the operator shall require trncks carrying material to or from the licensed nonmetallic mining site to travel on roads other than Town roads (i.e., federal highways, state highways, and county trunk highways) which have higher weight carrying design capacity.
b.	The operator shall require any employees or independent contractors providing services to the operator to comply with these transportation requirements.
c.	The site shall be served by sufficient and safe access points. The access points shall have the approval of the Town Board, and, if applicable due to the location, the County Highway Department and/or the Wisconsin Department of Transportation. Access points shall be designed and placed so that the lights of vehicles entering and exiting the site are directed away from residential, commercial and agricultural buildings on adjacent lands.
d.	The Town  Board  may  require  the  operator  to  construct,  at the
operator's expense, an acceleration lane to serve the site if a Town road is being utilized.
e.	Trncks serving the site shall at all times operate with load covers or be of enclosed tanker design. The deposit or spilling of materials on roads is prohibited. [Cross-Reference: Section 7-3- 8(c)(5)b].
f.	In the event that the operator believes that any Town road will regularly be used  to transport materials, permanently or tempo­ rarily, to or from the nonmetallic mine site,  the operator shall immediately notify the Town. Upon such a notification  and  a clear necessity for use of Town roads is presented. the Town will
 
designate haul routes to be used that will have the least impact on the Town and its residents (Haul Route). The operator shall cause its employees and independent contractors to use such designated haul route(s).
g.	Prior to a haul route being designated, a public hearing on the proposed haul route shall be conducted  pursuant  to the procedures in  Sec.  7-3-5(c).
h.	To help preserve the integrity of designated haul routes, operators of silica sand mining/processing operations shall not sell sand or waste sand from their site to secondary local users (examples: fill material, bedding sand, etc.).
1.	As authmized by Section 349.16, Wis. Stats., each operator of a nonmetallic mining operation shall be required to enter into a Town Road Use Agreement with the Town of Cady addressing the issues herein regarding use of Town roads if such will be used at haul routes. The Town Road Use Agreement shall be negotiated upon the basis of a review of the factors in this Subsection and the following factors and such others as are detennined by the Town Board to be of relevance to the proposed use of Town roads:
1.	The State, County and Town highways and roads in the Town
of Cady which are proposed to be utilized for hauling purposes.
2.	The anticipated level of hauling truck traffic, per day, week,
month and year.
3.	The tonnage  or other  measurement  of  nonmetallic  mining proposed to be hauled by each fully loaded truck.
4.	Whether  the  haul  trucks  will  be  owned  and  operated  by  the
operator or by other companies/independent contractors, and, if the latter, upon what arrnngements will exist with the truck operator, whether an agent or independent contractor. If some or all of the hauling trucks are operated by persons other than the operator, the nature and extent of contractor controls proposed to be exercised by the operator over its use of Town roads shall be disclosed to the Town.
5.	Insurance, by type and amounts, proposed to be caITied by the
operator or other companies/independent contractors for all haul trucks to be operated in the Town of Cady.
J.	If such  a  Town  road  haul  route  is  agreed  upon,  a  form  of
maintenance funding by the operator and adequate funding for a Road Maintenance Escrow Account shall be agreed upon as a condition of license. [Cross-Reference: Sections 7-3-11 and 7-3-13].
k.	Prior to utilizing a designated haul route and annually thereafter, the  operator and Town shall mutually agree to select an indepen­ dent  third party who will conduct an initial pre-operations Road
Assessment and subsequent annual Road Assessments or the haul
routes in cooperation with and including input from the parties.
Such Road Assessment shall set forth in a rep01t projected repairs
 
needed due to haul route use by the operator and its employees and contractors, and such Road Assessment shall contain a reasonable estimate of costs of such repairs. As part of such Road Assessment, the Town shall have a videotape prepared at the operator's expense documenting the condition of all haul roads prior to commencement of work at the licensed site.
1.	The Road Assessment shall include, but not be limited to:
1.	Name  and length of Town roads to be  used.
2.	A general survey of the present condition of the pavement, roadbeds, shoulders, culverts, and the right-of-way.
3.	Estimated remaining life of roads at the time.
4.	Upgrades of pavement, roadbeds, shoulders, culverts, and rights-of-way	needed to a design standard meeting or exceeding Wisconsin Department of Transportation standards to withstand the weight and volume of proposed haul traffic.
5.	A    determination    of   upgrades    of    geometric    designs    of
highways to Wisconsin Department of Transportation standards to accommodate anticipated traffic volume; including, but not limited to, haul trnck traffic.
6.	Preparation  of an inventory of affected Town highways and
any necessary acquisition of rights-of-way required to accommodate recommended upgrades.
7.	Description by ownership, license number, haul weight, type,
and axle configuration of trucks proposed to be used for hauling on Town roads.
m.   The Town shall ensure that any third-party engaged for the Road
Assessment services, use sound professionally-accepted planning practices for haul route maintenance activities and work, and the Town shall make reasonable efforts to mitigate the costs of repairs to the haul routes. Such efforts may include, but not be limited to, reasonable preventive maintenance intended at overall cost reduction of haul route repairs while maintaining appropriate road conditions that protects public safety and recognizes the shared use of such roads with the general public. The operator shall have an opportunity to review the Road Assessment(s) and meet with appropriate Town representatives to discuss the Road Assessment. The parties shall have the right to modify the recommendations put forth in the Road Assessment by mutual written agreement in the Mining Agreement.
(11)	Weight Limits; Truck Operator Permits.
a.	The operator shall comply, and cause its contractors and employees to comply, with weight restlictions imposed on Town roads authorized by Sec. 10-1-11 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances, truck operator permits prescribed by Section 10-1-12 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances, other Town ordinances, and Sections 348.21 and 349.16, Wis. Stats.. unless otherwise modified by mutual agreement in the Mining Agreement.  [Cross-
 
Reference: Sections 10-1-11 and 10-1-12 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances].
b.	It is noted that Section 86.02, Wis. Stats,  provides  for  triple damages to be paid by parties injuring a town road or highway.
(12)	Control of Waste Materials. The amount of waste material (non­ marketable fines) returned to the mine site as part of the reclamation process shall not exceed the site specific ratio of waste to target material of the extracted raw material as determined prior to the processing of  the raw material. The processing facility shall keep records of the tonnage of raw material drawn from each raw material source. The tonnage of waste by product that is returned to each mine reclamation site shall not exceed the tonnage of waste contained in the raw material received at the processing facility from that site. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this Subsection and those of pertinent County reclamation standards, the more restrictive provision shall be applicable.
(c)	Standards Regarding Groundwater and Surface Water.
(1)	Impacts to Groundwater and Surface Water.
a.	Mining operations shall have at least one (1) monitoring well for every ten (10) acre sector of the licensed nonmetallic mining site. At least one (1) such well shall be a sentinel well at the boundary of the mining site that is down gradient of the groundwater flow.
b.	The operator, at the operator's cost, shall take quarterly monitoring
well samples for lead, arsenic, turbidity, total suspended solids, chlorides, nitrates, specific conductivity, any chemical or residual of the chemical used as a flocculent, and any other toxic substance, metal or mineral that may reasonably be believed to be present in the area or in the type of deposit from which the extraction will be made. The Town Board reserves the right to reasonably require sampling for other metals, minerals or toxic substances as a condition of licensing, at the operator's expense. This monitoring well requirement may not be applicable to sites that are used exclusively for drying (without chemicals), transfer or transloading at the nonmetallic mining site; such a detennina­ tion shall be made by the Town Board if so requested by the operator in writing.
c.	Mining  operations shall not be in violation  of the groundwater
quality standards in NR 140, Wis. Adm. Code.
(2)	Impacts to Groundwater Quality; Mining to be Conducted Above Groundwater Table.
a.	Mining operations shall not extract materials at a depth below the
point that is ten (10) feet above the groundwater table.
b.	Mining operations shall not cause a significant reduction in the quantity of groundwater available for reasonable use by cmTent users within  two (2) miles  of  the nonmetallic mining site. A "significant reduction" is a lowering of the water table that results in a substantial adverse impact on a private well including, but not limited to, the inability of a well to provide water on-demand and
 
on a continuous and/or uncontaminated basis. [Cross-Reference: Section 7-3-12]. The Town Board reserves the right to reasonably require verification testing as a condition of licensing, at the operator's expense.
(3)	Impacts to Surface Water Base Flow. Mining operations shall not cause a lowering of the groundwater table that results in  adverse effects on surface waters within two (2) miles of the  nonmetallic mining site, including, but not limited to, a reduction of water in streams and tributaries to or below base flows established p1ior to the commencement of mining activities. The Town Board reserves  the right to reasonably require verification testing as a condition of licensing, at the operator's expense.
(4)	Impacts to Surface Water Use. Mining operations shall not cause a lowering of the groundwater table that results in adverse effects on surface waters which serve as a critical source of water for agricultural, recreational or municipal functions such as fire protection. Adverse effects include, but are not limited to, a reduction of water in streams and tributaries to or below base flows established prior to the beginning of mining operations.  The Town Board reserves the light to reasonably require verification testing as a condition of licensing, at the operator's expense.
(5)	Stormwater Management; Deposits on Town Roads.
a.	The operator shall repair any damage to, and remove sediment from, any private property, or town roads, ditches and other drainageways when the operator is determined by the Town to be primaiily responsible for such sediment or damage caused by runoff from the nonmetallic mining site for any reason, including, but not limited to, heavy rains and/or snowmelt runoff.
b.	The operator shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 15-1-7 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances requiring that the operator maintain clean streets on Town roads used to transport products associated with the nonmetallic mining site, keeping such roads free of dirt, mud, soil and other deb1is. Adverse weather conditions may compel temporary suspension of hauling activities from the site on Town roads in order to comply with these requirements.
c.	In the event that the site contains areas adjacent to the nonmetallic mining operations that are being used for agricultural, commercial, or residential purposes, the operator shall undertake all measures necessary to control surface water runoff from those areas from entering mining operations or otherwise causing contamination of surface water and/or ground water.
(d)	Hazardous Materials.
(1)	Compliance With Regulatory Requirements. All hazardous chemicals shall be stored, used and disposed of in accordance with applicable state, federal, county and local laws and regulations.
 
(2)	Disposal of Waste Materials Containing Chemicals or Toxins. The operator shall not dispose of waste materials containing any hazardous chemicals in toxic amounts, or residuals declared to be hazardous by a government regulatory authority in toxic amounts,  on the site or in the Town of Cady, except in accordance with applicable state  and federal law and with prior approval of the Town Board.
(3)	Emergency Spillage Plan. The operator shall have a plan for responding to spills of any hazardous materials on the site. Said emergency spillage plan shall be filed with the Town Clerk prior to commencing operations, and also with any fire and emergency medical services department serving all or parts of the Town of Cady,  the County Sheriffs Department, and the County Emergency Management office.	[Cross-Reference: Sec. 7-3-8(a)(8) Emergency Responder Training].
(4)	Refuse Disposal. The operator shall be responsible for contracting, at the operator's cost, for regular removal of non-toxic refuse and waste from the nonmetallic mining site. Between collections,  such refuse shall be stored in covered refuse disposal dumpsters.
(e) Special Exceptions to Minimum Standards of Operation. The operator may request a special exception from the minimum standards of operation prescribed in this Section if the applicant can demonstrate that the standards required can be met by alternative means or are not applicable or necessary to the pa1ticular nonmetallic mining operation, and that the public health, safety and welfare will not be adversely affected thereby.
(t) Additional Conditions of licensing. The Town Board may impose requirements in addition to or exceeding the minimum standards of this Section if the Town Board has a rational basis to conclude that the intent of this Chapter, the objectives of the Town of Cady Comprehensive Plan, and the public health, safety and welfare will not be adequately protected without the imposition of additional measures.



Sec. 7-3-9	Annual Report.

(a)	Annual Report Requirement. Not later than March 1 of each calendar year, the operator shall submit a written annual report to the Town Board for all active and intermittent mining sites for which the operator has an Operations License from the Town of Cady. The annual report shall be in addition to the requirement for annual and semi-annual meetings between the operator and Town  Board required in Section 7-3-8(a)(7) and other verification reporting required by this Chapter.
(b)	Annual Report Contents. The annual report shall include the following information:
 
(1)	A description of the operator, the nonmetallic mm mg site and associated operations.  Included shall be information on any changes in the ownership of the parcel or the operating entity.
(2)	A map accurately depicting:
a.	The area of  excavation  to  date;
b.	Areas reclaimed and unreclaimed, including a calculation of the number of acres in each category (Note: This requirement is not applicable if the operator has only conducted drying operations without chemicals, transfers and transloading on the site).
(3)	A description of activities and operations on the site for the previous
calendar year;
(4)	A description of activities and operations on the site anticipated for the following calendar year;
(5)	A written rep01t demonstrating how the operator has complied with all
terms and conditions of its license and this Chapter. The report shall also include any smface water, groundwater. and all other monitoring results, as applicable.
(6)	A summary of all areas of non-compliance,  and a plan for b1inging
non-compliant areas into compliance.



Sec. 7-3-10	Inspections.

(a)	Inspection Authority. The Town Board, or its authorized representative, are authorized to enter upon lands affected by this Chapter to make inspections to determine the condition of nonmetallic mining sites in the Town of Cady in order to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare and determine compliance with the minimum standards of this Chapter and any conditions of license. Inspections of the site under this Chapter may occur prior to or after license issuance to determine compliance with this Chapter.
(b)	Inspection Protocols. The Town Board, or its authorized representative, may enter the nonmetallic mining site during regular hours of operation for inspection(s) and, if necessary, to investigate any complaints or concerns identified by the Town Board. The Town's representative(s) shall notify the operator's designated contact person by telephone or e-mail prior to enteting the site, and will report his/her presence to the on-site supervisor upon entering the site upon showing proper identification.
(c)	Inspection Warrants. If permission to inspect the subject property is denied by the operator or owner, an inspection warrant may be sought pursuant to Sec. 66.0119, Wis. Stats.
 
Sec. 7-3-11	Financial Security.

(a)	Financial Assurance. Financial assurance shall be provided  to the Town of Cady by an Operations License licensee as a condition of license approval in the amount necessary for the following:
(1)	Road Repairs; Road Maintenance Escrow Account.
a.	An  amount  necessary  for  the  repair  and  maintenance  of  Town roads used for truck traffic transporting mate1ials to or from the nonmetallic mining site shall be mutually agreed upon as part of a  Mining  Agreement   [Cross-Reference:	Sec.  7-3-13  below]. Upon approval of an agreement by the Town Board, the financial assurance  may  be  in  the  form  of  a Road  Maintenance  Escrow Account.	Both  the  Road  Maintenance   Escrow  Account  and underlying  Mining  Agreement  and Town  Road  Use  Agreement shall contain provisions under which the operator agrees to pay for all exceptional maintenance costs during and immediately after the term  of the Agreements,  and pay for ordinary  maintenance  at a rate to be determined upon the basis of the amount of use of Town roads by the operator in comparison with other use of said roads.
b.	If a Road Maintenance Escrow Account is utilized, the Town will provide a detailed written statement and accounting to the operator for maintenance costs inclmed as the work contained in the Assessment is completed, together with any supporting documenta­ tion reasonably requested by the operator. [Cross-Reference: Section 7-3-S(b)(10)]. Such statement shall be provided to the operator no less than fifteen (15) days prior to a withdrawl from the escrow account by the Town; the operator shall have the right to review the documentation and identify alleged errors and ommissions. An exception to the provisions of this Subsection is that in the event an emergency or hazardous road condition exists that has not been immediately corrected by the operator, the Town Chairperson may order emergency road repairs be perfo1med  by a qualified contractor, and the licensed operator shall promptly reimburse the Town for reasonable emergency road repair costs.
c.	The  Town  shall  only  receive  reimbursement  from  the  escrow
account for actual out-of-pocket costs inctmed by the Town for maintenance to the Haul Route necessitated by use of the Haul Route, or other Town roads improperly used by the operator in violation of this Chapter, or other Town roads, by the operator and its employees or independent contractors. Such maintenance costs must be primarily attributable to damage to the Town roads caused by  the  operator  or  its  employees  or  independent   contractors
 
hauling products, supplies and equipment related to the nonmetal­ lic mining site, and may include the cost of  professional consultants working with the Town in addition to actual construction costs.
d.   If the Road Maintenance Escrow Account becomes insufficient to
properly fund repairs and maintenance to a Haul Route(s), or any other Town road used by the operator or its employees or independent contractors, the operator shall immediately deposit an amount as directed by the Town into the escrow account sufficient to meet such obligations.
(2)	Alternative  Water Supply.   An  amount  necessary  to  provide  an
alternative water supply to potentially affected residences or agricultural operations within two (2) miles of the nonmetallic mining site or such other larger area shown to be impacted by the operator's nonmetallic mining operations.
(3)	Property Value Assurance. By separate Mining Agreement, the Town and operator, as a condition of license, shall enter into a Property Value Guarantee Agreement with identified private property owners near the nonmetallic mining site. The actual terms and parties affected by an Agreement shall be addressed in such Agreement(s).
(4)	Other Areas of Financial Security. In addition to the above, financial
assurance and escrow accounts may be required by the Town Board to address other identified issues.
(b)	Form of Financial Assurance. The form of financial assurance made to the Town of Cady shall be that form approved by the Town Board, following review by the Town legal counsel, and may include utilization of escrow agreements/funds, in-evocable letters of credit, performance bonds, or other measures agreed upon by the Town Board.
(c)	Changes in Amounts of Financial Assurance. If at any time after an Operations License has been issued by the Town of Cady the Town Board determines that the amount of financial assurance must be increased to meet specific road repair, water supply needs, or other areas identified by the Town Board as requiring a financial assurance mechanism, or the amount previously provided has been utilized, the Town shall notify in writing the operator of the additional amount(s) required and the basis for the request. The operator shall have thirty (30) days to provide, to the Town Board's satisfaction, the increased amount(s).
(d)	Proof  of  Financial  Assurance  for  Reclamation.	The   operator   shall
provide to the Town acceptable documentation that the operator has provided the financial assurance for required site reclamation as required by applicable Wisconsin law and county requirements.
(e)	Failure to Maintain Financial Assurances.	Failure  by  the operator to
propertly  maintain  the  financial  assurances  and  security  required  by  this
 
Chapter, and particularly this Section, shall automatically terminate any license issued under this Chapter.



Sec. 7-3-12	Damage to Private Water Supplies.

(a)	Damage to Private Water Supply Claims.  A property owner within two
(2) miles of a nonmetallic mining site may seek remedies under this Section for any of the following damages to a private water supply caused by the operator or its employees and/or contractors:
(1)    An enforcement standard or preventative action limit is exceeded in a
private water supply well on the property  owner's land.
(2)	A substantial adverse impact on the quantity or quality of water from a private well on the owner's property occurs, including, but not limited to, the inability of any such well to provide water on a continuous or uncontaminated  basis.
(3)	A lowering  of  surface  waters  which  serve  as a source  of  water  for
personal,  business, aglicultural or municipal functions on the owner's property to levels below base flow levels for more than five (5) days.
(b)	Notice Requirements. Any property owner under Subsection (a) above seeking a remedy under this Section shall simultaneously file a notice with the Town Clerk and the operator of the nonmetallic mining site of the occurrence of the event(s) under Subsection (a) describing the nature and extent of the problem.
(c)	Use of Financial Assurance.
(1)	Within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of such notice  under Subsection (b), the Town Chairperson is autho1ized to expend funds provided for in Sec. 7-3-11, if deemed  applicable and appropriate, to provide an interim water supply.
(2)	If applicable, the Town shall also use funds under  Sec. 7-3-11 to
indemnify  the  Town  of  Cady  for  any  claims  filed  under  Section 281.77(4), Wis. Stats.
(3)	An inte1im water supply shall continue to be provided until the Town
Board has approved the report or plan under Subsection (d) below.
(d)	Plan Requirement. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of a notice pursuant to Subsection (b) above, the nonmetallic mine operator shall provide to the property owner and to the Town Clerk:
(1)	A  report  that  demonstrates  that  the  impact  to  the  property  owner's
water  supply  was  not  attributable   to  the  mining   operation,  with technical data supp01ting such position; or
(2) A plan for a permanent alternative water supply to the affected prope1ty owner, to be paid for by the operator.
 
(e)	Town  Determination.
(1)	The Town Board, following consultation with experts and with the operator and property owner, shall review the report or plan  and approve or deny such report or plan.
(2)	If the Town Board determines that the operator's report is incorrect or
insufficient, the Town may continue to provide an interim water supply under the fund provided for in Sec. 7-3-11 during any subsequent negotiations, mediation,  or litigation
(3) If the Town Board determines that the nonmetallic mine operator was not the cause of the damage to or failure of the private water supply, the operator may elect to seek reimbursement by the property owner for the costs of supplying interim water during a period not exceeding one (1) year. The costs to the Town for expert consultants to review the matter shall not be subject to this reimbursement  provision.
(f) Other Claims. A property owner beyond two (2) miles of the nonmetallic mining operation may apply to the Town for use of funds under Sec. 7-3-ll to remedy damages to a private water supply, provided that the property owner can demonstrate that the damage to the private water supply was caused by the nonmetallic mining operation. If the Town Board determines that sufficient cause exists that the damage may have been caused by the nonmetallic mining  operation, the property can utilize  the procedures and remedies of this Section.



Sec. 7-3-13    Mining Agreement.

The Town and an operator shall enter into a Mining Agreement as a condition of license, such agreement  to provide additional site-specific provisions governing operations and indemnification. A Town Road Use Agreement may be a part of the larger Mining Agreement [Cross-Reference:  Sec. 7-3-8(b)(l0)]. Any of the provisions of this Chapter, including the license term, may be modified by agreement between the Town and the operator, but only if the Town Board determines that the agreement provides protections for the public, at a minimum, at least equal to those of this Chapter and is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.



Sec. 7-3-14    Insurance and Indemnification.

(a)	Insurance Requirements. All operators licensed under this Chapter shall maintain the following insurance coverages commencing upon construction of the facility:
(1)	Liability Insurance Coverage.
a.	The licensed operator shall, at its expense, at all times maintain a broad  form  comprehensive  coverage  policy  of  public  liability
 
insurance insuring the licensed operator and property owner (if different) against loss or liability caused by the operator's occupation and use of the nonmetallic mining  site in an amount not less than Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) of combined single limit liability coverage per occurrence, accident or incident, which may have a commercially reasonable deductible. The Town of Cady shall be listed as an additional named insured  on  the policy.
b.	As a condition of license, the operator shall also be responsible for ensuring that sufficient vehicle insurance coverage [One Million Dollars ($1,000.000.00) per occurrence] is in effect for any trucks used	to service the site by its employees or independent contractors.
(2)	Worker's Compensation Insurance.  Worker's compensation insurance
coverage in an amount required by Wisconsin law shall be provided by the operator.
(3)	Independent  Contractors.   The  operator  shall require  subcontractors
and independent contractors and others not protected under  the operator's worker's compensation insurance to obtain and maintain worker's compensation  and employers' liability  insurance.
(4)	Proof of Insurance.  Certificates  of insurance  evidencing  compliance
with the insurance requirements of this Subsection  shall be provided to the Town. The operator shall provide written notice to the Town in the event there is a lapse in coverage exceeding thirty (30) days. All policies, other than worker's compensation policies, shall be written on an occurrence and not on a claims made basis.
(b)	Defense of licensing Decison(s) and Indemnity.
(1)	Defense of Licensing Decision.
a.	In addition to the indemnification desc1ibed below, the  licensed operator shall  reimburse the Town its reasonable attorney's fees incurred in defending any legal actions brought by third parties challenging the legality or enforceability of this Chapter or any portion thereof, or the issuance of a license by the Town pursuant to this Chapter.
b.	If the  Town seeks reimbursement,  it shall  notify  the  licensed
operator in writing promptly upon discovering any claim entitling the Town to a licensing defense reimbursement, but in no event more than ninety (90) days after receiving written notice of any action, lawsuit, proceeding, investigation or other claim against the Town which may give rise to a claim for a licensing defense reimbursement.
c.	The licensed operator shall not be obligated to reimburse the Town with respect to any such liability, action or claim if the Town fails








47
 
to notify the operator in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection in sufficient time, including, without limitation, any responsive motion or answer to a complaint, petition, notice, or other legal, equitable action or claim, but only insofar as such knowing failure to notify the licensed operator has resulted in prejudice or damage to the operator.
d.	With   respect   to   any   third-party   action,   lawsuit,   proceeding,
investigation, or other claim which is subject to reimbursement under this Subsection, the  licensed operator shall be entitled to assume, with counsel of its choice, the defense of such action, lawsuit, proceeding, investigation or other claim at the licensed operator's expense; provided, however, that the Town shall be entitled to participate,  at its option, in the defense of such claim and to employ counsel of its own choice for such purpose (the fees and expenses of such separate counsel to be borne by the Town) and to assert against any third-party any and all  cross claims and counterclaims the Town may have, subject to the operator's consent, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. If the licensed operator elects to assume the defense of any such claim, it may settle such claim in its sole discretion so long as either:
1.	Such  settlement  provides  an  unconditional   release  of  the
Town; or
2.	The licensed operator shall obtain the p1ior w1itten consent of the Town (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld).
e.	If the licensed operator elects to assume the defense of any claim,
the Town shall cooperate with the licensed operator and its counsel in such defense.
(2)	Indemnification.   The licensed  operator shall defend, indemnify  and
hold harmless the Town and its officials, employees and agents from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injmies, costs, expenses and liabilities whatsoever, including reasonable attorney's fees (such liabilities together known as "liability") arising out of the operator's selection, construction, operation, reclamation, and/or removal of the nonmetallic mining site and affiliate equipment, including, without limitation,  liability for property or personal injury (including death) whether such liability is premised on contract or on tort (including without limitation strict liability or negligence). This general indemnification, however, shall not be construed as limiting or qualifying the Town's other indemnification rights available under law.
 
Sec. 7-3-15	Renewal of Operations Licenses.

(a)	Renewal Request. The operator shall make a written request to the Town Clerk for a renewal of its Operations License to operate its  nonmetallic mining site no less than four (4) months prior to the date on which the license will expire.  The application shall be accompanied by the payment of both the renewal application fee of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000. 00) and the base administrative escrow account fee of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) established for the administration of this Chapter. [Cross­ Reference:  Section 7-3-5].
(b)	Report Submittal. The request for license renewal shall include the annual report from the previous calendar year in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-3-9.
(c)	Preliminary Renewal Application Review by Staff. The Town Clerk shall make a preliminary review the renewal application within thirty (30) days of receipt to determine whether the application is complete, and, upon a determination that the application is complete, shall forward it to the Town Board.
(d)	Preliminary Renewal Application Review  by Town Board; Additional Fees.
(1)	The Town Board shall review the renewal application to determine if
additional information or expertise is necessary to properly evaluate the application. The Town shall retain an engineer and/or other qualified person with appropriate expertise to inspect the  nonmetallic  mining site.  If the site has been reported as being inactive for the past year, a member of the Town Board or its designee may be assigned to inspect the site. If no additional information or professional assistance is deemed necessary, the Town Board shall schedule the renewal application for a determination under Subsection (f) below.
(2)   If the Town Board  determines that additional professional  assistance is required to properly review the renewal application, the Town Board shall authorize hiring an engineer, attorney, land use planner, geologist, soils scientist, hydrologist, accoustical expert, or other qualified person with appropriate expertise to advise the Town and give written notice to the applicant of the additional administrative escrow account fee to be charged beyond the base administrative fee to cover the cost of review by the Town's retained expert(s). Such additional fee shall be paid before the next step in the renewal review is undertaken.
(e) Consultant Reports. Once the applicant has submitted additional requested information and has paid the additional administrative fee in the required amount, the retained expert(s) shall report to the Town Board on whether the renewal  application  meets  the  requirements  of  this  Chapter.    The  Town
 
Clerk shall place  the request on the agenda of the next regular or special meeting of the Town Board prior to the expiration of the license.
(f)	Renewal Determination. The Town Board may grant the request for renewal if it finds:
(1)	There have been no mate1ial violations of this Chapter, the Operations
License or other Town regulations which have not been appropriately remedied.
(2)	The operator has not received recurring  or multiple  citations, notices
of violations or corrective orders from regulatory authorities and/or the Town, or otherwise exhibited a recurring pattern  of noncompliance.
(3)	All applicable fees have been paid in full and financial responsibility
requirements have been met.
(g)  Renewal Denial; Public  Hearing.  If the Town Board  denies the request for renewal, the Town Board shall notify the operator and provide written reasons for its determination. Following the determination, the operator shall be provided with an opportunity for a public hearing on the non-renewal and possible  reconsideration.



Sec. 7-3-16	Violations, Enforcement Procedures and Penalties.

(a)	Violations. Each of the following occmTences shall constitute a violation of the terms and conditions of the licensing requirements of this Chapter and licenses issued hereunder, and any such violation shall be grounds for license revocation  or suspension, issuance of a citation, injunctive relief or other remedies available to the Town after the expiration of the notice and any cure period (for whatever reason for such a default and whether it shall be voluntary or involunta1y or be affected by operation of law or pursuant to any judgment, order or regulation). The following are violations under this Chapter:
(1)	Operating Without a License. Engaging in nonmetallic mining and/or associated activities without an Operations License or Small Site License granted by the Town Board.
(2)	Noncompliance With Ordinance Requirements and/or Conditions of License. Failure to comply with the minimum standards and other terms of this Chapter, other Town regulations, and/or other conditions imposed as a condition of license, including related contracts, financial assurances and agreements. There is a violation if there is a material failure by the licensed opertor to comply with any requirements of this Chaper and/or conditions of license directly related to the operation and  conditions  of   approval  for  the  nonmetallic  mining  site  and
 
associated operations, and if the operator fails to cure the material failure in order to come into compliance within a period of thirty (30) days after the date of such notice. A mitigating factor may be if the operator commences performance to correct such violation within such compliance period and is diligently proceeding to complete such performance, to the Town Board's satisfaction.
(3)	Providing  False  or  Misleading  Information.	Making  an  incorrect,
misleading or false statement in the information and documentation submitted during the licensing application and review process, during inspection of licensed operations by Town representatives, or with required monitoring, sampling and/or reporting.
(4)	Failure to Provide Annual Report. Failure to timely file the annual operations report required under Sec. 7-3-9 or to appear before the Town Board under Sec. 7-3-8(a)(7).
(5)	Failure  to  Take Appropriate  Action  in Response  to  Violations.
Failure to take appropriate action in response to a notice of violation or noncompliance, citation, request for additional financial assurance, or other order issued by the Town Board or its auth01ized representa­ tive, or any other regulatory authority.  There is a violation if there is a material failure by the licensed operator to comply with any statute, regulation, rule, contract or license administered by any federal, state or county regulatory authority or the Town directly related to the operation of and conditions of approval for the nonmetallic mining site and associated operations, and if the operator fails to cure the material failure in order to come into compliance within a period of thirty (30) days after the date of such notice (unless the regulatory authority has specified a shorter time for compliance).   A mitigating factor may be if the operator commences performance to coffect such violation within such compliance period and is diligently proceeding to complete such performance, to the Town Board's satisfaction.
(b)	Public Hearings on Violations; Denial of a license Application or Renewal.	In the event of alleged violations, or the denial of a license application or renewal request, the following procedures shall be followed:
(1)	Request for Public Hearing.
a.	Any person affected by a notice of violation or noncompliance, request for additional financial assurance or other order issued by the Town Board in connection with the enforcement of this Chapter, or upon denial of an application for a license or license renewal, may request and shall be granted a public hearing on the matter before the Town Board.
b.	Such party shall file with the Town Clerk a written request for a public heating, with shall set forth his/her name, address, e-mail address, telephone  number(s), fax number, and a brief  statement
 
of the grounds why the hearing is requested and/or why the mitigation of the order(s) is warranted.
c.	The written request for a public hearing shall be filed with  the Town Clerk within thirty (30) days upon receipt of a notice of violation or noncompliance, or upon denial of an application or renewal application. Upon receipt of the written request for a hearing, the Town Clerk shall set a time and place for a public hearing before the Town Board and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof.
d.	Following the public hearing, the Town Board, by majority vote,
shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice described in Subsection (b)(l)a above, or grant, deny or grant with conditions the license or renewal license, depending on the Town Board's findings as to whether the provisions of this Chapter have been sufficiently complied with. The hearing petitioner shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of such detennination.
e.	The proceedings of the public hearing, including the findings and decision of the Town Board and the reasons therefore, shall be summarized in writing and entered as a matter of record in the minutes of the Town Board or in a separate report or resolution, which shall be on file with the Town Clerk as a public record. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice and order issued in connection with the case.
(c)	Remedies. The Town Board may take any appropriate action or proceeding against any operator, landowner or other appropriate person in violation of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the following, or any combination of the following:
(1)	Stop Work Order.  Issue a stop work order, as follows:
a.	Representatives of the Town administering this Chapter are authorized to post an order stopping work upon land which has had a license revoked or on land currently undergoing activity in violation of this Chapter. Notice is given by both posting  upon the land where the violation occurs one (1) or more copies of a notice poster stating the violation, and by mailing a copy of the stop work order by certified mail to the party whose activity is in violation of this Chapter. The stop work order shall specify that the activity on the site must cease or the site be brought into compliance within five (5) days.
b.	Any stop work order shall remain in effect unless retracted by the
Town Board, the Town's authorized administrative representative, or by a court of general jmisdiction or until the activity is brought into compliance with this Chapter. Continued violation(s)  of  a stop work order may be referred for legal action.
 
(2)	Notice of Violation. Issue a notice of violation and order that specifies the remedial action(s) to be taken to remedy a violation or other situation.
(3)	Citation Issuance.  Issue a citation in accord with the Town of Cady
Code of Ordinances.
(4)	Action By Town Legal Counsel. Refer the matter to Town legal counsel	for consideration and commencement of legal action, including, but not limited to, the assessment of penalties and injunctive relief.
(5)	License Suspension or Revocation.  Suspend or revoke an Operations
License pursuant to Subsection (d) below.
(6)	Request Compliance Review by Other Agencies. Request review of the operations in question by federal, state and/or county regulatory bodies for compliance with their standards.
(d)	Suspension or Revocation of Operations license.  After giving notice and  providing  for  the  option  of  a  public  hearing,  the  Town  Board  may suspend  or  revoke  an  Operations  License  for  a  violation(s)  pursuant  to Subsections  (a) and (b) above.
(e)	Penalties.
(1)	Forfeiture and Other Penalties. Any person  or entity who  is found to have violated a provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture and other penalties as provided in Sec. 1-1-6 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances, except that in cases of violations of this Chapter the maximum amount of potential forfeiture shall be Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) per violation. Issuance of a citation does not preclude the use of other remedies, such  as, but not limited to, injunctive relief, or prosecution for violating other Town ordinances. The penalties and remedies in this Section are nonexclusive and shall not be interpreted as a limitation or prohibition against  non-Town parties commencing private legal actions or requesting review by federal, state or county regulatory authorities. Each day  that  a violation  exists constitutes a separate offense.
(2)	Court  and  Legal  Costs.	Any  person  or  entity  adjudicated  for  a
violation of this Chapter shall pay all court costs and reasonable attorney's  fees.
(3)	Forfeitures Not to Offset Other Penalties or Financial Obligations.
Notwithstanding anything in this Section, a violator may not use the payment of fines, forfeitures, liquidated damages, required financial obligations, payment of mandatory fees or other penalties or obligations to evade or avoid compliance with this Section.
(4)	Contamination Cleanup Costs. In contamination situations, and in addition  to  any  other  action, the Town may  commence  legal  action
 
against both the party who releases or causes the contaminants and the owner of the licensed site whereupon the contaminants were released to recover the costs, together with the costs of prosecution. The party who releases or causes such contaminants to be released and the owner of the land where upon the contaminants have been released or caused shall be jointly and severally responsible for the costs of cleanup, consultant or contractor fees, including all administrative costs for the oversight, review and documentation, including that of Town employees/agents,  equipment and mileage.
(t)	Prior  Infractions.	A  failure  by  the  Town  to  take  action  on  any  past
violation(s) shall not constitute a waiver of the Town's right to take action on any present violation(s).
(g) Judicial Review. Parties shall have the iight to appeal actions under this Section to circuit court within thirty (30) days of the date of the Town determination.



SECTION  11.	SEVERABILITY.


(a)	If any provision of this Ordinance is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of this Ordinance to any person or circumstance is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional  provisions  or applications.
(b)	If the application of this Ordinance to a particular parcel of land, building, structure, water
or air is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other land, building, structure, water or air not specifically included in said judgment.



SECTION Ill. CONFLICTING PROVISIONS REPEALED.


All Ordinances in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.



SECTION  IV.   EFFECTIVE  DATE.


This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided  by law.



ADOPTED this £day of	'!1'?ff='	'2013.
 
















INTRODUCED: PASSED: PUBLISHED/POSTED:






State of Wisconsin: County of St. Croix:
 
TOWN  OF CADY, WISCONSIN

 




Town Clerk
 

I hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance is a true, correct, and complete copy ottin ordinYfl duly and regularly passed by the Town of Cady Board of Supervisors on the _tJ_O _- -'-clay of  , 2013 and that said ordinance has not been repealed or amended and is now in full force and effect.







Town Clerk
 
Ordinance # 2020-2 Town of Cady Building Code Title 15


REPEAL AND ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS
Title 15, Building Code, adopted March of 2013 is repealed and recreated to read as follows.

15.1.1	AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority under Wisconsin Statutes 101.65.

15.1.2	PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the town residents, to protect property values and to promote the uniformity of construction standards by regulating construction of new buildings and additions or alterations to one and two family dwellings and Commercial Buildings.

15.1.3	SCOPE
Not withstanding s. SPS 320.05, the scope also includes the construction and inspection of alterations and additions to one and two family dwellings built before June I, 1980 and accessory structures. Because such projects are not under state jurisdiction, petitions for
variance and final appeals under s. SPS 320.19 and 320.21, respectively, shall be
decided by municipal board of appeals. Petitions for variance shall be decided per s. SPS
320.19 so that equivalency is maintained to intent of the rule being petitioned. As the board of appeals approves petitions of variance, the chief inspector is granted the power to apply the results to similar circumstances by precedent.

15.1.4	ADOPTION OF CODES BY REFERENCE
A.	The Uniform Dwelling Code, Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapters SPS320 to 325, and all amendments thereto are adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and shall apply to all buildings within the scope of this chapter. A copy of the code is on
file with the Town and/or Town Building Inspector.

B.	Adoption of Plumbing, Electrical, and Heating and Ventilating Codes. Chapters SPS 381 to 387, Plumbing Code, Wisconsin Administrative Code; Chapter SPS 316, Electrical Code, Wisconsin Administrative Code; Wisconsin SPS 360-366 of the Wisconsin Commercial Building Code and all amendments thereto in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter by reference and are applicable to all those classes of buildings to which said codes apply. Copies of said codes are available online and in the office of the Town Building Inspector.

15.1.5	BUILDING INSEPCTOR
A.	There is hereby created the position of Building Inspector, who shall administer and enforce this chapter and who shall be certified by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services as specified by W.S.A. s. 101.66(2).  Additionally, this or other assistant inspectors shall possess the certification categories of UDC HVAC, UDC Electric, UDC Plumbing, UDC Construction, and Commercial Building Inspector. The Town Board shall make the building inspector appointment.
 
B.	The Building Inspector shall have the powers and duty to see that the construction, reconstruction, and/or alteration of dwellings and Commercial buildings in the Town conform to the laws of the State of Wisconsin, the orders, rules and regulations laid down by the Department of Safety and Professional Services of the State of Wisconsin and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Town and County and to make all inspections as required.

15.1.6	BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED
No person shall build or cause to be built any new one or two family dwelling or any addition or alteration to an existing one or two family dwelling, swimming pool or accessory structure over 200 sq ft or any structure that requires electrical, plumbing or
structural footings or supports, or commercial or industrial building without first obtaining
a state uniform building permit or a town building permit for such dwelling, structure, commercial building, etc., as determined by the Building Inspector.

15.1.7	FEES; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A.	Fees.  The building permit fees will be set by the Building Inspector and may be changed from time to time and shall include the fee required by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Buildings for the UDC permit seal that shall be assigned to any new dwelling.

B.	Penalties.
(1)	The fee will be doubled if construction is stated prior to issuance of a permit.
(2)	The enforcement of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances relating to building shall be by means of the withholding of building permits, imposition of forfeitures and/or injunctive action. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, forfeit no less than $25 nor more than $500 and the cost of prosecution. Each day the violation continues after written notice is delivered to the occupant, owner (as designated on any permit application submitted to the Building Inspector) or construction person apparently in charge on the site shall constitute a separate violation.

15.1.8	APPLICATION PROCESS; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
A.	Application.  Application for a building permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the Building Inspector with the appropriate building requirements of the town. Where applicable, the county or the state requirements for the contemplated improvement shall be provided to the permit applicant by the Building Inspector at or before submission of a building permit.

B.	Plans and drawings.  The building permit applicant shall be submit with the application two complete sets of site plans and specifications, one set of build prints and an erosion control plan.

C.	County permits. The applicant must obtain any permits required by the County and include copies of such permits with the building permit application, including a county driveway permit, if necessary.
 
D.	Driveway permits. Driveway permits shall be applied for and obtained from the Town Board or designated agent for the town roads and private roads. The county issues all other driveway permits.

E.	Approval of plans and issuance of building permit.  If the building Inspector determines that the proposed building, addition or alteration will comply in every respect with all of the ordinances of the town and all applicable laws and regulations of the State of Wisconsin and is not in violation of the Town Subdivsion Ordinance or any applicable Town or County ordinance, the inspector shall conditionally approve the plans and issue a building permit which shall be valid for 24 months. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall not be altered in any respect that involves any of the above mentioned ordinances, laws or regulations or which involves the safety of the buildings or its occupants. One copy of the approved plan shall be returned to the applicant. The building inspector shall retain one copy.

F.	State Uniform Building Code Seal.  At such times as a building permit is issued for one or two family dwellings, it shall have affixed to it a State Uniform Dwelling Code seal.

G.	Fees.  Fees shall be submitted to the Building Inspector at the time the application is filed. Fees for plan examination, inspection, variance application and issuance of the building permit shall be set by the Building Inspector.

H.	Waiver of plans.  If the Building Inspector finds the character of the work is sufficiently described in the application, he may waive the filing of plans for alterations or repairs, provided the cost of such work does not exceed $10,000.

15.1.9	EXCEPTIONS
A.	Minor repairs or alterations which cost less than $10,000 and do not change the occupancy area, structural length, fire protection, exits, natural light or ventilation do not require a permit. Repairs or alterations that change any one of the above items require a permit. Repairs and alterations costing more than $10,000 require a permit.

B.	Replacement or repair of roof, siding, replacement of doors and windows of the same size may be done without a permit.

C.	Agricultural buildings on a contiguous parcel that is assessed at least 50% agricultural under Wis. Stat. §70.32(2)(A)

D.	Landscaping, not including decks, may be done without a permit.

15.1.10	DISAPPROVAL OF PLANS AND DENIAL OF PERMIT
A.	Non-conforming.  If the Building Inspector determines that the building permit application or plans do not conform to the provisions of the applicable codes or ordinances or other requirements, approval shall be denied.

B.	Denial of application.  A copy of the denied application, accompanied by a written statement specifying the reasons for denial, shall be sent to the applicant and/or owner as specified on the application.
 
C.	Stamping of plans. Plans and specifications which do not substantially conform to the provisions of the Building Code shall be stamped “Not Approved”. One copy shall be returned to the applicant.

D.	Appeals. The applicant may appeal a denial of an application to the Town Board.

15.1.11	TIME LIMIT FOR ACTION ON APPLICATION; POSTING OF PERMIT
A.	Time for permit issuance.  Action to approve or deny a building permit application shall be completed within 10 business days of receipt of all of the forms, fees, plans and documents required for processing the application.

B.	Posting of permit.  The building permit and other permits required by the town, county, state or other municipalities shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the building site and within view of the adjacent roadway.

15.1.12	COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT
All construction must comply with the building permit and the plans submitted with the building permit application. Any construction that is not authorized on the building permit, blueprint, site plan or plans or is not listed on the building permit application is a violation of the permit and subject to the violations and penalties established in this ordinance.

15.1.13	REVOCATION OF PERMIT
A.	If the Building Inspector finds at any time that the provisions of this chapter are not being compiled with and the holder of the permit refuses to conform after a written warning or instructions has been issued to them, the Building Inspector shall revoke the building permit by written notice posted at the site of the work.

B.	When any permit is revoked, no further work shall be done until the permit is reissued, except such work as the Building Inspector may order as a condition precedent to the reinsurance of the permit or as he may require for the preservation of human life and safety.

15.1.14	LAPSE OF PERMIT
A building permit shall lapse and be void unless construction under the permit is commenced within six months from the date if issuance thereof. The building permit shall lapse and be void if the permit purpose has not been fully completed with 24 months from the date of issuance of the permit. Once a permit has lapsed, no further work shall be performed under such lapsed permit until such time as a new permit has been issued.

15.1.15	INSPECTIONS
A.	Inspections.  All inspections for the purpose of administering and enforcing the UDC and Town Building Code ordinance shall be performed by a certified inspector who shall conduct inspections according to the respective codes being applied and enforced.

B.	Notification.  The builder shall give the Building Inspector for all inspections required by UDC Chapter SPS 320.10, 48 hours notice as per UDC.
 
C.	Witness to inspection.  It is recommended that a representative of the developer, contractor, builder or owner be present at each required inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the developer, contractor, builder or owner to coordinate inspection times and dates with the Building Inspector.

D.	Re-inspections.  Any re-inspection necessary due to incomplete work or non- complying conditions shall be subject to an additional fee per inspection to be paid in full prior to the issuance of the occupation permit.

15.1.16	ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY
A.	Except where otherwise provided in this code, the Building Inspector shall have the general management and control of all matters pertaining to building inspection and shall enforce all state laws, town ordinances and lawful orders relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal and safety of buildings and other structures, dwellings, public buildings and places of employment in the Town.

B.	The Building Inspector may at all reasonable hours enter any public or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical or heating work. No person shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any such premises to the Building Inspector while in performance of their duties.

15.1.17	RECORDS AND REPORTS
A.	The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of all permits issued, which shall be kept on file.

B.	The Building Inspector shall make a monthly and annual report to the Town Board of all permits issued, open permits, violations noted and fees collected.

15.1.18	OCCUPANCY PERMITS
The Building Inspector shall issue occupancy permits.

A.	All inspections shall have been satisfactorily completed, the well construction report shall have been received, all required fees shall have been paid and all required terms of this Building Code shall have been met before occupancy permit will be issued.

B.	No single or multiple family dwelling may be occupied by any person or party until an occupancy permit has been issued.

C.	A penalty will be charged if a dwelling is occupied prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.

15.1.19	ROAD DAMAGE
The property owner shall be liable to the town for any town road damage due to construction. Failure to pay for damages after billing, which shall be a lien on the owner's property, is collectable in the manner provided by law.
 
15.1.20	NON-LIABLILTIY OF TOWN
This ordinance shall not be construed as creating or assuming any liability on the part of the Town or any official or employee thereof for damages to anyone injured or for any property destroyed by any defect in any building or equipment in any plumbing or electric wiring or equipment.

15.1.21	SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter or Wisconsin Administrative Code chapters are adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction the remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby.



EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall replace Title 15 Building Code adopted March 2013 and be effective 3-4-2020, upon passage and publication as provided by law.

Adopted this 2nd day of March 2020.




 
 










ST. CROIX COUNTY

CODE OF ORDINANCES LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT









CHAPTER 15 ZONING
















Repealed and Reenacted: Ordinance No. 881 (2019) – November (2019)
 
Contents

 
COUNTY CODE CHAPTER 15 	3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 	3
Planning in St. Croix County 	3
How to Read this Document 	3
Determining the Regulations for a Specific Site 	5
Determining Which Procedures Apply 	5
INTRODUCTION 	5
15.100 Title 	6
15.105 Purpose 	6
15.110 Authority 	6
15.115 Applicability 	6
15.120	Consistency with Comprehensive Plan 	7
15.121	to 15.199 Reserved. 	7
ZONING DISTRICTS 	7
15.200 General Provisions 	7
15.205 Districts Established 	7
15.210 Zoning Map 	8
15.220	AG-1 Agricultural District 	8
15.221	AG-2 Agricultural District 	10
15.230	R-1 Residential District 	12
15.231	R-2 Residential District 	14
15.232	R-3 Residential District 	16
15.240	C-1 Commercial District 	18
15.241	C-2 Commercial District 	19
15.242	C-3 Commercial District 	20
15.250	I-1 Industrial District 	22
15.251	I-2 Industrial District 	23
15.252	NMO Nonmetallic Mining Overlay 	24
15.275 CON Conservancy District 	25
15.280 PD Planned Development District 	25
15.285	Use Table 	27
15.286	to 15.299 Reserved. 	34
USE REGULATIONS 	34
15.300 General Provisions 	35
15.305 Accessory Structures & Uses 	35
15.310 Adult Establishments 	36
15.315 Agricultural Entertainment and Agritourism Uses 	37
15.320 Airstrips 	38
15.322 Campgrounds 	39
15.325 Conservation Design Development 	39
15.330 Contractor Storage Yards 	41
15.335 Chickens and Ducks 	42
15.340 Fences and Walls 	42
15.345 Home Occupations 	43
15.350 Housing 	46
15.352	Salvage Operations 	47
15.353	Junk 	48
15.355 Kennels, Commercial 	49
15.360 Livestock Facilities 	50
15.365 Mobile Tower Siting 	51
15.370	Nonmetallic Mining 	55
15.371	Private One-Room Schoolhouse 	55
15.373 Roadside Stands 	56
15.375 Short-Term Rentals 	56
1
15.380 Signs 	56
15.385 Solar Energy 	68
15.390 Temporary Structures and Uses 	69
15.395	Wind Energy Systems 	69
15.396	To 15.399 Reserved 	70
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 	70
15.400 General Provisions 	70
15.405 Access Management & Driveways 	70
15.410 Building Height 	78
15.415 Grading and Land Disturbance 	80
15.420 Screening, Landscaping & Tree Preservation 	81
15.425 Lot Development 	86
15.430 Parking and Loading 	89
15.431 To 15.499 Reserved 	96
PROCEDURES 	96
15.500 General Provisions 	97
15.505 General Procedural Requirements & Authority 	97
15.510 Pre-application 	98
15.515 Completeness Review 	99
15.520 Notice Provisions 	99
15.525 Public Hearings 	100
15.530 Town Recommendation 	100
15.535 Specific Processes 	100
15.540 Text Amendments 	100
15.545 Rezonings 	102
15.550 Conditional Use Permits 	105
15.555 Land Use Permits 	107
15.560 Appeals 	109
15.570 Variances 	110
15.571 To 15.574 Reserved 	111
SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 	111
15.575 General Provisions 	111
15.580 Technical Plans or Studies 	111
15.585 Digital applications 	112
15.590 Application Checklists 	112
15.595 Fees 	117
15.596 To 15.599 Reserved 	117
NONCONFORMITIES & VESTED RIGHTS 	117
15.600 General Provisions 	117
15.605 Nonconforming uses 	118
15.610 Nonconforming Lots 	119
15.615 Nonconforming Structures 	119
15.620 Nonconforming Site Improvements 	120
15.625 Applications and Projects in Progress 	120
15.626 To 15.699 Reserved 	121
AGENCIES 	121
15.700 General Provisions 	121
15.705 Zoning Administrator 	121
15.710 Community Development Committee (CDC) 	122
15.715 Board of Adjustment 	122
15.716 To 15.749 Reserved 	122
ENFORCEMENT 	122
15.750 General Provisions 	122
15.755 Violations 	122
15.760 Penalties 	124
15.765 Enforcement Procedures 	124
15.770 Revocation of Permit or Approval 	125
15.771 To 15.799 Reserved 	125
DEFINITIONS & RULES OF INTERPRETATION 	125
15.800 General Rules of Interpretation 	126
15.805 Definitions 	126
15.807 Acronyms 	160
15.810 Interpretation of Zoning Map 	160
15.815 Conflicting Rules 	161
15.816 To 15.899 Reserved 	161
15.900 LEGAL PROVISIONS 	161
15.900 Relationship to Other Provisions of the County Code 	162
15.905 Zoning of Towns 	162
15.910 Private Restrictions 	162
15.915 Severability 	162
15.920 Repeal of existing ordinance 	162
15.925 Effective Date 	162
15.926 to 15.999 Reserved. 	162
 

 



COUNTY CODE CHAPTER 15

Contents:
Executive Summary Introduction Zoning Districts Use Regulations
Development Standards
Procedures
Submittal Requirements Nonconformities & Vested Rights Agencies
Enforcement
Definitions & Rules of Interpretation 15.900 Legal Provisions

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The St. Croix County Zoning Code establishes standards and procedures for new development or redevelopment in the County. The Zoning Code is not designed to be read from cover to cover. Instead, it is organized so readers may look up only the parts they need. The list of subchapters in “How to Read this Document” shows the main topics and overall organization of the Zoning Code. Later portions of this Executive Summary explain different ways to use the Zoning Code to answer frequently asked questions.

Planning in St. Croix County 	

The major purpose of the Zoning Code is to implement the County’s long-term planning policies. These are found in its comprehensive plan, the St. Croix County 2012-2035 Comprehensive Plan. As part of the comprehensive plan, the land use chapter and Generalized Future Local Land Use map (vol. 1-11) establishes long-term policies for land use. The Zoning Code establishes development and land use metrics that implement the comprehensive plan, and zoning districts that align with the Generalized Future Local Land Use map. The Zoning Code provides clear rules about what is expected of applicants in order to gain approval to develop land in the County.

How to Read this Document 	
 
The Zoning Code is not designed to be read from cover to cover. The code is written in a way that allows readers to quickly find information that is of interest to their property or neighborhood. Purpose statements are included to assist readers in understanding the intent of a regulation. In addition, the numbering conventions are consistent with the rest of the County Code of Ordinances to maintain consistency.

How the Document is Organized

The Zoning Code is divided into 11 subchapters. These are structured so that the most frequently used information appears first, with the definitions and technical information (such as submittal requirements) appearing later.

1.	The first subchapter, called Introduction, contains some basic information on the purpose of the Zoning Code. It sets the stage for the remainder of the document.
2.	The Zoning Districts establish the uses permitted in each district. They also state which uses are allowed in limited situations, known as “conditional use,” and which are prohibited. Development standards for each zoning district are also included. These standards include metrics for residential density, height, setbacks, open space, landscaping, and civic space. The districts indicate which composite building and design standards apply. A Table showing the permitted and conditional uses in all districts is presented in § 15.285.
3.	The Use Regulations contain requirements for specific uses and development types that apply in all zoning districts.
Examples include accessory uses, home occupations, and signs. These uses may or may not be permitted as of right or as a conditional use, depending on how they are listed in the applicable zoning district. The standards are designed to address particular issues that are raised by the particular use - such as state or federal legal requirements, impact on surrounding neighborhoods, or development allowances or incentives.
4.	The Development Standards consolidate the development metrics that apply to all development and land uses in the County’s zoning jurisdiction. This includes standards for site improvements such as access, parking, landscaping, grading, and building height. It includes general standards for blocks and lots that determine how lots, blocks, and setbacks are measured. Similarly, the building design and height standards establish standards and rules of interpretation that guide the zoning districts standards.
5.	The Procedures tell the applicant how projects are entitled. This subchapter provides information on the County’s administrative framework and procedural workflows. Sections 15.500 through 15.530 provide general information about the application process, public hearings, and notification. Sections 15.535 through 15.555 describe the procedures for zoning approval, including rezonings, conditional uses, land use permits, appeals, and variances. Processes to appeal and request variances from the Board of Adjustment are set out in section 15.560 and 15.570.
6.	The Submittal Requirements provide a checklist of the information that applicants need to have a complete application that the County can process. It also establishes fees.
7.	The Nonconformities subchapter addresses situations where a use or building has been legally established before new regulations that would otherwise not allow them. Under Wisconsin law, these uses are grandfathered, but may have standards that dictate whether and how they can expand or continue. This subchapter also addresses the grandfathering of building permits that are in process when the Zoning Code, or changes to the Zoning Code, are adopted.
8.	The Agencies subchapter establishes, or references state statutes relating to, the agencies involved in administering the Zoning Code. These include the Community Development Committee, Zoning Administrator, and Board of Adjustment. The County Board of Supervisors is the County’s legislative body, and adopts amendments to this Chapter (including rezonings).
9.	The Enforcement subchapter establishes procedures to enforce the Zoning Code, including penalties for violations.
10.	The Definitions & Rules of Interpretation provide the Zoning Code’s “glossary.” It defines terms and phrases used in the Zoning Code, the uses listed in the zoning districts, and acronyms. It also establishes rules of interpretation, including rules for determining the location of zoning district boundaries.
11.	The Legal Provisions include legal language such as the severability clause, how to apply standards that differ from each other, and the effective date.

Purpose Statements

Many sections include an italicized summary or a purpose statement. These summaries are aids in explaining and interpreting this Code. They are not separate standards. They will not be used to deny or condition development, but they may be used to explain how the standards are applied. They may also include legislative findings, which provide facts that support Code requirements.
 
Determining the Regulations for a Specific Site 	

To determine the regulations of the Zoning Code applicable to a site, the user must first find the site on the Zoning Map. The map will show the zoning district that is applied to the site. The official Zoning Map is maintained online through the County’s Geographic Information Systems website.

The reader should then look up all the relevant regulations. Start with the zoning districts and development standards. The zoning districts state whether a use is allowed by right, allowed as a conditional use, or prohibited. The dimensional standards in each district include the setback, building height and related standards that apply to the uses that are allowed. In addition, readers should consult the Use Regulations to see if additional requirements apply to the use they are contemplating.

Figure ES.1
St. Croix County Zoning Map























Screenshot of St. Croix County Zoning Map. Click here for a current version of the Zoning Map


Determining Which Procedures Apply 	

Each section of the Procedures subchapter includes a process workflow. This starts with a subsection entitled “Applicability.” This subsection describes the situations where a particular process is needed. If the section applies, the reader should then consult the following subsections, which describe how an application is initiated, how an application is processed, the criteria for review, and cross-references to other parts of the Zoning Code. In addition, most sections have a subsection entitled “Scope of Approval” which describes the rights granted to an applicant by the issuance of approval of the permit. Keep in mind that not all permits entitle an applicant to begin construction. In fact, most simply allow an applicant to proceed to the next step in the approval process.



INTRODUCTION

Contents:
15.100 Title
15.105 Purpose
15.110 Authority
15.115 Applicability
15.120	Consistency with Comprehensive Plan
15.121	to 15.199 Reserved.
 
15.100 Title 	

This Chapter shall be cited as the "St. Croix County Zoning Code," and is referred to in this Chapter as "this Chapter" or "this Code."

15.105	Purpose 	

This Chapter is adopted to:

•	implement the St. Croix County Comprehensive Plan; and

•	promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;

•	encourage planned and orderly land use development;

•	protect property values and the property tax base;

•	permit the careful planning and efficient maintenance of highway systems;

•	ensure adequate highway, utility, health, educational and recreational facilities;

•	recognize the needs of agriculture, forestry, industry and business in future growth;

•	encourage uses of land and other natural resources which are in accordance with their character and adaptability;

•	provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for solar collectors and to wind for wind energy systems;

•	encourage the protection of groundwater resources;

•	preserve wetlands;

•	conserve soil, water and forest resources;

•	protect the beauty and amenities of landscape and man-made developments;

•	provide healthy surroundings for family life;

•	to promote the efficient and economical use of public funds;

•	incorporate any master plan adopted under Wis. Stat. § 62.23(2) or (3) and the official map of any city or village in the county adopted under Wis. Stat. § 62.23(6).

[Reference: Wis. Stat. §§ 59.69(1), 66.1001]

15.110 Authority 	

This Chapter is adopted under the authority of Wis. Stat. §§ 59.69 to 59.698, 66.1001 to 66.1037; and additional authority cited in specific sections of this Chapter.

15.115 Applicability 	
1.	Generally. The following shall comply with this Chapter:
a.	The use of any land or water,
b.	the size, shape and placement of lots,
c.	the use, size and locations of structures on lots,
d.	the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste disposal facilities,
e.	the filling, grading, lagooning and dredging and any land,
f.	the cutting of shoreland vegetation, and
g.	the subdivision of lots.

2.	Governmental Units
 
a.	Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and counties shall comply with this Chapter and obtain all necessary permits.
b.	State agencies shall comply with this Chapter if Wis. Stat. § 13.48(13) applies.

3.	Statutory Exemptions. This Chapter does not apply to any use, development, building or activity that is exempt from this Chapter by state or federal law. This section supersedes any other section of this Chapter to the extent of any inconsistency.

15.120	Consistency with Comprehensive Plan 	

The County finds and determines that this Chapter is consistent with the St. Croix County Comprehensive Plan.

15.121	to 15.199 Reserved. 	

ZONING DISTRICTS

Contents:
15.200 General Provisions
15.205 Districts Established
15.210 Zoning Map
15.220	AG-1 Agricultural District
15.221	AG-2 Agricultural District
15.230	R-1 Residential District
15.231	R-2 Residential District
15.232	R-3 Residential District
15.240	C-1 Commercial District
15.241	C-2 Commercial District
15.242	C-3 Commercial District
15.250	I-1 Industrial District
15.251	I-2 Industrial District
15.252	NMO Nonmetallic Mining Overlay
15.275 CON Conservancy District
15.280 PD Planned Development District
15.285	Use Table
15.286	to 15.299 Reserved.

15.200 General Provisions 	

1.	This Subchapter establishes the Zoning Districts, along with the use and dimensional standards for property within
each district. [⇔ § 15.285 establishes the uses allowed within each district]
2.	This Subchapter applies to those towns which approve its application.

15.205 Districts Established 	

1.	This subchapter divides the area to which it applies into districts. Each district has its own rules on use, yard space, lot size and building height.

2.	The zoning districts are categorized as Base, Overlay, and Planned districts, as follows:
 

Table 15.205.1 District Categories
District Category	Description	Districts (Symbol)
Base	Districts that establish uniform use, dimensional and design standards.	Agricultural (AG-1) Agricultural (AG-2) Residential (R-1) Residential (R-2) Residential (R-3) Commercial (C-1) Commercial (C-2) Commercial (C-3) Industrial (I-1) Industrial (I-2) Conservancy (CON)
Overlay	A zoning district that is superimposed on one or more  other zoning districts and imposes additional restrictions on the underlying Base or Planned districts.	Shoreland Overlay (SO)
Lower St. Croix Riverway Overlay (SCR) Floodplain Overlay (FO)
Non-Metallic Mining Overlay (NMO)
Planned	Development in planned districts is subject to a master plan approved as part of a rezoning application.	Planned Development (PD)


15.210 Zoning Map 	

1.	The locations of the zoning districts are shown on the St. Croix County Official Zoning Map (the “Zoning Map”).
2.	The Zoning Map is available  online through the St. Croix County website and in the Zoning Administrator's office.
Refer to § 15.810.

15.220	AG-1 Agricultural District 	

Purpose: The AG-1 District -

•	Provides for a wide range of traditional agricultural and agricultural accessory uses at various scales and accommodates all activities typically associated with the primary production and harvesting of crops, livestock, animal products or plant materials, recognizing that those uses may involve noise, dust, odor, use of heavy equipment and chemicals, and long hours of operation.
•	Conditionally allows for incidental processing, packaging, storage, transportation, distribution and other activities intended to add value to agricultural products produced on premises or to ready those products for market, given the potential that they may pose for conflicts with agricultural uses due to volumes or speed of vehicular traffic, or in light of existing residential density, proximity to incompatible uses, environmental impacts or degradation of or loss of agriculturally productive lands.

•	Allows other incidental activities, compatible with agricultural uses as a supplement to family income and supportive of the agricultural community.

•	Provides additional economic opportunities for property owners that are generally compatible with agricultural uses, such as the establishment of new small-scale farming operations.
•	Locates new farm residences in a manner that will minimize impacts on roads, soils and existing agricultural land uses.
•	Preserves remnant parcels of productive agricultural land following development of adjoining properties.
•	Preserves land for production of food and fiber.
•	Preserves productive farms by preventing land use conflicts between incompatible users.
•	Maintains a viable agricultural land base to support agricultural processing and service industries.
•	Reduces costs associated with the provision of governmental services to non-agricultural parcels scattered among agricultural lands.
•	Paces and shapes urban growth.
•	Meets the criteria for certification of this district as a Farmland Preservation Zoning District under Wis. Stat. § 91.38.
 
The AG-1 District is intended to apply to productive farm operation lands, including lands that have historically exhibited good crop yields or are capable of such yields; lands which have been demonstrated to be productive for dairying, livestock raising and grazing; or other lands that are integral parts of such farm operations; land used for the production of specialty crops such as sod, fruits and vegetables; lands which are capable of productive use through economically feasible improvements such as irrigation; and lands consisting of undeveloped natural resource and open space areas.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses.
a.	Refer to § 15.285.

b.	Minor subdivisions resulting in the creation of 4 or less lots over a 5-year period are permitted.

2.	Lot Size and Land Division.

a.	Land zoned AG-1 has a maximum density of one principal dwelling per 40 acres or full quarter-quarter (1/4-1/4) section.

b.	Land divisions resulting in new lots smaller than 35 acres are permitted through the Minor Subdivision process, limited to the creation of 4 or less lots over a 5-year period. The resulting Certified Survey Map (CSM) must include, on its face, a list of the resulting lots and the number of additional lot splits, if any, available to each lot while it is zoned Ag 1.

3.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.220.1 AG-1 Dimensional Standards 	
1	Lot area (min)	3 acres
2	Density (max)	1 principal dwelling per 40 acres or quarter-quarter (¼ - ¼) section

3	Height (max)	2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is less)
No height limit applies to agricultural accessory uses such as silos, bins, barns and seed storage facilities
4	Street setback (min)	50'

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure, 100' structure that houses animals

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure, 100' structure that houses animals
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang.
Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.
The Community Development Department shall determine allowable farm divisions to ensure that farms existing as of the effective date of this section are not divided so as to create in excess of the allowable number of lots per quarter-quarter (1/4 - 1/4). Remaining acreage of a farm not constituting
a full quarter-quarter (1/4 - 1/4) shall be divided by 40, with the resulting quotient used to determine the number of additional residential units allowed (fractions are rounded down to whole numbers).
 
Figure 15.220.1 AG-1 Dimensional Standards











































4.	Restriction on Rezoning. No land in the AG-1 District shall be rezoned except in accordance with § 15.545 and Wis. Stat. § 91.48.



15.221	AG-2 Agricultural District 	

Purpose: The AG-2 District:

•	Provide for a wide range of agricultural, agricultural accessory and agriculture- related uses, at various scales of operation while providing for the minimum lot area necessary to accommodate such uses.
•	Accommodate uses which are commercial or industrial in nature; are associated with agricultural production; and require a rural location due to extensive land area needs or proximity to agricultural resources and which do not require urban services.

In appearance and operation, the permitted uses in the AG-2 District are often indistinguishable from an active farm operation. Conditional uses in this District are clearly commercial or industrial in nature and may involve facilities or processes that require a remote location distant from incompatible uses, proximity to agricultural products or suppliers and/or access to utility services or major transportation infrastructure.
 
Examples of uses in the AG-2 District include, but are not limited to, agricultural support services, value-added or related businesses such as implement dealers, veterinary clinics, farm machinery repair shops, agricultural sales facilities, marketing, storage and distribution centers, plant and tree nurseries and facilities for the processing of natural agricultural products or by-products, including fruits, vegetables, silage or animal proteins. Those activities are characterized by: (1) Wholesale or retail sales and outdoor storage/display of agriculture-related equipment, inputs and products; (2) The use of parking areas, outdoor lighting and signage appropriate to the scale of the use; (3) Small, medium or large utilitarian structures, facilities or workshops, appropriate to the scale of the use; (4) Low to moderate traffic volumes; and (5) Noises, odor, dust or other potential nuisances associated with agriculture-related production or processing.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. Refer to Sec. 15.285.
2.	Lot Size and Land Division.

a.	Land zoned AG-2 has a maximum density of one principal dwelling per 20 acres or one-half of a quarter-quarter (1/4-1/4) section.

b.	Land divisions resulting in new lots smaller than 35 acres are permitted through the Minor Subdivision process, limited to the creation of 4 or less lots over a 5-year period. The resulting Certified Survey Map (CSM) must include, on its face, a list of the resulting lots and the number of additional lot splits, if any, available to each lot while it is zoned AG-2.

3.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.221.1 AG-2 Dimensional Standards 	
1	Lot area (min)	3 acres
2	Density (max)	2 principal dwellings per 40 acres or quarter-quarter (¼ - ¼) section

3	Height (max)	2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is less)
No height limit applies to agricultural accessory uses such as silos, bins, barns and seed storage facilities
4	Street setback (min)	50'
5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure, 100' structure that houses animals

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure, 100' structure that houses animals
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang. Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are
subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.
The Community Development Department shall determine allowable farm divisions to ensure that farms existing as of the effective date of this section are not divided so as to create in excess of the allowable number of lots per quarter-quarter (1/4 - 1/4). Remaining acreage of a farm not constituting
a full quarter-quarter (1/4 - 1/4) shall be divided by 20, with the resulting quotient used to determine the number of additional residential units allowed (fractions are rounded down to whole numbers).
 
Figure 15.221.1 AG-2 Dimensional Standards











































4. Restriction on Rezoning. No land in the AG-2 District shall be rezoned except in accordance with § 15.545 and Wis. Stat. § 91.48

15.230	R-1 Residential District 	

Purpose: The R-1 district establishes areas within which agricultural uses, commercial uses serving agriculture and limited residential uses with a rural character are located. The R-1 District includes areas in or adjacent to agricultural uses, and that may retain an agricultural character. However, exclusive agricultural use (i.e. AG-1 or AG-2) on an area-wide basis is not warranted due to the existence of residential uses, demonstrated or expected ability of farm and selected nonfarm uses to exist in close proximity without undue conflict, the need to buffer agricultural and urban-residential uses, and related factors.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses
a.	Refer to Sec. 15.285.
b.	Minor Subdivisions resulting in the creation of 4 or less lots are permitted

2.	Density and Lots
a.	Maximum residential density. Parcels of land existing on the effective date of this chapter shall not be divided into more than 4 lots per 40 acres (or portion thereof).
 
1.	Calculation. The allowable number of residential lots shall be calculated by dividing the size of the parcel by
10. (Example: A parcel of 35 acres results in 35 ÷ 10 = 3.5 lots.)
2.	Rounding. Any fractional lot resulting from the calculation in 2.a.1 which is at least .75 shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
3.	Existing Residences. Any residence which exists on the parcel of land to be divided shall count against the maximum residential density allowed.
4.	Transfers. The transfer of allowable density from one parcel to a contiguous parcel under the same ownership is permitted. Such transfer may also be across a public or private road to a parcel under the same ownership which has opposite frontage.
5.	Exception for existing lots. Parcels less than 17.5 acres existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be divided into two residential lots subject to the requirements of this ordinance and Chapter 13 St. Croix County Land Division Ordinance.

b.	Lots less than 17.5 acres created after the effective date of this ordinance are not eligible to be divided into two residential lots while zoned R1.
c.	All lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall indicate, on the Certified Survey Map creating the lots, the number of additional residential lots that may be further divided from that lot in the future while it is zoned R1, including those lots that may not be further divided. No lot shall be created which does not carry with it the allowance for at least one dwelling unit unless identified on the Certified Survey Map as an outlot that may not be improved for residential use.
d.	The Certified Survey Map must include, on its face, a list of the resulting lots and the number of additional lot splits, if any, available to each lot while it is zoned R-1.
e.	The number of lots that may be created from an existing parcel while it is zoned R-1 will be calculated by the Zoning Administrator whenever a land division is proposed.
f.	All land divisions are subject to the requirements of this ordinance and shall meet Chapter 13 - St. Croix County Land Division Ordinance.

3.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.230.1 R-1 Dimensional Standards 	
	Standard Design
1	Lot area (min)	1.5 acre minimum
2	Density (max)	1 principal dwelling per 10 acres




3	



Height (max)	Principal Building:
2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is less)
Additional 1’ allowed per 1’ additional setback from all property lines (up to 1 additional
story/10’)
Accessory Structure:
25 feet, plus additional 1' allowed per 1' additional setback from all property lines, not to exceed five additional feet in height
No height limit applies to agricultural accessory uses such as silos, bins, barns and seed
storage facilities
4	Street setback (min)	50'

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure,100' structure housing animals

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure, 100' structure housing animals
7	Open Space (min)	--
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang.
Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.
 
Figure 15.230.1 R-1 Dimensional Standards









































15.231	R-2 Residential District 	

Purpose: The R-2 district provides for limited residential uses with a rural character. The R-2 district provides for higher residential density than R-1, buffering the County’s agricultural base and complementary residential development from residential neighborhoods and commercial areas. This district restricts agricultural uses to lower-intensity operations consistent with residential neighborhoods, and to prevent large-scale or noxious agricultural processing uses.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses
a.	Refer to Sec. 15.285.

2.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.231.1 R-2 Dimensional Standards 		
	Standard Design	Conservation Design
1	Lot area (min)	1.5 acres	--
2	Density (max)	--	See Subdivision Ordinance


3	

Height (max)	Principal Building:
2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is less)
Additional 1’ allowed per 1’ additional setback from all property lines (up to 1 additional story/10’)
Accessory Structure:
25 feet, plus additional 1' allowed per 1' additional setback from all property lines, not to exceed five additional feet in height
 

Table 15.231.1 R-2 Dimensional Standards	
		No height limit applies to agricultural accessory uses such as silos, bins, barns and seed storage facilities
4	Street setback (min)	50'	25'

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure	10’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building 5’ accessory structure	10’ for principal building 5’ accessory structure
7	Open Space (min)	--	65% of gross site area
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang. Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are
subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.

Figure 15.231.1 R-2 Dimensional Standards
 












































15.232	R-3 Residential District 	

Purpose: The R-3 district accommodates and protects the essential characteristics of areas with a predominantly low density residential character, along with community and recreational uses that serve the district’s residents. The R-3 district allows limited multi-family appropriate for rural areas and requires extension of municipal water and wastewater treatment or a common septic or community wastewater treatment system. Lower-density multi-family uses are allowed depending on site characteristics and town/county plans.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses
a.	Refer to Sec. 15.285.

2.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.232.1 R-3 Dimensional Standards 	
	Standard Design	Conservation Design
1	Lot area (min)	Sewered lots: 12,750 sf	--

2	Density (max)	3 principal dwelling units per acre Maximum 8 attached dwellings per building	4.5 principal dwelling units per acre Maximum 8 attached dwellings per building
 

 	Table 15.232.1 R-3 Dimensional Standards 	
	Standard Design	Conservation Design



3	


Height (max)	Principal Building:
2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is less)
Additional 1’ allowed per 1’ additional setback from all property lines (up to 1 additional story/10’)
Accessory Structure:
25 feet, plus additional 1' allowed per 1' additional setback from all property lines, not to exceed five additional feet in height
4	Street setback (min)	50'	35'

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building 5’ accessory structure	10’ for principal building 5’ accessory structure

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building 5’ accessory structure	10’ for principal building 5’ accessory structure
7	Open Space (min)	--	50% of gross site area

8	Landscaping / Civic Space (min)	
10% of lot area	
10% of lot area
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang.
Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.

Figure 15.232.1 R-3 Dimensional Standards
 








































15.240	C-1 Commercial District 	

Purpose: The C-1 district is established for commercial uses in areas that serve the County’s agricultural businesses and rural communities. This district accommodates commercial and other non-residential uses while protecting surrounding properties from excessive noise, traffic, drainage, or other potential nuisance factors. Landscaping, parking, and paving standards appropriate for rural areas are established in the Development Standards subchapter to protect surrounding development, minimize stormwater runoff, and mitigate aesthetic impacts consistent with a rural environment.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. Refer to § 15.285.
2.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.240.1 C-1 Dimensional Standards 	
1	Lot area (min)	1.5 acres
2	Density (max)	--
3	Height (max)	2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is greater)
4	Street setback (min)	50'

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure
7	Residential setback (min)	50’ principal building and 20’ for accessory structure abutting residential zoning district or use
 

 	Table 15.240.1 C-1 Dimensional Standards 	

8	Landscaping / Civic Space (min)	5% of lot area
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang. Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are
subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.

Figure 15.240.1 C-1 Dimensional Standards









































15.241	C-2 Commercial District 	

Purpose: The C-2 district provides for rural and agricultural tourism and entertainment uses such as wedding barns, agritourism activities with sales of off-site products, outdoor recreation, and related activities. This district accommodates those uses while protecting surrounding properties from excessive noise, traffic, drainage, or other potential nuisance factors.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. Agricultural Entertainment and Agritainment, consistent with the Use Regulations.
2.	Dimensional Standards. Agricultural Entertainment and Agritainment, consistent with the Use Regulations.

 	Table 15.241.1 C-2 Dimensional Standards 	
1	Lot area (min)	3 acres
2	Density (max)	--
 

 	Table 15.241.1 C-2 Dimensional Standards 	
3	Height (max)	2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is greater)
4	Street setback (min)	50'

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal structure
5’ accessory structure

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal structure
5’ accessory structure
7	Residential setback (min)	50’ principal building and 20’ for accessory structure abutting residential zoning district or use
8	Landscaping / Civic Space (min)	5% of lot area
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang.
Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.

Figure 15.241.1 C-2 Dimensional Standards









































15.242	C-3 Commercial District 	
 
Purpose: The C-3 district is established to provide for commercial uses in corridors and centers that are accessible to residential neighborhoods or other businesses. This district accommodates commercial and other non-residential uses while protecting surrounding properties from excessive noise, traffic, drainage, or other potential nuisance factors. Landscaping, parking, and paving standards are established in the Development Standards subchapter to protect surrounding development, minimize stormwater runoff, and mitigate aesthetic impacts consistent with development in and abutting corridors and centers.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. Refer to § 15.285.
2.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.242.1 C-3 Dimensional Standards 	
1	Lot area (min)	1.5 acres
2	Density (max)	--
3	Height (max)	2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is greater)
4	Street setback (min)	50'

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure
7	Residential setback (min)	50’ principal building and 20’ for accessory structure abutting residential zoning district or use

8	Landscaping / Civic Space (min)	15% of lot area
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang.
Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.
 
Figure 15.242.1 C-3 Dimensional Standards









































15.250	I-1 Industrial District 	

Purpose: The I-1 District provides for development of light industrial uses in an industrial park setting, or for employment or production type uses that are fully enclosed and have low intensity and environmental, noise, vibration, or related impacts. These uses may include amenities and open space that serve employees, including limited and internalized retail and service uses.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. Refer to § 15.285.
2.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.250.1 I-1 Dimensional Standards 	
1	Lot area (min)	1.5 acres
2	Density (max)	--
3	Height (max)	2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is greater)
4	Street setback (min)	50 feet

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure
7	Residential setback (min)	50’ principal building and 20’ for accessory structure abutting residential zoning district or use
 

 	Table 15.250.1 I-1 Dimensional Standards 	

8	Landscaping / Civic Space (min)	15% of lot area
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang. Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are
subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.

Figure 15.250.1 I-1 Dimensional Standards









































15.251	I-2 Industrial District 	

Purpose: The I-2 district is created to accommodate production, processing, assembly, warehousing and distribution uses. These uses potentially create impacts relating to noise, dust, vibration, air and water quality, and traffic and should be located apart from residential neighborhoods and public gathering areas.

The Heavy Industrial district requires sufficient space in appropriate locations for industrial uses while protecting surrounding properties from excessive noise, traffic, drainage, or other potential nuisance factors and air, water or thermal pollution or any other environmental degradation.

The district also protects locations where a variety of compatible industrial uses are located. Residential and institutional uses that are not compatible with the permitted industrial uses and would impede the development of industrially zoned lands for industrial purposes are prohibited.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. Refer to § 15.285.
 
2.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.251.1 I-2 Dimensional Standards 	
1	Lot area (min)	1.5 acres
2	Density (max)	--
3	Height (max)	2 ½ stories / 35 feet (whichever is greater)
4	Street setback (min)	50 feet

5	Side setback (min)	10’ any side / 25’ aggregate for principal building
5’ accessory structure

6	Rear setback (min)	25’ for principal building
5’ accessory structure
7	Residential setback (min)	100’ for principal building and 20’ for accessory structure abutting residential zoning district or use

8	Landscaping / Civic Space (min)	15% of lot area
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed | “DU" = dwelling unit | “ac” = gross acres | -- = not applicable.
An “accessory structure” is a structure that is detached from all other structures by at least 10’, measured from the edge of each roof overhang.
Accessory structures that do not meet this standard or are attached to the principal building are considered part of the principal building, and are subject to all dimensional standards applicable to the principal building.

Figure 15.251.1 I-2 Dimensional Standards









































15.252	NMO Nonmetallic Mining Overlay 	
 
Purpose: The Nonmetallic Mining Overlay provides for the site location of new and expansion of existing heavy industrial non-metallic mining sites. Nonmetallic mining is an important industry that contributes to the County's economic well-being. However, heavy industrial mining operations, if not properly sited and regulated, can create short-term and long-term damage to the physical environment and tax base. The NMO allows the County to allow the expansion of existing heavy industrial mining sites, engage in case-by-case review of proposals for new heavy industrial mining sites, and regulate heavy industrial mining to minimize or prevent damage to the public and to restore mining sites to a useful and stable condition after mining ceases.

1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. The following uses are allowed:
a.	Heavy Industrial Mining operations, subject to an approved reclamation plan and any conditions of approval of an NMO district, and consistent with Chapter 14 of the County Code, all applicable state and federal regulations, and any conditions of a permit or reclamation plan approved by the County and the State of Wisconsin; and
b.	Permitted and conditional uses allowed in the base district, subject to their applicable requirements and approval processes.

2.	Dimensional Standards.
a.	The nonmetallic mining site must comply with any buffer zone, setback, height, or area of operations standards required by Chapter 14 of the County Code, any state or federal statute, and any condition of a state or County permit.
b.	Any land use subject to a reclamation plan shall comply with the base district requirements, any condition of rezoning to an NMO district, and any State or County-approved reclamation plan in effect when the use is established.

15.275	CON Conservancy District 	

Purpose: The Conservancy District preserves and perpetuates in an open state areas such as lowland swamps, marshes and wetlands, floodplains and stream beds, slopes, bluffs, wooded areas, native or restored prairie, parks, recreation areas, wildlife habitat and other areas of aesthetic value which, because of their unique physical features, are deemed desirable to be retained for the benefit of this and future generations. The Conservancy District regulations:

•	preserve and perpetuate open space land and water areas consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and
•	protect the community and the County from costs and consequences that are incurred when unsuitable development occurs in those areas which, because of their unique physical features, are deemed desirable to be retained for the benefit of this and future generations..
1.	Permitted and Conditional Uses. Refer to Sec. 15.285.
2.	Dimensional Standards.

 	Table 15.275.1 Conservancy District Dimensional Standards 	

1	Impervious surface
coverage (max)	
10%
2	Street setback (min)	50 feet
Notes: “min" = minimum required | “max” = maximum allowed.
Impervious surface coverage is calculated as the percentage of impervious surface is calculated by dividing the surface area of existing and proposed impervious surfaces on the lot or parcel by the total area of the lot or parcel, and multiplying the result by 100. Impervious calculations do not include
any area within the Right-of-Way (ROW).


15.280 PD Planned Development District 	

Purpose: the Planned Development district accommodates master planned development that cannot feasibly comply with the standards in any of the other zoning districts, and that demonstrates a high degree of design quality and accomplishes an important public purpose.

1.	Applicability. This section establishes Planned Development districts that are applied at the request of a property owner.
2.	Generally. The procedures for approving a PD rezoning are established in § 15.545. A PD rezoning requires a General Development Plan approval at the time of rezoning, and a Final Development Plan to be approved by the Zoning
 
Administrator. Any approval of PD zoning requires demonstration of adequate service and infrastructure capacity, including roads, water and wastewater.
3.	Public Benefit Required. The PD District shall be used to enable high-quality development that serves community goals and objectives as identified in the comprehensive plan. The PD District is not available as a means to reduce environmental or neighborhood protections or the general quality of development that occurs under the base zoning districts.
4.	Comprehensive Plan Consistency. The PD District is available in any Future Land Use Classification shown on the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan, if the uses and intensity of use proposed is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
5.	Permitted Uses. The uses permitted in the PD District are established in the General Development Plan for each site proposed for PD zoning.
6.	General Development Plan. The zoning for the site shall be proposed and recorded in a General Development Plan (GDP). The GDP shall include:
a.	Existing conditions map(s) of the site including:
1.	aerial photo, including adjacent parcels
2.	existing structures
3.	elevation contours, 2-foot or better
4.	wetlands and floodplains
5.	woodlands
6.	any existing utility or access easements

b.	Concept plan map of the site including, at minimum:
1.	lot sizes
2.	public and private road locations
3.	general land use for each lot
4.	stormwater management locations
5.	public or private open space, if any

c.	Permitted and conditional uses for each lot, with reference to a base zoning district if appropriate.
d.	Description of standards for each of the following development attributes, including reference to the standards applicable in a base zoning district or description of any proposed standards that differ from the standards applicable in a base zoning district or that are not addressed in Chapter 15:
1.	lot size,
2.	development intensity, including the number of residential units and the building area of any non-residential uses,
3.	lot coverage,
4.	setbacks,
5.	building height,
6.	off-street and on-street parking and loading,
7.	signs,
8.	screening, landscaping or buffering,
9.	building design,
10.	site design,
11.	tree preservation,
12.	exterior lighting,
13.	facilities or improvements for pedestrian safety,
14.	street design,
15.	water supply, and
16.	wastewater treatment.
 
e.	Description of any requirements for detailed site plans to verify compliance with development standards, such as screening and buffering locations, wastewater treatment facility locations, building locations or other attributes. If site plans are deemed unnecessary, the GDP shall indicate this.
f.	Estimated project phasing, including anticipated timing of land division(s) and construction.

7.	Final Development Plan.
a.	The details of development shall be documented in a Final Development Plan that includes the following information:
1.	Preliminary Plat or Certified Survey Map
2.	Site plans, as described in the GDP
3.	Any agreements, bylaws or covenants that will be recorded to govern the organizational structure, use, maintenance and continued protection of the development and any of its common services, open areas or other facilities.

b.	The Final Development Plan may be submitted for approval concurrent with the General Development Plan, or as a unified General and Final Development Plan if it includes the required information.

15.285	Use Table 	

1.	Use Categories. The Use Table (see Table 15.285.2) establishes uses permitted within each zoning district, and how they are permitted. The uses permitted in each of the Zoning Districts established in this Chapter are defined as follows:

 	Table 15.285.1 Use Categories 	



P	


Permitted by Right	Uses in the Use Table identified by "P" in any column are permitted subject to district regulations, any conditions of rezoning, and the conditions specified in the Use Regulations or Development Standards or elsewhere in this Chapter. Any by-right, conditional or accessory use permitted in any district must comply with the requirements of the district in which it is located unless the Board of Adjustment approves a variance from those requirements. The property owner must obtain a permit by showing that the proposed use is listed as a permitted use.
L	Land Use Permit	The use is permitted if a land use permit is issued (see § 15.555).


C	

Conditional Use	Conditional Uses are uses that are allowed only after the County Board of Adjustment reviews the proposed use, holds a public hearing and decides whether to approve the use, based upon the application of standards found in this subchapter or in § 15.550. Conditional uses are also subject to any conditions and limitations specified in the Use Regulations or imposed as a condition of rezoning conditional use permit approval. See Submittal Requirements for application information.

A	
Accessory	Uses in the Use Table identified with an “A” are permitted only as an accessory use to another use that is permitted as a by right or conditional use in the applicable district.
U	Use Regulations	Permission, standards and location determined by Use Regulations
	Not Permitted	Uses in the Use Table identified by a blank cell are not permitted in that particular district.
	Not Listed	Not permitted unless the use is approved as provided in subsection 3 below.

2.	Additional Regulations Apply. The fact that a use is shown as a permitted use does not always mean that the project may proceed. The Chapter 12 Sanitary, Chapter 13 Land Division, or other sections of this code may result in a permitted use not being allowed to proceed, depending upon the manner in which those provisions apply.
3.	Uses Not Listed
a.	The Zoning Administrator may determine that an unlisted use is permitted by right or as a conditional use if sufficiently similar in nature and impact to a permitted use or a conditional use. The Zoning Administrator may refer to any of the following factors as guidance in making this determination:

1.	Whether the use has similar visual, traffic, environmental and similar impacts as an expressly listed use. The Zoning Administrator may refer to empirical studies or generally accepted planning or engineering sources in making this determination.
 
2.	Whether the use is within the same industry classification as another permitted use. In making this determination, the Administrator may refer to the most recent edition of the North American Industry Classification Manual (Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 2017)(“NAICS”). If the use is not defined in the NAICS, the Administrator may refer to the American Planning Association, Land-Based Classification Standards LBCS Tables (April 1, 2001).

b.	The burden is on the applicant to establish that the use is similar to the expressly listed use. The applicant shall submit all proofs or verification that show that the proposed use is similar to another permitted or conditional use and could be allowed.
c.	The Zoning Administrator shall initially determine if a proposed use is similar to another permitted or conditional use in the district and could be allowed.
d.	If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed use is deemed sufficiently similar in nature and impact to a permitted use or a conditional use, the applicant shall submit an application for a conditional use permit to the Board of Adjustment.
e.	If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed use does not meet the standards listed in subsection a above, the proposed use shall be denied and the applicant notified in writing. The determination may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment as an appeal of an administrative decision.

4.	Preemption. Uses regulated by the State of Wisconsin and exempt from local control are permitted subject to state regulations.





 	15.285.2 Use Table 	

Use Category	
AG-1	AG- 2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
AGRICULTURE
											
Agriculture, Aquaculture*	P	P	P	P							P
Agriculture, Beekeeping*	P	P	P	P	A						P
Agriculture, Crop or Forage Production	P	P	P	P	P						
Agriculture, Enrolled Land*	P	P	P	P	P						
Agriculture, Floriculture*	P	P	P	P							
Agriculture, Forest Management*	P	P	P	P							
Agriculture, Fur Farm*	P	P	P	C	C						
Agriculture, Keeping Livestock	P	P	P	P							
Agriculture, Sod or Christmas Tree Production*	
P	
P	
P	
P							
Agriculture, Wholesale Nursery	P	P	P								
Agricultural Resource Production (including sawmills)	
P	
P	
C								
Animal Production, Other											C
Community Garden	P	P	P	P	P	P		P			
Community Supported Agriculture	P	P	P	P	P	P		P			
Crop/Limited Agriculture	P	P	P	P	A	P		P			
Grazing	P	P	P	P	P						P
Greenhouse	A	A	A	A	A	P		A			
Harvesting of Wild Crops	P	P	P	P							P
Livestock Facility (< 200 animal units) (§ 15.360; L where required by Table 15.360.1)*	
P	
P	
P	
P							
 

 	15.285.2 Use Table 	

Use Category	
AG-1	AG- 2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
Livestock Facility (200-499 animal units) (§ 15.360; L where required by Table 15.360.1)*	
P	
P	
P								
Livestock Facility (> 500 animal units) (§ 15.360; L where required by Table 15.360.1)*	
L	
L	
L/C								
Manure Storage	P	P	C	C							
Pick-Your-Own Operations	P	P					P				
Raising of Chickens and Ducks	P	P	A	A	A						
Raising of Waterfowl, Fowl, and Fish											P
Stock Yard or Livestock Auction Facility		C									
NATURAL RESOURCES	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Filling, Draining, or Dredging of Wetlands	L	L	L	L	L	L		L	L	L	C
Undeveloped Natural Resources and Open Space Land Use	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P	
P
RESIDENTIAL	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Residences											
Dwelling, Single-Family	P	P	P	P	P		P				
Caretaker Unit								A			
Conservation Design Development (§
15.325)*			P	P	P						
Dwelling, Rental or Secondary	P	P									
Dwelling, Two-Family			C	C	P						
Manufactured Home	P	P	P	P	P		P				
Mobile Home Park			C	C	C						
Mobile Home											
Modular Home	P	P	P	P	P		P				
Multifamily Dwelling					P						
Temporary Residence (§ 15.390)*	L	L	L	L	L						
Group Living											
Community Living Arrangement (9-15
persons) (Wis. Stat. § 59.69(15))			
C	
C	
P						
Community Living Arrangement (> 15
persons) (Wis. Stat. § 59.69(15))			
C	
C	
C						
Foster Home / Adult Family Home (Wis. Stat.
§ 59.69(15)(bm), (br)2)			P	P	P						
Life Care or Continuing Care Service					P			P			
Retirement Housing Service					P			P			
Skilled-Nursing Service (above intermediate level nursing care)					P			P			
LODGING	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Boarding House								P			
Bed and Breakfast (subject to Wis. Stat. § 97.01(1g) or 97.625(1p) as determined by DATCP)		
C	
C	
C	
C	
C		
C			
Campground, Private (§ 15.322)			C	C		C	C	C			
Campground, Public (§ 15.322)			C	C							L
Hotel or Motel								C			
 

 	15.285.2 Use Table 	

Use Category	
AG-1	AG- 2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
Short-Term Rental (§ 15.375)*	P	P	P	P	P						
ART, ENTERTAINMENT, &
RECREATION	
AG-1	
AG-2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
Adult Establishment (§ 15.310)*						L		L	L	L	
Agricultural Entertainment (< 15 days) (§
15.315 L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)*	
A	
A									
Agricultural Entertainment (> 15 days) (§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)*	
A/C	
A/C									
Agricultural Entertainment (< 30 days)
(§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)*							
P				
Agricultural Entertainment (> 30 days)
(§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)*							
C				
Amusement or Theme Park								C			
Drive-In Theater			C					C			
Farm Exhibition (< 5 days)
(§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)*	
A	
A					
P				
Farm Exhibition (> 5 days)
(§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)*	
A/C	
A/C					
L				
Game Arcade								C			
Golf Course			C	C	C			C			C
Hiking, Biking, and Bridle Trails	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Indoor Recreational Facility								C			
Miniature Golf								P			
Museum		L	L					L			
Outdooor Entertainment Facility						C		C			
Outdoor Recreational Facility			C	C		C	C	C			
Racetrack								C			
Stadium, Arena, or Conference Center								C			
Theater, Movie, or Performing Arts								C			
Zoos, Botanical Gardens, Arboreta, and similar uses								
C			
COMMERCIAL/MIXED USE	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Animal Services											
Game Management	P	P	C								
Kennel, Commercial (§ 15.355)*	C	C	C			P		P			
Stable, Commercial	C	C	C	C		C		C			
Veterinary Clinic						P		P			
Automotive											
Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores								
P			
Automotive Service, Repair, and Towing						P		P			
Car Wash								A			
Dealerships (Motor, Off-Road, Watercraft, and Implements)								
P			
 

 	15.285.2 Use Table 	

Use Category	
AG-1	AG- 2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
Service Station								P			
Truck Service, Repair, and Towing						P		P	P	P	
Day Care											
Child Care Home, Family (< 8 children)	A	A	A	A	A	A		A			
Child Care Center (Wis.Stat. § 48.65)						P		P			
Group Day Care						P		P			
Financial Services											
Financial or Investment Institution								P			
Food & Beverage Sales/Service											
Bar or Tavern								P			
Grocer*	C	C						P			
Liquor Store								P			
Restaurant								P			
Roadside Stand*	P	P	P	P	P	P		P			
Sales - Processed or Preserved Agricultural Products and Produce	
C	
C	
C			
P		
P			
Mixed Uses											
Vertical Mixed Use (retail or office on ground floor, residential on upper floors)								
P			
Office, Business & Professional											
Courier and Messenger Service								P			
Office								P			
Plant or Livestock Genetic Laboratory		C				C		P			
Postal Service								P			
Personal/Business Services											
Barber or Beauty Shop								P			
Business Support Services								P			
Funeral Home								P			
Indoor Maintenance and Repair of Goods and Equipment						
P		
P			
Laundry								C			
Retail Sales											
Contractor Sales and Service						P		P			
Convenience Store								C			
Drug Store/Pharmacy								P			
Garden Center						P		P			
Landscape Supply and Contracting Business
(Plant or Tree Nursery)		
C	
C			
P		
P			
Notion, Variety, or Gift Shop								P			
Retail Sales and Service (< 2500 sf)								P			
Retail Sales and Service (> 2500 sf)								C			
Riding Supply	C	C				P		P			
Miscellaneous Commercial											
Agricultural Supply*			C			P		P			
 

 	15.285.2 Use Table 	

Use Category	
AG-1	AG- 2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
Business Conducted By Owner/Operator of Farm*	
C	
C									
Farm-Related Exhibition, Sale, or Event (5 days or less)(§ 15.315)*	P	P	P			P	P	P			
Farm-Related Exhibition, Sale, or Event
(more than 5 days)(§ 15.315)*	
C	
C	
C			
P	
P	
P			
Home Occupation, Major (§ 15.345)*	A/C	A/C	A/C	A/C	A/C						
Home Occupation, Minor (§ 15.345)*	A	A	A	A	A						
Motion Picture or Sound Recording								P	P		
Sale or Storage of Agricultural Byproducts		C									
Salvage Operation (§ 15.352)			C			C			C	C	
INFRASTRUCTURE	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Transportation/Parking											
Airstrip (§ 15.320)*		C	C								
Freight Terminal										C	
Parking Facility								C			
Taxi and Limousine Service								P			
Transit System								P	P	P	
Utilities											
Air Conditioning and Steam Supply										P	
Biopower Facility		C									
Dam		C	C	C	C						C
Electric Generating Facility (Large Scale)	C	C									
Electric Generating Facility (Small Scale)	C	C	C	C	C	P		P	P	P	
Flowage Area		C	C	C	C						C
Irrigation and Industrial Water Supply	P	P	P	P					P	P	
Power Plant										C	
Solar Collector / Solar Energy System ( §
15.385)	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C	
C
Utility, Major	C	C								P	
Utility, Minor	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	
Wind Energy System (§ 15.395)*	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C
Wired Communication/Cable Facility*		C	C	C	C						C
Communications Uses											
Radio and Television Broadcasting Studio								P			
Mobile Support Structures And Facilities (§
15.365; may require L)*	
U	
U	
U	
U	
U	
U	
U	
U	
U	
U	
Waste-Related											
Hazardous Waste Collection, Treatment, and Disposal										
C	
Septic Tank and Related Services									P	P	
Solid Waste Collection, Treatment, and Disposal									
C	
C	
Solid Waste Processing or Transferring									C	C	
PUBLIC, CIVIC, & INSTITUTIONAL	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Assembly											
 

 	15.285.2 Use Table 	

Use Category	
AG-1	AG- 2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
Governmental, Institutional, or Nonprofit Community Use	
C	
C	
P	
P	
P			
P			
Club or Lodge	C	C				P		P			
Religious Institution	P	P	P	P	P	P		P			
Civic and Open Space											
Cemetery	P	P	P	P	P	P		P			
Historic or Natural Resource	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Open Space			P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Park			P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Educational Services											
Personal Instruction Services						P		P			
Private One-Room Schoolhouse	L	L	L								
School (public or private)								P			
Technical or Trade School								P			
Public Administration / Institutional											
Library								P			
Correctional or Military Institution*								P		C	
Hospital*								P			
Medical Clinic*			C					P			
Public Safety								P	P	P	
Social Services and Non-Profit Organizations											
Child and Youth Services								P			
Elderly and Disabled Services								P			
Family Services (food, emergency, etc.)								P			
INDUSTRIAL/PRODUCTION	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Manufacturing & Employment										
Agricultural Products Processing		C							C	C	
Asphalt Plant	C	C	C	C	C				P	P	
Brewery or Distillery							C	C	P	P	
Building Construction Services								C	C	P	
Composting, Commercial										C	
Forest Products Processing									C	C	
Heavy Construction Services										P	
Industry, Heavy									C	P	
Industry, Light									P	P	
Manure Processing Facility		C								C	
Recycling Facility								C	C	C	
Renewable Fuel Manufacturing		C								C	
Slaughterhouse						C			P	P	
Winery	A	A	C						P	P	
Mining & Natural Resource Extraction											
Heavy Industrial Mining (if located within the NMO District 15.252)										
P	
Metal Extraction										C	
 

 	15.285.2 Use Table 	

Use Category	
AG-1	AG- 2	
R-1	
R-2	
R-3	
C-1	
C-2	
C-3	
I-1	
I-2	
CON
Nonmetallic Mining, (§ 15.370)		C	C							C	
Temporary Nonmetallic Mining (§ 15.370)		L	L							L	
Warehousing, Storage & Distribution											
Contractor Storage Yard (§ 15.330)*			C	C		L		L	L	L	
Dead Stock Hauling Service*		C							C	P	
Propane Storage and Distribution						C		C	C	C	
Seasonal Storage	P	P	P								
Self Storage Facility								P			
Warehouse (Greater than 20,000 sf)									C	C	
Warehouse (Less than 20,000 sf)									P	P	
Wholesaling									P	P	
Wrecking and Demolition Service										P	
MISCELLANEOUS	AG-1	AG-2	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-1	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	CON
Accessory Structures & Uses	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A
Portable Storage Unit	A	A	A	A	A	A		A	A	A	
Outdoor Junk Storage (§ 15.353)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	
Minor Subdivisions	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Major Subdivisions				P	P	P		P	P	P	
Notes:
P = Permitted | L = Land Use Permit required | C = Conditional | * = Use Regulations apply | U = approval determined by Use Regulations A = Accessory Use









15.286	to 15.299 Reserved. 	

USE REGULATIONS

Contents:
15.300 General Provisions
15.305 Accessory Structures & Uses
15.310 Adult Establishments
15.315 Agricultural Entertainment and Agritourism Uses
15.320 Airstrips
15.322 Campgrounds
15.325 Conservation Design Development
15.330 Contractor Storage Yards
15.335 Chickens and Ducks
15.340 Fences and Walls
15.345 Home Occupations
15.350 Housing
15.352	Salvage Operations
 
15.353	Junk
15.355 Kennels, Commercial
15.360 Livestock Facilities
15.365 Mobile Tower Siting
15.370	Nonmetallic Mining
15.371	Private One-Room Schoolhouse
15.373 Roadside Stands
15.375 Short-Term Rentals
15.380 Signs
15.385 Solar Energy
15.390 Temporary Structures and Uses
15.395	Wind Energy Systems
15.396	To 15.399 Reserved.

15.300 General Provisions 	
1.	Applicability. This Subchapter establishes standards for the uses listed in each section. These standards:
a.	Supplement the standards in the Zoning Districts or Development Standards, or
b.	Where indicated, supersede the standards in the Zoning Districts or Development Standards.

2.	Relationship to Use Table. This Subchapter applies regardless of the zoning district where the use is located or whether the use is permitted by right or as a conditional use, unless otherwise indicated in this Subchapter.

15.305 Accessory Structures & Uses 	
1.	Accessory Buildings.
a.	Accessory buildings, including private garages and buildings clearly incidental to the residential use of the property, are permitted in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts.
b.	No accessory building may be constructed in any major subdivision unless a primary residential building is already constructed.

c.	No accessory building may be used as a separate dwelling unit.

d.	Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building shall not occupy more than 30% of the area of the required rear yard.

2.	Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are permitted uses requiring no additional zoning approval, unless the Use Table in
15.285 or a specific Use Regulation in this subchapter describes the need for a Land Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit.
3.	Agricultural Accessory Uses. Agricultural Accessory Uses are subject to the following:
a.	Accessory to Agricultural Uses
1.	Agricultural Accessory Uses shall be subordinate to a Primary Agricultural Use in the AG-1 and AG-2 districts and cannot be engaged in unless a Primary Agricultural Use is actively maintained on the same parcel of land.
2.	Determination of the existence of a Primary Agricultural Use shall be made upon review of the most recent tax assessment records for the parcel, demonstrating that more than 50% of a contiguous farm is assessed as agricultural under Wis. Stat. § 70.32(2)(a).

b.	Conditional Uses.
1.	The following Agricultural Accessory Uses require a conditional use permit in the AG-1 and AG-2 Districts:
a.	A business, activity or enterprise, whether or not associated with an agricultural use, that is conducted by the owner or operator of a farm, that requires no buildings, structures or improvements other than those described in the definition of "Agricultural Accessory Building " in § 15.805 and that employ no more than four (4) full time employees annually and that does not impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of the farm or other protected farmland.
 
b.	Sale of agricultural and dairy products not produced on the premises and incidental sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snacks.
c.	Farm exhibitions as permitted in § 15.315.

2.	The following Agricultural Accessory Uses require a conditional use permit in the AG-2 District:
a.	Bed and breakfast operations in existing farm residences located on a farm
b.	Airstrips, subject to § 15.320

15.310 Adult Establishments 	

Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to protect the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the residents of St. Croix County, to preserve the quality of family life, to preserve the rural and urban characteristics of its neighborhoods in St. Croix County and to prevent adverse and deleterious effects contributing to the blight and downgrading of neighborhoods. Being mindful of the effects of adult entertainment upon minors and the criminal activity and disruption of public peace associated with adult establishments, while also giving due consideration to civil rights of persons partaking in adult entertainment, it is the intent of this section to regulate the location of establishments of adult entertainment. By the enacting this ordinance, the St. Croix County Board of Supervisors does not intend to give any explicit, implicit or tacit approval or condone any activity relating to adult entertainment.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any Adult Establishment. For purposes of this section, an "Adult Establishment" includes any of the following uses as defined in § 15.805:

a.	Adult Bookstore,
b.	Adult Motion Picture Theater,
c.	Adult Motion Picture Theater (Outdoor),
d.	Adult Mini Motion Picture Theater,
e.	Adult Bath House,
f.	Adult Massage Parlor,
g.	Adult Modeling Studio,
h.	Adult Body Painting Studio,
i.	Adult Cabaret, and
j.	Adult Video Store.

2.	Permitting.
a.	Adult Establishment Conditional Use Permit Process. The above uses are considered conditional uses, and shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied within 30 calendar days after a complete application is submitted. If a final decision on the conditional use permit is not rendered within 30 calendar days, a provisional land use permit shall be granted.

b.	Judicial Review

1.	Filing. A denial, approval with conditions, or revocation of a conditional use permit under this Section is appealable to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided in Wis. Stat. § 59.694(10). The appeal of a denial, condition or revocation under this Section is subject to the same rules and procedures, and shall be conducted in the same manner, as prescribed for judicial review under Wis. Stat. § 59.694(10). However, subsections 2 through 4 below apply to a petition for judicial review filed under this chapter.

2.	Transmittal of Record. Within 10 days from the date the County is served with the petition, the Zoning
Administrator shall prepare the County’s record for the petitioner to transmit to the court.

3.	Provisional Land Use Permit. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the County’s enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately issue the applicant a provisional land use permit. The provisional land use permit shall allow the applicant to operate of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the applicant's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the County’s enforcement.
 
4.	Application of this Section During Provisional Land Use Permit Periods. Adult establishments operating under provisional land use permits are subject to subsection 3, 4.c, 4.d, 4.e, 4.g, 4.h, and 4.i.

3.	Underlying District Standards. Lot area and width, building height and area, yard and sanitary sewer system requirements in the underlying district shall be complied with.
4.	Standards for Adult Entertainment Uses. In addition to all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, all Adult Establishments shall meet the following standards:
a.	No Adult Establishment shall be permitted within 1,320 feet of the center of any public entrance to a school, library, church, park, playground or daycare facility. The distance shall be measured along the shortest route along the street or highway between the points where lines perpendicular to the centers of the public entrances intersect with the street or highway.
b.	No adult entertainment use shall be permitted within 500 feet of property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3, or within 500 feet of any in the AG-1 or AG-2 districts. The distance shall be measured from the center of any public entrance of the adult entertainment use in a straight line to the closest point of the other property.
c.	There shall be no sale of intoxicating beverages in the Adult Establishment.
d.	Signs advertising any of the Adult Establishment shall conform with § 15.380.
e.	Parking shall comply with § 15.430, and all parking shall be provided in a lighted area.
f.	There shall be no pornographic displays or signs depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in display windows on the premises.
g.	The owner and/or operator of the adult entertainment establishment shall comply with all federal, state and local laws and ordinances, including obscenity, liquor and cabaret laws, and shall further ensure that minors are not permitted on the premises. Solicitation for purposes of prostitution shall be strictly prohibited.
h.	The hours of operation for such establishments shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
i.	Outdoor adult motion picture theaters shall also have the viewing screen located in such a fashion as to not be visible from any road, street or highway or residence and the premises shall be surrounded by solid fencing at least eight feet in height. All theaters shall comply with Wis. Stat. § 134.46.
j.	This section does not permit or authorize any establishment or use which violates other applicable local or county ordinances or Wisconsin law.

15.315 Agricultural Entertainment and Agritourism Uses 	

Purpose: this section establish standards for Agricultural Entertainment and Farm Exhibition uses in the County's Agricultural districts and rural commercial areas that accommodate an economic and entertainment demand, complement the County's agricultural economy, and protect surrounding neighborhoods.

1.	Agricultural Entertainment
a.	Applicability. This subsection applies to Agricultural Entertainment, as defined in § 15.805. When applied to the C-2 district a broader range of recreational uses may be permitted that do not relate to agriculture, however motorized recreation uses are not permitted.
b.	Where Permitted
1.	Agricultural Entertainment activities that do not exceed 15 calendar days per each 12 months in succession are considered an Agricultural Accessory Use and are permitted by right only if accessory to an agricultural use in the AG-1 and AG-2 districts. This agricultural accessory use must comply with Wis. Stat. § 91.01(1).
2.	Agricultural Entertainment activities which exceed 15 days in the aggregate annually are considered an Agricultural Accessory Use that requires a conditional use permit in the AG-1 and AG-2 districts.
3.	Agricultural Entertainment activities that do not exceed 30 calendar days per each 12 months in succession are considered an Agricultural Accessory Use and are permitted by right only if accessory to an agricultural use in the in the C-2 District. This agricultural accessory use must comply with Wis. Stat. § 91.01(1).
4.	Agricultural Entertainment activities which exceed 30 days in the aggregate annually are considered an Agricultural Accessory Use that requires a conditional use permit in the C-2 district.
 
c.	Food and Beverages. Agricultural Entertainment may include the incidental preparation and sale of beverages and food. For purposes of this subsection, "incidental" means that:
1.	food or beverages are not a primary reason to frequent the establishment, but instead are offered for purchase as a convenience to the customer, and
2.	the areas where food and beverages are prepared are subordinate and minor in size and use, and
3.	occur either:
a.	inside a structure devoted to an agricultural use or a residence, or
b.	in locations that are not visible from the public right-of-way and that occupy no more than 3,500 square feet cumulatively, or
c.	in outdoor locations or tents that occupy no more than 1,000 square feet cumulatively.

2.	Farm Exhibitions

a.	Applicability. This section applies to farm related exhibitions, sales or events such as auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities.
b.	Where Permitted

1.	Farm Exhibitions occurring no more than 5 days in a calendar year are considered an Agricultural Accessory Use and are permitted by right only if accessory to an agricultural use in the AG-1 and AG-2 districts. This agricultural accessory use must comply with Wis. Stat. § 91.01(1). In the C-2 district this use is permitted by right.
2.	Farm Exhibitions occurring on more than 5 days in a calendar year are considered an Agricultural Accessory Use that requires a conditional use permit in the A-1 and A-2 districts; in the C-2 district this use requires a land use permit.

3.	Event Plan / Land Use Permit

a.	This subsection applies to any Rural or Agricultural Entertainment or Farm Exhibition anticipated to have attendance of more than 100 persons during a 24 hour period.
b.	An event plan addressing the items in Table 15.315.1 (Event Plans) shall be filed and approved with a land use permit from the Zoning Administrator. For Farm Exhibitions, the applicant shall file and obtain approval of the event plan annually. The event plan shall address the following:

Table 15.315.1 Event Plans	
Item Addressed	Agricultural Entertainment	Farm Exhibitions
Parking	*	*
Proposed days and hours of operation	*	*
Ingress and egress (including any permit required by the appropriate road jurisdiction)	*	*
Sanitation	*	*
Other public safety issues	*	*
Signs	*	
Solid waste management	*	
(asterisk [*] = item is required | blank cell = item not required)
c.	The applicant shall file the approved land use permit with the appropriate town clerk, fire department, emergency medical provider, the St Croix County Sheriff’s Department and any other local law enforcement agency that has responsibility for providing police protection services for the Agricultural Entertainment or Farm Exhibition activities, at least 30 days prior to the start of any such activities in each calendar year.

15.320 Airstrips 	

1.	Applicability. This section applies to airstrips that are not agriculture-related or agriculture-accessory uses.
2.	Conditional Use Permit Application. Each proposed airstrip owner shall file a written application for a conditional use permit with the Zoning Administrator (see Submittal Requirements, § 15.590).
 
3.	Notice to Law Enforcement Agencies. If approved by the Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall notify all police Agencies in the vicinity of the airstrip, together with the County Sheriff's Department and the Central Communication Center of the existence of the airstrip, its location and its length.
4.	Liability Insurance. If the conditional use permit is approved, all future airplanes owned by the applicant shall sufficient liability insurance, and proof and that insurance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within 30 days.
5.	Location. The airstrip in question shall be located as close as possible to the center of the real estate owned by the applicant, unless the topography of the real estate in question cause a central location to be unreasonable.
6.	Length. The airstrip shall be of sufficient length to:
a.	Enable safe takeoffs and landings by any and all airplanes owned by the applicant or by airplanes that the applicant approves to land at the airstrip.
b.	Be approved by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics, and
c.	Safely and reasonably comply with 14 CFR § 91.9 (Civil aircraft flight manual, marking, and placard requirements)
.(See par. 19. of this subsection.)

7.	Abandonment. Upon being notified by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics, that a an airstrip with an approved conditional use permit is abandoned by the applicant, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant and its successor or assigns that the conditional use permit is terminated. This decision is appealable to the Board of Adjustment (see § 15.560).
8.	Conveyance. Upon the sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the real estate on which an approved airstrip is located, the new purchaser, transferee or leasee of the real estate shall immediately file a notice of the purchase, transfer or lease with the County Zoning Administrator. The notice shall contain the statement that the new purchaser, transferee or leasee agrees to conform to and abide by these standards. Upon receipt of the notice, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the purchaser, transferee or leasee of these standards.
9.	Paved Strips Permitted. Airstrips shall remain as grass or sod strips only and be properly maintained for that use.
10.	Hold Harmless Agreement. Upon approval of the proposed airstrip by the Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement in favor of the County, which shall indicate that the applicant has sole responsibility for any and all damage caused to any person or property by the operation of the County approved airstrip.
11.	Standards not Exclusive. These standards shall not be construed to limit the authority of the County Board of Adjustment with respect to its review of any conditional use request from a particular applicant. The provisions of the County Zoning code concerning the Board of Adjustment remains in effect supplements these standards where applicable.
12.	Notice to Municipalities. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the clerks of all municipalities located on the drawing made by the applicant prior to the conditional use public hearing. Oral or written comments may be made at the hearing by any municipal official.
13.	Flight Altitudes. The airstrip shall comply with Section 14 CFR § 91.119 (Minimum Safe Altitudes; General).

15.322 Campgrounds 	
1.	Applicability. This section applies to public and private campgrounds that accommodate 2 or more camping units wherein a fee is charged for use.
2.	Standards.
a.	Campgrounds shall have adequate sanitary facilities to accommodate occupancy.
b.	Campgrounds shall be licensed by the Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection (DATCP).
c.	Private Campgrounds may include commercial recreational activities such as waterslides, mini-golf, etc., and may include retail sales of goods directly related to the recreational activities on the site.
d.	Public Campgrounds may not include commercial activities other than retail sales of essential camping goods.



15.325	Conservation Design Development 	

Purpose: The purposes of Conservation Design Developments (CDD) are:
 

•	To provide for the unified and planned development of clustered, residential uses, outside of the state certified agricultural districts, which are designed and located to reduce the perceived density of development, while still providing privacy for dwellings, and incorporate large areas of permanently protected common open space.
•	To allow for the continuation of agricultural uses in those areas best suited for such activities and when adjoining
residential uses are compatible with such activities.
•	To maintain and protect St. Croix County’s rural character by preserving one or more of these important landscape elements, including but not limited to those areas containing such unique and environmentally sensitive natural features such as woodlands, river and stream corridors, drainageways, wetlands, closed depressions, floodplains, shorelands, prairies, ridgetops, steep slopes, critical species habitat, and productive farmland by setting them aside from development. Such areas contained in primary and secondary environmental corridors, independent environmental resources and potentially productive agricultural land, as identified by the St. Croix County Development Management Plan, are given particular significance for conservation.
•	To connect common open space areas between adjacent properties and create environmental corridors throughout the County. Areas contained in primary and secondary environmental corridors, independent environmental resources and potentially productive agricultural land, as identified by the St. Croix County Development Management Plan, are given particular significance for conservation.
•	To preserve scenic views and to minimize views of new development from existing homes and roads.
•	To provide greater design flexibility in siting dwellings and other development features than would be permitted by the application of standard use regulations to minimize the disturbance of rural landscape elements and sensitive areas, scenic quality, and overall aesthetic value of the landscape.
•	To increase flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services and infrastructure by altering road length, utility requirements, drainage requirements, and the amount of paving required for residential development, where possible.
•	To create groups of dwellings with direct visual and physical access to common open space.
•	To permit active and passive recreational use of common open space by residents of the development and/or the public.
•	To reduce erosion and sedimentation by retaining existing vegetation and minimizing development on steep slopes.
•	To permit various means for owning common open space, preserved landscape elements, agricultural land, and to protect such areas from development in perpetuity.

•	To create a stewardship approach to common open space by requiring a land management plan for the common open space.
1.	Applicability
a.	This section applies to any Conservation Design Development (CDD).
b.	The standards in this section replace the underlying zoning district standards.

2.	Uses
a.	Permitted Uses. Land within a CDD may be used for the following purposes:
1.	Permitted uses in the residential portion, not the common open space portion, of the Conservation Design Development:
2.	Single-family dwelling units and related accessory structures.
3.	Parking areas where necessary to serve single-family dwellings.
4.	Permitted uses in the Common Open Space portion of the Conservation Design Development shall include all uses permitted in the Conservancy District (§ 15.275), except:

a.	Nonresident buildings used solely in conjunction with the raising of waterfowl, minnows and other similar lowland animals, fowl or fish,

b.	Accessory uses and structures,

c.	Similar uses to those listed in subsections a and b, and

d.	golf courses.
 
b.	Conditional Uses. The following uses require a conditional use permit (see § 15.550):

1.	Conditional Uses in the residential portion, not the common open space portion of the Conservation Design Development.
a.	Institutional and government uses.
b.	Minor home occupations.
c.	Bed and breakfast establishments.
d.	Attached single-family residential dwelling units of 2, 3 or 4 dwelling units in one attachment. No more than 25% of the total number of dwelling units in the CDD as identified in the yield plan shall be duplexes, twin homes or attached.

2.	Conditional Uses in the Common Open Space portion of the CDD.
a.	Conditional Uses allowed in the Conservancy District.
b.	Equestrian boarding and riding facilities available only to development residents. A 590 Nutrient Management Plan is required.
c.	Swimming pools available only to development residents.

c.	Prohibited Uses. All permitted, principal, accessory and conditional uses not expressly provided for above are prohibited.

3.	Density Standards.
a.	Residential Base Density. The Residential Base Density, or the base number of allowable dwelling units, is determined by the yield plan pursuant to Ch. 13, St. Croix County Code of Ordinances, § 13.2.C.3. Existing dwellings that may or may not be part of a farmstead that will be retained shall be counted toward the base density.
b.	Residential Gross Density. The total number of dwelling units allowed in a CDD is referred to as the Residential Gross Density. This is calculated as the Residential Base Density plus 25% of the number of dwelling units prescribed by the Residential Base Density.

	Table 15.325.1
Conservation Design Density Allocation Examples	

Yield Plan	
Base Density	
Gross Density	Dwelling Units Mix	
Sample Breakdown	
Totals
18 Lots	18 DU	22 DU	22 SFDU	22 –1-Family Detached
DU	22 DU
50 Lots	50 DU	62 DU	47 SFDU + 15 MFDU
= 62 DU	47 –1-Family Detached DU 5 –3-Family Attached DU	47 DU +
15 DU =
62 DU
100 Lots	100 DU	125 DU	94 SFDU + 31 MFDU
= 125 DU	94 –1 Family Detached DU 7 – 2-Family Attached DU 3 – 3-Family Attached DU 2 – 4-Family Attached DU	94 DU +
14 DU +
9 DU +
8 DU =
125 DU
DU = Dwelling Units | SFDU = Single Family Detached Dwelling Units | MFDU = Multi Family Attached Dwelling Units






15.330 Contractor Storage Yards 	

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any Contractor Storage Yard.
2.	Permits
a.	A Contractor Storage Yard may require a conditional use permit where indicated by the zoning district regulations.
If the Contractor Storage Yard does not require a conditional use permit, the property owner shall obtain a land use permit for the Contractor Storage Yard.
 
b.	The conditional use permit or land use permit shall be obtained before any new structures are constructed or equipment is stored on the lot.
c.	The applicant shall not store, erect or employ any structures, services, operations, vehicles or employees not indicated in the approved plans.
d.	The applicant shall secure all necessary permits and approvals from the Town and obtain any other required local, state, or federal permits and approvals.

3.	Operational Standards
a.	The applicant shall maintain the property in a neat and orderly manner.
b.	Activities are limited to the storage of equipment and vehicles for use off-site. No manufacturing, retail services, or other business services shall take place on the same lot.
c.	In the R-1 or R-2 districts, hours of operation shall not occur earlier than 6:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m.

4.	Lighting. To minimize glare, all lighting associated with the Contractor Storage Yard shall be illuminated downward and shielded away from abutting properties and any public road.
5.	Screening. The applicant shall provide vegetative screening from any any abutting lot in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zoning Districts.



15.335 Chickens and Ducks 	

Purpose: this section provides for the raising of chickens and ducks as an accessory use in a residential district, to allow for local food production while protecting the surrounding neighborhood and environment.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to the keeping of chickens and ducks in lots less than 3 acres within the residential districts.
2.	Generally. For purposes of this section, "Chickens" refers to either chickens or ducks.
3.	Standards.
a.	The maximum number of chickens allowed is twelve (12) per parcel regardless of how many dwelling units are on the parcel.
b.	Only female chickens (hens) are allowed.
c.	Chickens must have wings appropriately clipped to prevent them from flying.
d.	Chickens must be contained within the parcel at all times. Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse or similar safe enclosure during non-daylight hours.
e.	Henhouses and chicken pens must be located in a rear or side yard, at least ten (10) feet from the property line and at least twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent residential dwelling, church, school or place of business.

15.340 Fences and Walls 	

Purpose: this section regulates fences and walls to preserve the County's rural character, and to prevent the obstruction of motorists' vision.

1.	Applicability. This section applies generally to fences or walls. Any conflicting provisions in the zoning district
regulations, another Use Regulation, or a Development Standard supersede this section.
2.	Location. Fences and walls may be located in any required yard area.
3.	Height. Fences shall not exceed:
a.	8 feet in height when located along a lot line that does not abut a road or street, or
b.	3½ feet when located along a lot line that abuts a road or street, or
c.	2½ feet when located within a vision triangle (§ 15.405), or
d.	8 feet or as required by state law for partition fencing or fencing of farm-raised deer pursuant to Wis. Stat. Chapter 90.

4.	Design. The finished side of the fence shall face outward toward the public right-of-way and/or adjacent parcel.
 
5.	Chain Link Fences. Chain link fences up to 8 feet in height, that can be seen through, may be located in all of the locations described above except a vision triangle. This does not supersede any requirements of the Shoreland Overlay (SO) or Lower St. Croix Riverway (SCR) overlay districts.

15.345	Home Occupations 	

Purpose: the purpose of this section is to:

Protect residential and agricultural areas from adverse impacts of activities associated with home occupations; Permit residents of the community an opportunity to conduct a business at their place of residence; and
Establish criteria and development standards for home occupations conducted in dwelling units and accessory structures in the Residential Rural (R-1), Residential Neighborhood (R-2), Residential Mixed (R-3), and Agricultural (A-1 and A-2) districts.

Provide for certain types of restricted occupational uses within the Residential Rural (R-1), Residential Neighborhood (R-2),
Residential Mixed (R-3), and Agricultural (A-1 and A-2) districts which:

•	Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence or a farm;
•	Are compatible with residential or agricultural uses;
•	Are limited in extent; and
•	Do not detract from the residential or agricultural character of the neighborhood.
1.	Applicability and Definitions. This section applies to any home occupation. Home occupations are divided into minor, major, and nonconforming home occupations, defined as follows:
a.	A minor home occupation is a home occupation as defined in subsection 3 authorized by this section without a hearing or permit.
b.	A major home occupation is a home occupation as defined in subsection 4 that is authorized as a conditional use.
c.	A nonconforming home occupation is one which was established and maintained prior to the effective date of this section but is no longer allowed because of the application of this section or any amendment hereto.

2.	General Standards. The following standards apply to all home occupations:
a.	The person principally responsible for the home occupation must reside at the location of the proposed home occupation.
b.	All home occupations shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of a dwelling or accessory structure for residential or agricultural purposes, and the appearance of the structure shall not be altered or the occupation within the dwelling or accessory structure be conducted in such a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential or agricultural character by either the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, noises, odors or vibrations.
c.	In no case shall any home occupation be open to the public at times earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 10:00 p.m.
d.	A home occupation shall have adequate parking spaces available to compensate for additional parking needs generated.
e.	Storage

1.	There shall be no exterior storage of business equipment, merchandise, inventory, vehicles or heavy equipment.
2.	Materials, including organic materials such as rock or plants, may be stored within the permitted home occupation area (see subsection 4.c.1.c below) outside of an enclosed structure.
3.	There shall be no exterior storage of junk.

f.	Home occupations shall not produce noise or objectionable odors, vibrations, glare, fumes or electrical interference detectable beyond the lot line of the parcel on which the home occupation is located.
g.	Home occupations shall not illegally discharge any materials, fluids or gases into the sewer system or into an on- site waste disposal system nor discharge such items in violation of any applicable government code.
 
h.	Garage sales, craft sales or other similar sales are permitted without special permit if they meet the following standards:
1.	Sales last no longer than three days.
2.	Sales are held no more than twice yearly.
3.	Sales are conducted on the owner's property. Multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of the participants.
4.	No goods purchased for resale are offered for sale.
5.	No consignment goods may be offered for sale.

i.	Sign(s) as allowed as provided in § 15.380.

3.	Minor Home Occupations.
a.	A home occupation is considered a minor home occupation that is allowed without permit or hearing, if it conforms to all of the following:
1.	Minor home occupations shall not be conducted in any building on the premises other than the principal dwelling.
2.	No person other than a resident of the principal dwelling may be engaged or employed in a minor home occupation.
3.	The area set aside for the home occupation shall not exceed 50% of the total floor area of the residence.
4.	The selling of stocks of merchandise, supplies or products is not conducted on the premises. However, orders previously made by internet, telephone or at a sales party may be filled on the premises. That is, the direct sale of products off display shelves or racks is not allowed, but a person may pick up an order placed earlier as described above.
5.	Parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking orders are not held more than 4 times each month.

b.	Permitted minor home occupations include, but are not limited, to the following:
1.	Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring;
2.	Painting, sculpturing or writing;
3.	Telephone answering or marketing;
4.	Home crafts for sale off-site;
5.	Tutoring for up to three (3) students at a time;
6.	Home cooking and preserving for sale off-site;
7.	Computer programming, data entry or other data processing services; and
8.	Secretarial services.

c.	In the AG-1 and AG-2 district, Minor Home Occupations are allowed if they:

1.	comply with all applicable requirements of this section, and

2.	do not impair or limit current or future agricultural use of the farm on which they are performed, and

3.	do not engage or employ any persons other than the residents of the principal residence located on the farm, and

4.	comply with Wis. Stat. § 91.01(1).

4.	Major Home Occupations
a.	A major home occupation is any proposed or existing home occupation that does not meet the standards for a
minor home occupation.
b.	A major home occupation requires a conditional use permit.
c.	All major home occupations shall meet all of the following additional standards:
1.	Major home occupations must be conducted:
a.	within the principal dwelling if the area set aside for the major home occupation does not exceed 50% of the total floor area of the principal dwelling, or
 
b.	within a permitted accessory structure (alone or in combination with the principal dwelling), if the total floor area dedicated to the home occupation, including any area used in the principal dwelling, is limited to 1,500 square feet, or
c.	in the rear yard (alone or in combination with the principal dwelling or a permitted accessory structure);
1.	if no mechanized equipment is used outside of an enclosed structure, and
2.	the cumulative area of the home occupation does not occupy an area exceeding the lesser of 1,500 square feet or 5% of the rear yard.

2.	Major home occupations may not be located within 100 feet of any preexisting neighboring residence. The conditional use permit can require additional distance, up to a maximum of 500 feet, if the additional distance can be shown to mitigate negative impacts to a neighboring residence associated with sounds or views.
3.	No more than 2 persons other than a resident of the principal dwelling may be employed or engaged in a
major home occupation.
4.	Only merchandise directly incidental to a service provided may be displayed or sold within the dwelling or structure used for a major home occupation.
5.	Major home occupations authorized in an Agricultural District must be limited to agriculturally-related activities.

Figure 15.345.1 Major Home Occupation Dimensional Standards
 
5.	Inspections. There may be 1 annual inspection each year of any authorized home occupation by the Zoning Administrator or his designee. In addition, the Zoning Administrator or his designee may at any time, upon reasonable request, enter and inspect the premises for safety and compliance purposes.

15.350	Housing 	

Purpose: this section -

•	Accommodates housing types that diversify St. Croix housing stock, provide a broad choice of housing types, and affordable housing options, and
•	Promotes the efficient use of land as a result of housing sizes and configurations that provide living arrangements in compact land areas, and
•	Ensures that multifamily dwellings, tiny houses, small homes, and manufactured homes do not change the character of the districts in which they are located and are compatible with other uses in their neighborhood.
1.	Applicability. This section applies to tiny homes, manufactured homes, , and caretaker units.
2.	Dwelling Unit Area. Every dwelling unit shall provide the following minimum floor area for each family residing in the building:

Table 15.350 Dwelling Unit Size
Unit Type	Minimum Size
Single Family, Detached	720 sf on main floor
Attached Units	500 sf

3.	Multifamily Dwellings

a.	Where Allowed. Multifamily dwellings are a permitted use in the R-3 district
b.	Landscaping and Screening. All Multifamily structures shall meet landscaping requirements as described in 15.420.

4.	Tiny Houses
a.	Where Allowed
1.	Tiny Houses are permitted as a principal use where allowed as a condition of a Planned Development (PD)
rezoning.
2.	A Tiny House on Wheels is considered a “Camping Unit,” and is only permitted in a Campground.

b.	General Standards. All Tiny Houses shall comply with the following:
1.	Each house shall be located on its own individual lot
2.	Construction of the house shall comply with any applicable building code.
3.	Each house shall be installed on a permanent foundation, with wheels and chassis removed.
4.	Each house shall be connected to water and sewer utilities (public water, public sewer, private well, and/or an approved septic system).

c.	Porches. A Tiny House permitted as a principal use shall have a porch that:
1.	is oriented towards common open space or a public or approved private street, and
2.	has a minimum width of 4 feet or 75% of the building façade width, whichever is greater, and
3.	has a minimum depth 5 feet.

5.	Manufactured Homes

a.	Where Allowed. Manufactured Homes are permitted in all districts where Single-Family Dwellings are permitted, to include the AG-1, AG-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, and C-2 Districts, subject to the supplemental regulations in this subsection.
b.	Installation. A Manufactured Home shall comply with the installation standards established by the Wisconsin
Department of Safety And Professional Services.
 
c.	Foundation. A continuous permanent masonry foundation or masonry curtain wall slab, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, shall be installed under the perimeter of Manufactured Home.
d.	Moving Equipment Removed. The moving hitch, transporting lights, wheels and axles shall be removed.
e.	Dimensions and Appearance
1.	The principal entrance to the manufactured home shall face a public or approved private street.
2.	The exterior siding shall consist predominantly of vinyl or metal horizontal lap siding (the reflectivity of which does not exceed that of gloss white paint), wood or hardboard, brick, stone or stucco comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction in the County.
3.	Roofs must be covered with roofing material that is residential in appearance. This includes, but is not limited to, approved wood, standing-seam metal, asphalt composition shingles or fiberglass.
4.	All roof structures shall provide an eave projection of at least 6 inches, which may include a gutter.

6.	Caretaker Units

a.	Where Allowed. Caretaker Units are allowed as an accessory use to a Self Storage Facility.
b.	Number Allowed. Only one Caretaker Unit is allowed on a lot.
c.	Location. Caretaker Units shall be interior and attached to the Self Storage Facility.
d.	Setbacks. The caretaker unit shall conform to side and rear yard setbacks.
e.	Height. The caretaker unit shall not exceed 2 stories or the height of the principal dwelling unit, whichever is less.
f.	Number of Bedrooms. Caretaker Units shall have no more than 3 bedrooms.
g.	Parking. Parking may be provided as part of the parking area for the Self Storage Facility. No additional parking is required.
h.	Ownership. A Caretaker Unit shall be owned by the same person or entity who owns the Self Storage Facility, and shall not be sold separately from the remainder of the property.



15.352	Salvage Operations 	

1.	Applicability. This section applies to all salvage operations.
2.	Standards.

a.	Commercial salvage operations are permitted only as a conditional use and only in the R-1, C-1, I-1 and I-2 districts.

b.	No portion of any salvage operation may be located in the street yard, meaning between the primary structure and the street.

c.	Salvage materials shall be enclosed by an opaque fence and/or year-round vegetative screening so that materials are not visible from other property in the vicinity of the salvage operation nor from a public road nor from navigable water. The fence or vegetative screen shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall be properly maintained to satisfy the screening objective.

d.	Salvage material items being stored shall not exceed 12 feet in height.

e.	Salvage materials shall not be located within 500 feet of any residence other than that owned by the owner of the premises and 1,000 feet from a lake, river or stream.

f.	Salvage material shall not be located in a wetland, floodplain, intermittent stream, drainage way or storm water basin.

g.	For fire protection, an unobscured fire break shall be maintained, 15 feet in width and height and completely surround the salvage operation.

h.	No item may be stored within the salvage operation that contains hazardous materials that could contaminate the soil or water. All liquids shall be drained from any containers, vehicles or equipment.
 
i.	At a minimum, there shall be five feet of soil between the water table or bedrock.

15.353	Junk 	

Purpose: this section provides for the regulation of junk, when stored outdoors, in order to protect the general health and welfare of the community. Junk stored outdoors can cause soil and water contamination, cause negative impacts to surface waters and groundwater, decrease property values, and  have negative impacts on the aesthetics of an area or neighborhood.


1.	Applicability. Specifically, but not limited by enumeration, the following items meet the definition of junk as defined in Section 15.805:
a.	Motorized vehicles or motorized equipment of any type, if not currently capable of motorized operation including, but not limited to, cars, vans, trucks, recreation vehicles, watercraft, motor homes, lawn mowers, snow blowers, outboard motors, go-carts, mopeds, scooters and mini-bikes
b.	Non-motorized vehicles intended to transport persons or property on a road or highway, including trailers and bicycles, if not currently safe to use on the road.
c.	Vehicle parts
d.	Tires, with or without rims
e.	Interior appliances and electronic equipment not in use including, but not limited to, cooktop range and ovens, refrigerators, dishwashers, fans, clothes dryers, clothes washers, microwaves, televisions, screens, audio equipment, computers, arcade games and vending machines
f.	Interior plumbing and mechanical fixtures not in use including, but not limited to, toilets, sinks, piping, bath tubs, tub surrounds, water heaters/tanks, water softeners, humidifiers, dehumidifiers, wood-burning stoves, furnaces and related piping and ductwork
g.	Interior furniture that is abandoned, discarded or damaged including, but not limited to, sofas, recliners, mattresses, bed frames, dressers, credenzas, desks, tables and chairs
h.	Outdoor recreation equipment that is disassembled or broken including, but not limited to, trampolines, above-ground swimming pools, swimming pool components and patio furniture
i.	Building components or construction materials not installed or in use including, but not limited to, doors, windows, siding, shingles, lumber and flooring
j.	Outdoor fixtures or containers not currently in use including, but not limited to, fuel tanks, propane tanks, liquid barrels and air conditioners
k.	Scrap metal, plastic, glass or wood not in use
l.	Any other item similar in nature to the above list

2.	Standards
a.	The accumulation of junk outdoors is prohibited in any zoning district.
b.	Exceptions. The accumulation of certain junk items is permitted in the rear yard if it meets the following:
1.	The items are unbroken and intended to be put to use
2.	Screened from ordinary public view and from neighboring property by means of opaque fencing and/or year- round vegetative screening or other appropriate means not to exceed eight (8) feet in height
3.	Items being stored shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height
4.	Located in the rear yard
5.	Located in one (1) contiguous area
6.	The area does not exceed the lesser of 600 square feet or 2% of the area of the rear yard
7.	No item may be stored within the designated storage area that contains hazardous materials that could contaminate the soil or water. All liquids shall be drained from any containers, vehicles or equipment
8.	Stored items shall not be located in a wetland, floodplain, intermittent stream, drainage way or storm water basin
 

Figure 15.353.1 Outdoor Junk Storage Dimensional Standards









































15.355 Kennels, Commercial 	

1.	Applicability. This section applies to Commercial Kennels:
2.	Location

a.	Kennels are prohibited in major subdivisions.
b.	Kennel structures shall be set back at least 300 feet from all property lines, or 200 feet by conditional use permit if additional standards are met.
c.	Kennel structures shall be located at least 50 feet from any potable water supply well.

3.	Standards
a.	Kennel structures housing animals shall provide soundproofing so that animal noise cannot be heard beyond
owner’s lot lines.
b.	All animals shall be housed indoors from 9:00 p.m to 6:00 a.m.
c.	There shall be no more than the following number of adult dogs or cats, six months of age or older, outdoors at any one time:
 
1.	16 in the AG-1, AG-2, C-1, or C-3 districts. Up to four (4) animals per dog/cat run enclosure not exceeding four (4) runs per commercial kennel operation.
2.	6 in the R-1 District. Up to two (2) animals per dog/cat run enclosure not exceeding three (3) runs per commercial kennel operation.

d.	The operator shall provide a plan for animal waste management to ensure timely collection and safe disposal.
This requirement is intended to address site odor, stormwater runoff contamination and public health protection.
e.	Additional standards to allow lesser setbacks for outdoor kennels:
1.	Views of outdoor kennel structures shall be entirely obscured from the property line through a combination of walls, berms, fences and/or landscaping.
2.	Barking and other noises shall be mitigated through the use of walls, berms, fences, bark suppression collars and/or landscaping.

15.360 Livestock Facilities 	

Purpose: this section provides for livestock facilities that support the County's agricultural economy, allow a reasonable economic return for agricultural property owners, protect surrounding neighborhoods, and minimize the environmental and public health impacts of intensive livestock facilities.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to all animal units, except household pets, in all districts.
2.	Generally

a.	Except for chickens and ducks as permitted under 15.335, no animal units may be kept on lots or parcels less than 3 acres, nor on lots or parcels in a major subdivision unless provided for in the plat.
b.	No livestock facility with 200 or more animal units shall be permitted in the R-2 district.
c.	One animal unit per acre of land suitable for animal waste utilization, consistent with NRCS 590 Nutrient Management, is allowed without a permit on lots or parcels of 3 acres or more in size. Land suitable for animal waste utilization excludes:
1.	wetlands or lands below the OHWM,
2.	closed depressions,
3.	slopes in excess of 25%, and
4.	other areas that may be determined as sensitive and adversely affecting surface water or groundwater
quality.

3.	Permitted Districts and General Standards

 




Standard
 
Table15.360.1
Livestock Facility Locations and Standards

Livestock Facility Threshold (AU = animal unit)
 

	< 1 AU per acre of	> 1 AU per acre of	< 1 AU per acre of	> 1 AU per acre of
	land suitable for	land suitable for	land suitable for	land suitable for
	animal waste	animal waste	animal waste	animal waste
	utilization or	utilization and <	utilization and	utilization or
	< 200 AU	200 AU	200-499 AU	> 500 AU
Land Use Permit Required?	No		No (A-1, A-2, R-1)	Yes (A-1, A-2)
Conditional Use Permit Required?	No	Yes (R-2)	No	Yes (R-1)
Wisconsin Administrative Code Ch. ATCP 151, Livestock Facility Siting				
*
Wisconsin Administrative Code Ch. NR 243, Animal Feeding Operations	
*	
*	
*	
*
Wisconsin Administrative Code Ch. NR 151, Runoff Management	
*	
*	
*	
*
Ch. 11, St Croix County Code of Ordinances,
Animal Waste Storage Facilities	
*	
*	
*	
*
 




Standard
 
Table15.360.1
Livestock Facility Locations and Standards

Livestock Facility Threshold (AU = animal unit)
 

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Conservation Practice Standard Code 590, Nutrient Management	
*	*	*	*
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Conservation Practice Standard Code 318, Short Term Storage of Animal Waste and By-Products	
*	
*	
*	
*
* = standard is required | blank cell = standard is not required


4.	Minimum Parcel Size. Minimum parcel size for any livestock facility exceeding 199 AU in the R-1 or R-2 districts is 10 acres.
5.	Structure Setbacks

a.	Agricultural Districts. The following structure setback provisions apply to livestock structures, including animal waste storage structures, and other structures housing animal units in the A-1 and A-2 Districts.
1.	All structures must be set back at least 100 feet from any property line or public road right-of-way if the
facility has less than 1000 animal units.
2.	All structures must be set back at least 200 feet from any property line or 150 feet from a public road right- of-way if the facility has 1000 animal units or more.
3.	All animal waste storage structures for less than 500 animal units must be set back at least 100 feet from any property line or the nearest point of any public road right-of-way unless:

a.	The animal waste storage structure existed prior to May 1, 2006.
b.	The animal waste storage structure is a single new structure constructed no closer to the relevant property line or public road than an animal waste storage structure that existed on the same tax parcel prior to May 1, 2006, if the new structure is no larger than the existing structure and is located within 50 feet of the existing structure.

4.	All animal waste storage structures for 500 or more animal units must be set back at least 350 feet from any property line or the nearest point of any public road right-of-way unless:
a.	The animal waste storage structure existed prior to May 1, 2006.
b.	The animal waste storage structure is a single new structure constructed no closer to the relevant property line or public road than an animal waste storage structure that existed on the same tax parcel prior to May 1, 2006, provided that the new structure is no larger than the existing structure and is located within 50 feet of the existing structure.

b.	Residential (R-1 and R-2) Districts. The following structure setback provisions apply to livestock structures, including animal waste storage structures, and other structures housing animal units in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts.

1.	All livestock structures must be set back at least 100 feet from any property line or 100 feet from any public road right-of-way for lots or parcels with less than 500 animal units.
2.	All livestock structures must be set back at least 200 feet from any property line or 150 feet from any public road right-of-way for lots or parcels with 500 or more animal units.
3.	Animal waste storage structures must be set back at least 350 feet from any property line or nearest point of any public road right-of-way.

c.	Exemption for Equipment and Piping. Equipment and piping used to transport animal waste from a livestock facility to an animal waste storage structure are exempt from the setback provisions in this subsection.

15.365	Mobile Tower Siting 	

Purpose and Findings:
 
The Board of Supervisors hereby finds as follows:

•	Mobile service facilities and support structures provide an important infrastructure for a wide variety of communication tools for emergency services providers, businesses and the public.
•	Mobile service facilities and support structures can create safety hazards that threaten the public health, safety or welfare. Such a safety threat is particularly great for mobile support structures that are structurally inadequate, and for mobile support structures that exceed 200 feet in height.
•	Radio broadcast services and facilities provide the public with the regular provision of commercial and noncommercial service involving the transmission, emission or reception of radio waves for the transmission of sound or images for direct reception by the general public.
•	Radio broadcast services and facilities are an essential infrastructure for radio and television broadcasts which are utilized extensively by businesses and the public.
•	Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0404 and 66.0406 limit the authority of local government to regulate mobile service facilities and support structures and radio broadcast services and facilities.
•	If oversized, mobile support structures can have an adverse impact on the value of nearby property. The purpose of this section is to:
•	Accommodate communication, radio and television generation needs while protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
•	Minimize adverse visual impacts of the associated ground structures with screening requirements.
•	Minimize adverse impacts of such structures on the value of nearby property.
1.	Title. This section shall be cited as: Section 15.365, St. Croix County Mobile Tower Siting.
2.	Statutory Authorization. Except as otherwise noted, this Section is adopted through powers granted in Wis. Stat. §
59.69 for the purpose of implementing Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0404 and 66.0406.
3.	General Provisions
a.	Applicability.
1.	The following regulations and standards apply to all mobile support structures and facilities in all Zoning Districts unless otherwise provided in this section.
2.	Subject to subsections 3.b and c below, Mobile Support Structures and Radio and Television Broadcasting Studios are permitted in all Zoning Districts, with a Land Use Permit.

b.	Mobile Support Structures In Floodplain Overlay District. The County is required by Wis. Stat. § 87.30 and Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 116 to adopt and enforce its floodplain zoning ordinance, which is codified as Section 15.270. In addition, the placement of electrical and mechanical equipment in a floodplain is regulated by SPS 321.33(5) of the state’s construction standards. Nothing in this Section shall alter or affect the obligations arising from any of those provisions.
c.	Mobile Support Structures In The Public Right-of-Way. Pursuant to the County’s authority under Wis. Stat.
§ 59.54(6), no mobile support structure or its structural components shall be erected or temporarily placed within any road or highway or its right-of-way.
d.	Mobile Support Structures Exempt From Regulation. The following mobile support structures and facilities are exempt from regulation under this section:

1.	Amateur Radio Antennas constructed for use by licensed amateur radio operators up to:

a.	60 feet high, or

b.	100 feet when extended by a telescoping or crank-up mechanism, with a maximum height of 60 feet when retracted.

2.	Reception-only antennas and dishes for television and radio.

4.	Permit Process

a.	Permit Required. A land use permit is required for a new mobile support structure and facilities, a Class 1 Co- Location or a Class 2 Co-Location.
 
b.	Land Use Permit Application For A Mobile Support Structure & Facilities, a Class 1 Co-location or a
Class 2 Co-location
1.	A properly completed application for a land use permit for a new mobile support structure and facilities or Class 1 Co-Location shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the County.
2.	The application must be signed by both the property owner and the applicant or his/her agent.
3.	The information required by § 15.590 shall be provided for new mobile support structures and facilities and Class 1 Co-Locations.

c.	Permit Decision & Appeal Process for New Mobile Support Structures and facilities or Class 1 Co- locations
1.	If an applicant submits to the Zoning Administrator an application for a permit for a new mobile support structure and facilities or Class 1 co-location, which contains all of the information required under this ordinance, it shall be considered complete.
2.	If the Zoning Administrator does not believe that the application is complete, the applicant will be notified in writing, within 10 days of receiving the application that the application is not complete. The written notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete.
3.	Within 90 days of receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the Zoning Administrator may agree in writing to an extension of the 90-day period:

a.	Review the application to determine whether it complies with all applicable aspects of the building code and, subject to the limitations in this section, zoning ordinances.

b.	Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application.

c.	Notify the applicant, in writing, of the final decision.

d.	If the application is approved, issue the applicant the land use permit.

e.	If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification substantial evidence
which supports the decision.

d.	Permit Decision & Appeal Process for Class 2 Co-locations

1.	If an applicant submits to the department an application for a permit for a Class 2 co-location, which contains all of the information required by by § 15.590, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the application complete.
2.	If any of the required information is not in the application, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, within 5 days of receiving the application, that the application is not complete. The written notification shall specify in detail the required information that was incomplete. An applicant may resubmit an application as often as necessary until it is complete.
3.	Within 45 days of receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall complete all of the following or the applicant may consider the application approved, except that the applicant and the Zoning Administrator may agree in writing to an extension of the 45 day period:

a.	Make a final decision whether to approve or disapprove the application.

b.	Notify the applicant, in writing, of the final decision.

c.	If the application is approved, issue the applicant the relevant permit.

d.	If the decision is to disapprove the application, include with the written notification substantial evidence
which supports the decision.

5.	Standards

a.	Setbacks. The setback for mobile service support structures and facilities shall meet the provisions of § 15.242.
b.	Aeronautical Safety. The County may disapprove an application involving creation of a new mobile support structure where both of the following are true:
 
1.	The height of the new structure exceeds 200 feet, measured from the ground level at its site; and
2.	The new structure would extend into air space [protected by 47 C.F.R. 17.7(b)] that is above an imaginary surface extending outward and upward at any of the following slopes:
a.	100 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 6.10 kilometers (20,000 feet) from the nearest point of the nearest runway of any airport with at least one runway more than 0.98 kilometers (3,200 feet) in actual length, excluding heliports.
b.	50 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 3.05 kilometers (10,000 feet) from the nearest point of the nearest runway of any airport with its longest runway no more than 0.98 kilometers (3,200 feet) in actual length, excluding heliports.
c.	25 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 1.52 kilometers (5,000 feet) from the nearest point of the nearest landing and takeoff area of any heliport.

c.	Removal of Mobile Support Structure & Facilities. Any mobile support structure and facilities which is not used for the use for which the permit was granted for 12 consecutive months must be removed and the site restored within 3 months. The site shall be restored to its original condition and anchoring elements shall be removed from the ground to a depth of at least 8 feet below grade. If removal and restoration are not completed, the County is authorized to complete the removal and site restoration and charge the cost to the performance bond.
d.	Performance Requirements

1.	A performance bond in a form acceptable to the Zoning Administrator shall be submitted at the time of application to provide for the removal of the mobile support structure and facilities. The bond shall be a maximum of $20,000.
2.	The structures on the ground shall be screened with 6 foot high coniferous trees to provide 80% opacity at maturity.
3.	The bottom of the mobile support structure and facilities from ground level to 12 feet above ground shall be designed to prevent unauthorized climbing and shall be enclosed with a minimum 6-foot high chain link fence with a locked gate.
4.	Security lighting shall be downward directed and shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site.
5.	Adequate parking shall be provided for maintenance and repair vehicles.
6.	A written acknowledgement from the landowner of a leased site that they will abide by the applicable conditions of the Land Use Permit, including the restoration and reclamation requirements in subsection 5.c of this section.
7.	Installation of the wireless mobile support structure and facilities shall comply with the manufacturer’s
specifications.
8.	New mobile support structure and facilities shall provide space for at least two co-locations.

e.	Prohibitions
1.	No wireless communication facility shall be artificially illuminated unless required by the FCC or FAA.
2.	A temporary mobile transmission facility site is not permitted except in the case of equipment failure, equipment testing, equipment replacement, or emergency and prior authorization is obtained from the Zoning Administrator. Use of a temporary site for testing purposes shall be limited to 24 hours, and the use of a temporary site for equipment failure, equipment replacement or emergency shall be limited to 30 days unless extended for good cause in writing by the Zoning Administrator.
3.	There shall only be one mobile support structure and facilities on a parcel of land.

f.	Completion Deadline
1.	Wireless mobile support structure and facilities construction authorized by a land use permit issued under this section shall commence within 1 year from the date of approval and be substantially completed or implemented within 2 years.
2.	Applicants can request extensions of one or both deadlines, for periods up to 6 months, from the Zoning Administrator.
3.	The total time granted for extensions shall not exceed 6 year.
 
g.	Permit Revocation. Where the terms or conditions on any land use permit for wireless mobile support structure and facilities are violated, the permit may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator.
h.	Biennial Report. The mobile support structure and facilities owner shall submit each even-numbered year on or before January 31st, a transmission facility information report, on a county- provided form. The report shall detail the use, maintenance and condition of the wireless mobile support structure and facilities. The report shall be accompanied by a 2-year renewal of the performance bond in a form acceptable to the Zoning Administrator in an amount sufficient to provide for removal of the wireless mobile support structure and facilities. The bond amount is a maximum of $20,000.
i.	Safety Inspection. If the county has reason to believe that a wireless mobile support structure and facilities is a safety risk, it may require the permit holder to perform an inspection by a registered engineer and provide a copy of the report to the Zoning Administrator within 60 days of notice by the County that an inspection is required.

6.	Effective Date. This Section is effective on August 15, 2017 Ordinance No. (2017)

15.370	Nonmetallic Mining 	

Purpose: Nonmetallic Mining is permitted as a conditional use or a temporary use in the AG-2, R-1, and I-2 districts and is regulated by Chapter 14 of the County Code of Ordinances. This section protects public health, safety and general welfare and ensures that Nonmetallic Mining is compatible with the applicable district, while accommodating these uses as an important industry that contributes to the County's economic well-being.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to Nonmetallic Mining.
2.	General Standards. Non-metallic mining operations shall comply with:
a.	Chapter 14 of the County Code of Ordinances, and
b.	Wis. Stat. Chapter 295, subchapter I, and rules promulgated under that subchapter as well as with local ordinances adopted under Wis. Stat. §§ 295.13 or 295.14,
c.	applicable provisions of this Section, and
d.	any requirements of the State Department of Transportation concerning restoration of nonmetallic mineral mine sites.

3.	AG-2 District. In the AG-2 district, the applicant shall demonstrate that:
a.	The operation and its location:
1.	considered alternative locations outside of the AG-2 District, or
2.	is specifically approved for the location under state or federal law.

b.	The operation is reasonably designed to minimize the conversion of land around the mine site from agricultural or open space uses to other land uses.
c.	The operation does not substantially impair or limit the current or future agricultural use of surrounding parcels
of land that are zoned for or legally restricted to agricultural use.
d.	The owner or operator will restore the mine site to agricultural uses, consistent with a reclamation plan calling for such type of restoration once the nonmetallic mineral mining operation has been completed.

4.	Temporary Nonmetallic Mining. Temporary Nonmetallic Mining operations are allowed if the operation:
a.	Extracts a total of 10,000 cubic yards or less of material, and

b.	does not exceed 60 days in duration, and

c.	obtains a Land Use Permit in accordance with § 15.555.

15.371	Private One-Room Schoolhouse 	


1.	Applicability. This section applies to any one-room structure used for private religious and educational instruction.
2.	Standards.
a.	Maximum capacity of 37 occupants.
 
b.	The use shall comply with St. Croix County sanitary wastewater requirements.

15.373 Roadside Stands 	

Purpose: This section provides for the regulation of structures near the public right-of-way used to sell farm products and agriculture goods, to enable that use while protecting rural character and roadway safety.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any structure in a street yard used to sell farm products
2.	Standards.
a.	The maximum ground area covered by a roof shall be 300 sq. ft.
b.	The structure shall not be permanently fixed to the ground and shall be readily removable in its entirety.
c.	The structure shall not be fully enclosed.
d.	The structure shall be used solely for the sale of farm products produced on the premises or adjoining premises.
e.	The structure shall be sited to allow vehicles to safely exit and enter the public roadway. Vehicles should be able to turn around on the parcel before exiting.



15.375 Short-Term Rentals 	

Purpose: This section identifies County and State regulations allowing for the short-term rental of principal residential dwellings .


1.	Applicable Regulations. Short-Term Rentals are regulated by Wis. Stat. § ATCP 72 Hotels, Motels and Tourist Rooming Houses and also by § 66.1014.
2.	Registration and Licensing. The owner of a Short-Term Rental Property shall annually obtain a tourist rooming house license from the Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection. These licenses are locally issued by the St. Croix County Public Health Department - Licensing and Inspections. The license year for all licenses is from July 1 to June 30 of the following year.

15.380	Signs 	

Purpose and Findings:

The Board of Supervisors finds that:

•	Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and quality of the environment.
•	Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages.
•	Signs can create safety hazards that threaten the public health, safety or welfare. Such a safety threat is particularly great for signs that are structurally inadequate, or that may confuse or distract drivers or pedestrians, or that may interfere with official directional or warning signs.
•	Signs can also threaten the public welfare by creating aesthetic concerns and detriments to property values. Such aesthetic concerns and detriments to property values are particularly great when an accumulation of signs results in visual clutter, or when one or more signs spoil vistas or views, or when one or more signs add or increase commercialism in noncommercial areas.
•	The ability to erect signs serving certain functions, such as an address sign or a sign announcing that the property on which it sits is for sale or for lease or a sign used to indicate areas not available (or available) for public use, is an integral part of nearly every property owner’s ability to realize the fundamental attributes of property ownership. The same cannot be said for signs serving other functions, such as billboards erected so as to be visible from public rights- of-way. Such signs are primarily designed to take advantage of an audience drawn to that location by the public’s substantial investment in rights-of-way and other public property.

•	Signs serving certain other functions, such as small off-premise signs that are in place for fewer than four days, are necessary to enable visitors or residents to efficiently reach their intended destinations. Experience teaches that
 
citizens often plan as if such signs will be present in those settings, so in the absence of such signs, frustration and disorientation will result, and time and fuel will be wasted.
•	No signs that exceed the size or spacing limitations of this section constitute a customary use of signage in the County.
•	The County’s land-use regulations have included the regulation of signs in an effort to foster adequate information and means of expression and to promote the economic viability of the community, while protecting the County and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community or threaten health, safety or the welfare of the community. The appropriate regulation of the physical characteristics of signs in the County and other communities has had a positive impact on the safety and the appearance of the community.
•	The County in the establishment of an Adult Establishment regulations (§ 15.310) identified its intent to protect the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the residents of St. Croix County, to preserve the quality of family life, to preserve the rural and urban characteristics of its neighborhoods in St. Croix County and to prevent adverse and deleterious effects contributing to the blight and downgrading of neighborhoods. Being mindful of the effects of adult entertainment upon minors and the criminal activity and disruption of public peace associated with such establishments, while also giving due consideration to civil rights of persons partaking in such entertainment, it continues to be the intent of the Adult Establishment regulations and this section to regulate the advertisement of such establishments of adult entertainment.

The purpose of this section is to:

•	Regulate signs in a manner that does not create an impermissible conflict with statutory, administrative, or constitutional standards, or impose an undue financial burden on the County.

•	Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth in this section under the zoning authority of the County.
•	Improve the visual appearance of the County while providing for effective means of communication and orientation, particularly in those settings in which the need for such communication or orientation is greater, consistent with constitutional guarantees and the County’s Findings and other Purposes.
•	Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the County, including its scenic views and rural character consistent with the St. Croix County Comprehensive Plan and the purpose of each zoning district, by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the community, protecting vistas and other scenic views from spoliation, and preventing or reducing commercialism in noncommercial areas.

•	Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of signs within the County in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
1.	General Provisions
a.	Applicability. This subsection applies to all signs in all zoning districts, including permanent, temporary, on- premise and off-premise signs, unless otherwise provided by this section.
b.	Substitution Clause & Sign Content
1.	Subject to the landowner’s consent, noncommercial speech of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial speech; provided, that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any provision to the contrary in this ordinance. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a lot or parcel, nor does it affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted.
2.	All noncommercial speech is considered on-premise signage and is entitled to the privileges that on-premise signs receive under this section.
3.	No commercial speech is allowed on a sign, other than a message drawing attention to a business or service legally offered on the premises, except as allowed in subsection 3.d.

c.	Signs In The Public Right-of-way
 
1.	No sign or its structural components shall be erected or temporarily placed within any road, highway, right- of-way, public easement or upon any public property, except for the following, which may be placed without a permit:
a.	Public signs erected by or on behalf of a government body for the purpose of carrying out an official duty or responsibility, including but not limited to posting legal notices, identifying property, or to direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular movements or pertaining to traffic control or safety.
b.	Signs, red reflective with white lettering, maximum size 20 inches wide by 12 inches high, if they are located to the right of the driveway (to a person facing the driveway from the road) at the right-of-way line, and parallel to the road.
c.	Signs posted or placed by a public utility or communications franchise holder near one or more of its poles, lines, pipes or facilities.
d.	Signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way, to ensure safety.

2.	Unauthorized signs erected or temporarily placed within any road, highway, right-of-way, public easement or upon any public property may be removed by the County or town in which the sign is located at the sign owner's expense.

d.	Signs Exempt From Regulation. The following signs are exempt from regulation under this section:
1.	Incidental signs.
2.	Interior signs located completely within a building and not visible from outside the building.
3.	Up to three flags on a single lot or parcel containing only non-commercial speech the combined area of which is less than 100 square feet in size. Flags not within this definition are deemed freestanding signs subject to permit. For purposes of this paragraph, a “single lot” includes but is not limited to an area to which a member of a condominium association, cooperative association, or residential real estate management association has a separate ownership interest or a right to exclusive possession or use.
4.	Signs that are traffic control devices and are permitted or allowed by the Wisconsin Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.
5.	Governmental signs erected by or on behalf of a government body to carry out an official duty or responsibility, including but not limited to posting legal notices, identifying public property and indicating a public use, except for such signs in the Lower St. Croix Riverway Overlay District (see subsection 2.f.4 below).
6.	Temporary freestanding signs, containing no commercial speech, two square feet or less in size in farm fields.
7.	Temporary freestanding signs, containing no commercial speech, 36 square inches or less in size in any lawn.

e.	Suspension Of Certain Size, Shape, Placement and Content Restrictions During an Election Campaign Period
1.	Subject only to the exceptions in subsection 5. below, during an election campaign period, signs containing noncommercial speech may be placed upon residential property notwithstanding any other restriction in this section of the size, shape, placement or content of any sign.
2.	For purposes of this subsection, “election campaign period” means:
a.	In the case of an election for office, the period beginning on the first day for circulation of nomination papers by candidates, or the first day on which candidates would circulate nomination papers were papers to be required, and ending on the day of the election.
b.	In the case of a referendum, the period beginning on the day on which the question to be voted upon is submitted to the electorate and ending on the day on which the referendum is held.

3.	If the owner of the property has rented some or all of the property to another, the renter may exercise the right in any area of the property that he or she occupies exclusively, and the owner of residential property may exercise the right in any portion of the property not occupied exclusively by a renter. The terms of a lease or other agreement under which the residential property is occupied shall control in determining whether property is occupied exclusively by a renter.
4.	If another part of this section, including the substitution clause provisions of subsection 1.b, creates a right to erect or display a particular type of sign, this subsection does not in any way limit the exercise of that right, whether or not the sign is erected or displayed during an election campaign period.
 
5.	Exceptions
a.	No owner or renter may place a sign that is contrary to a size, shape, or placement regulation of this section if:
1.	Such regulation is necessary to ensure traffic or pedestrian safety, or
2.	The sign has an electrical, mechanical or audio auxiliary.

b.	This section shall not affect the County’s authority to enforce any regulation against a sign that is prohibited from being erected or displayed under Wis. Stat. §§ 13.02, 12.035, or 84.30.

f.	Prohibited Signs. All signs, other than those permitted herein, shall be prohibited, including but not limited to:

1.	Signs that fail to satisfy one or more of the applicable regulations set forth in subsections 1 and 2.
2.	Beacons, except those associated with emergencies and aircraft facilities.
3.	Bench signs.
4.	Bus shelter signs.
5.	Flying signs, such as blimps or kites, designed to be kept aloft by mechanical, wind, chemical or hot air means that are attached to the property, ground or other permanent structure.
6.	Inflatable signs that are attached to the property, ground or other permanent structure, including but not limited to balloons.
7.	Signs and components and elements of faces of signs that move, shimmer, or contain reflective devices.
8.	Signs which emit any odor, noise or visible matter other than light.
9.	Signs painted directly on a building, fence, tree, stone or similar object, except those on windows or buildings as allowed in subsections 3.a and 3.b.5.
10.	Off-premise signs, except as allowed in subsections 1.e, 3.d and 4.a.
11.	Pornographic signs.
12.	Portable signs.
13.	Protruding Building signs and Perpendicular Building signs except as allowed in subsections 3.b.5.f.2 and 5.
14.	Roof signs.
15.	Signs on utility poles.
16.	No advertising message or sign shall be affixed to any transmission facility.
17.	A vehicle used as a sign or as the base for a sign where the primary purpose of the vehicle in that location is its use as a sign.

2.	Standards

a.	Placement Standards
1.	Signs shall not be placed on any property without the property owner's written approval.
2.	Building signs shall be placed below the roof line.
3.	No person shall place a sign which will obstruct or interfere with a driver's or pedestrian's ability to see a road, highway, traffic sign, signal, railway crossing, crossroad or crosswalk. No sign or its structural components shall be erected or temporarily placed within the vision triangle of a road or highway.
4.	Double faced signs shall be placed back-to-back (parallel) with not more than 18 inches between facings.

b.	Dimensional Standards
1.	Every portion of any sign and its structural components and mounting devices must meet the specified
setbacks.
2.	Signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from any right-of-way.
3.	Signs shall be set back at least 20 feet from all side and rear yard lot lines.
4.	Signs over 100 square feet shall be at least 500 feet from any preexisting residence or residential district.
5.	Freestanding sign(s) shall be separated from other structures by a minimum of 10 feet, measured from edge of roof overhang to sign.
 
6.	The maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be 20 feet above the average elevation at the site of the sign.
7.	Sign area or size will be measured by the smallest square, rectangle or combination thereof which will encompass the entire sign, including the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. It will not include the base, apron, supports, structural members, framework, poles, roof, embellishments or decorative base when such area meets the other regulations of this Section.
8.	Multi-faced signs shall not exceed 2 times the allowed square footage of single-faced signs.

c.	Illumination Standards
1.	Externally illuminated signs shall have a shielded light source which is downward directed.
2.	Illuminated signs shall be designed so as not to direct any light or produce glare onto adjacent properties or toward navigable waters.
3.	The County may specify the hours a sign may be illuminated and limit its brightness while illuminated. The hours of illumination or brightness limitations may be established at any time, including during the life of the sign.
4.	The lighted portions of an auxiliary canopy shall be backlit and considered sign area, which will be limited by the wall sign regulations of the underlying zoning district.
5.	Signs and sign components and elements of faces of signs shall not flash, move, travel or use animation.
6.	Unless a sign’s only illumination is external and uncolored, the following additional regulations shall also apply to that sign:
a.	No illuminated off-premises sign which changes in color or intensity of artificial light at any time while the sign is illuminated shall be permitted.
b.	No illuminated on-premises sign which changes in color or intensity of artificial light at any time while the sign is illuminated shall be permitted.
c.	A sign that regularly or automatically ceases illumination for the purpose of causing the color or intensity to have changed when illumination resumes shall fall within the scope of the prohibitions of subsections a and b above.
d.	The scope of subsection 6's prohibitions include, but are not limited to, any sign face that includes a video display, LED lights that change in color or intensity, ‘digital ink,’ and any other method or technology that causes the sign face to present a series of two or more images or displays.

d.	Construction & Maintenance Standards

1.	All signs, supports and accessories and construction shall meet applicable State of Wisconsin building codes and the Uniform Sign Code and the International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, to ensure that the signs and their construction are structurally sound and safe.
2.	Sign display surfaces shall be properly coated or covered, attached and maintained.
3.	All signs using electric power shall have a cutoff switch on the outside of the sign and on the outside of the building or structure to which the sign is attached.
4.	All signs, supports and accessories shall be maintained in good repair.
5.	When any use is discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days, all signs and sign supports relating to that use shall be removed.
6.	Signs that are in structural disrepair or damaged and are left without repair for 60 consecutive days shall be removed.

e.	Sign Maintenance & Repair
1.	Signs and their structural components may be maintained or repaired with a land use permit for sign maintenance and repair, provided there is no enlargement or alteration to the sign, mounting device(s) or structural components of the sign.
 
2.	A permit is not required if the only change is to a sign's message or copy, provided there is no enlargement or alteration to the sign or structural components of the sign. This does not relieve the owner of the need to comply with every applicable legal requirement other than the duty to obtain a permit.

f.	Overlay Districts and Use Regulations
1.	Signs in the overlay districts or in Use Regulations are allowed subject to the standards and permitting requirements of the underlying zoning district.
2.	An On-Premise Sign for an Adult Establishment under § 15.310 is allowed subject to the standards of the underlying zoning district, and a land use permit is required for all permanent signs.
3.	An On-Premise Sign in the Shoreland Overlay Districts under § 15.260 is allowed subject to the following additional standards:
a.	A land use permit for signage is required for all permanent signs.
b.	Any sign visible from the water shall be set back 75 feet from the Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM).
c.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 32 square feet.

4.	An On-Premise Sign in the Lower St. Croix Riverway Overlay District § 15.265 is allowed, subject to the following additional standards:
a.	A land use permit for signage is required for all permanent signs.
b.	Either:
1.	The sign must be approved by State or local government and be necessary for public health or safety, or
2.	The sign must be used only to indicate areas that are available or not available for public use; or
3.	The sign must not be visible from the river and must be legally allowed or permitted in the underlying zoning district.

5.	An On-Premise Sign in the Floodplain Overlay District (§ 15.270) is allowed subject to the following additional standards:

	a.	A land use permit for signage is required for all permanent signs.
	b.	Any sign in the Floodway District shall meet the standards of §§ 15.270.4, 5, 6 and 9.


3.	c.

Sign Types	Any sign in the Floodfringe District shall meet the standards of §§ 15.270.4, 5, 7 and 9.
a.	Signs Permitted By Zoning District. The following tables identify the signs allowed in each zoning district, and the circumstances in which certain types of signs are permitted if those signs are not prohibited as set forth in subsection 1.f. above, satisfy all other applicable regulations set forth in subsections 1 and 2 and satisfy the specific requirements that are identified by sign type in subsections 3.b, c and d below.

Table 15.380.1
Permanent Signs Permitted By Zoning District
Sign Type
 

Zoning District
 

On-Premise Freestanding
 

On-Premise Building
 

On-Premise Area or Neighborhood
 

On-Premise Agricultural
 

On-Premise Home Occupation
 
Additional Standards May Apply
 
R-2, R-3		A/LUP		N	LUP		A	A	Yes AG-1		A/LUP		LUP		N		A	A	Yes AG-2		A/LUP		LUP		N		A	A	Yes R-1	A/LUP	N	LUP	A		A	Yes CON		A/LUP		N	N	N	N	Yes
C-1, C-2, C-3	LUP	LUP	LUP	N	N	Yes
I-1, I-2	LUP	LUP	LUP	N	N	Yes


Key:
 
A = Allowed without permit but subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this section. LUP = Land use permit for signs required but subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this section.
A/LUP = Either allowed without a land use permit or allowed with a land use permit subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this section.
N = Not permitted



 




Sign Type
 
Table 15.380.2 Permanent Sign Standards
 



Standard
 





Additional
 
Number	Size	Height	Type	Permit
 
Standards
 
On-Premise Residential	1/Lot or
Parcel
 

6 sf	6'	Freestanding	A	Yes
 
On-Premise Nonresidential    1/Frontage	32 sf/sign
64 sf total
On-Premise Commercial    1/Frontage	80 sf/sign
120 sf total
On-Premise Industrial    1/Frontage	80 sf/sign
120 sf total
 

6'-12'	Monument	LUP*	Yes

20'	Freestanding	LUP*	Yes

20'	Freestanding	LUP*	Yes
 
On-Premise Building  Unlimited on
3 Faces
 
80 sf/face
240 sf total	N/A	Wall/Window	LUP	Yes
 
On-Premise Area or Neighborhood    1/Entrance	32 sf/sign	20'	Freestanding	LUP	Yes
 
On-Premise Agricultural    1/Frontage	32 sf/sign
64 sf total
 

20'	Freestanding	A	Yes
 
On-Premise Home Occupation	1/Lot or
Parcel
 
2 sf/sign minor
6 sf/sign major
 

6'	Freestanding		A LUP*
 

Yes
 
 	Figure 15.380.1 Wall Sign Area Calculation 	










































Key:
A = Allowed without permit but subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this section. LUP = Land use permit for signs required but subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of
this section.

LUP* = These uses may also require a Conditional Use Permit

 




Sign Type
 
Table 15.380.3 Temporary Sign Standards
Standard
 

On-Premise Construction On-Premise Development
On-Premise Real Estate

On-Premise Employment


Key:
 
A = Allowed without permit but subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this section.

b.	Permanent On-premise Signs

1.	Permanent on-premise signs that are not prohibited as defined in subsection 1.f. above are permitted subject to the standards in this section, if those signs satisfy all other applicable regulations set forth in subsection 2, and standards specific to the zoning district in which they are located as set forth in subsection 3.a. and below.
2.	An On-Premise Sign is allowed on residential property in the AG-1 AG-2, R-1, R-2, R-3 and CON zoning districts subject to the following additional standards:
a.	No permit is required.
b.	One sign per lot or parcel.
c.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 6 square feet.
d.	Maximum height shall be 6 feet.
e.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
f.	Any such sign shall not be illuminated.

3.	An On-Premise Sign is allowed on property used for nonresidential uses legally allowed or permitted in the AG-1, AG-2, R-1, R-2, R-3 and CON zoning districts subject to the following additional standards:
a.	A land use permit for signage is required.
b.	One sign per road or highway frontage.
c.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 32 square feet per sign.
d.	Any such sign area shall not exceed 64 square feet in aggregate.
e.	Maximum height shall be 6 feet in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts and 12 feet in the AG-1, AG-2 and Conservancy zoning districts.
f.	Any such sign shall be a monument design.

4.	An On-Premise Sign is allowed in the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts subject to the following additional standards:
a.	A land use permit for signage is required.
b.	One sign per road or highway frontage.
c.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 80 square feet per sign.
d.	Any such sign area shall not exceed 120 square feet in aggregate.
e.	Maximum height shall be 20 feet.
f.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.

5.	An On-Premise Building Sign on a building used for agricultural, commercial or industrial purposes is allowed subject to the following additional standards:
a.	A land use permit for signage is required.
b.	Any number of signs may be installed on a building wall or window.
c.	The total area of all building signs on any face shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the façade, including wall and window, with a maximum allowable sign area of 80 square feet per face and 240 square feet in total.
d.	The allowable area of building signs for multi-tenant buildings with individual entrances from the outside shall be calculated based on the exterior wall/window area of the space the tenant occupies. Each tenant frontage is considered a separate wall/window.
e.	Auxiliary canopies are allowed building signs based on the surface area of the canopy (vertical surface below the roof line).
f.	Location.
1.	Building signs may be placed on not more than three walls/windows of rectangular shaped structures or not more than 75% of the major walls/windows on non-rectangular shaped structures.
 
2.	Signs may be attached flat against or pinned away from a building wall/window, but the sign face shall not extend or protrude more than 6 inches from the wall/window.
3.	Signs may be attached to the facade of a building, but shall not extend above the roof line.
4.	Signs may be on a building canopy, awning or marquee. Such sign will be considered a building sign on the wall, canopy, marquee or awning on which it is attached.
5.	Signs may be perpendicular to a building wall but the sign face shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall.

6.	An Area or Neighborhood Sign on property used for residential, commercial or industrial uses is considered an On-Premise Sign under this section is allowed subject to the following additional standards:

a.	A land use permit for signs is required.
b.	No more than one sign is allowed for every road or highway entrance to a development.
c.	The maximum area of any such sign shall be 32 square feet per sign.
d.	Any such sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from the right-of-way but no further than 20 feet from the right-of-way, unless incorporated into a county-approved entrance design.
e.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
f.	Any such sign shall not be internally lighted.

7.	A sign on property on which agricultural products are legally grown and legally offered for sale is considered an On-Premise Sign under this section if it does no more than draw attention to a product legally offered on the premises, and is allowed subject to the following additional standards:
a.	One sign per road or highway frontage.
b.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 32 square feet per sign.
c.	Maximum cumulative sign area per sale location shall be 64 square feet.
d.	Maximum height shall be 20 feet.
e.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
f.	Any such sign shall not be illuminated.
g.	Agricultural products shall be produced on the site.
h.	Sign(s) for Seasonal Roadside Stands shall be placed when products are available.

8.	A sign on property on which a Minor or Major Home Occupation within the meaning of § 15.345 is lawfully taking place is considered an on-premises sign under this section if it does no more than draw attention to a product or service lawfully offered on the premises, and is allowed subject to the following additional standards:
a.	One sign per home occupation, exterior or interior visible from the outside.
b.	Minor Home Occupation sign maximum area shall be 2 square feet.
c.	Major Home Occupation sign maximum area shall be 6 square feet.
d.	Maximum height shall be 6 feet.
e.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
f.	Any such sign shall not be illuminated.

9.	One additional On-Premise Sign shall be allowed in any zoning district subject to the following additional standards.
a.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 36 inches.
b.	Only one such sign is allowed for every parcel.
c.	Any such sign must be placed in one of the following three locations:
1.	On the front of the principal structure.
2.	On the side of an authorized United States Postal Service mailbox.
3.	On one post which measure no more than 48 inches in height and 4 inches in width.
 
10.	Two additional Freestanding On-Premise Signs shall be allowed on a parcel that includes a drive-through window, subject to the following additional standards:

a.	One sign may only be located within 6 feet of a lot line and within 6 feet of a curb cut, with a maximum area of 8 square feet.
b.	Any second sign shall be facing the drive-through lane, with a maximum area of 30 square feet.

11.	No on-premise sign may be placed without first obtaining the property owner's permission.

c.	Temporary On-premise Signs
1.	Any sign that is authorized under this subsection because of the status or activity occurring on the parcel, but that remains in place after the status or activity that permitted its use is completed, may not remain in place unless it constitutes or becomes a lawful Permanent On-Premise Sign under the previous subsection, and a land use permit for that sign is obtained for that use.
2.	The following temporary signs are permitted to be placed on the lot or parcel to which they refer without a land use permit for signs, subject to the applicable standards:
a.	A Temporary On-Premise Sign is allowed on residential property in the Residence, AG-1 AG-2, R-1, and CON zoning districts subject to the following additional standards:
1.	No permit is required.
2.	Maximum area shall be 6 square feet.
3.	The maximum area of 6 feet may be used for one sign or divided among several otherwise compliant signs, so long as the total amount of area does not exceed 6 square feet.
4.	Maximum height shall be 6 feet.
5.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
6.	Any such sign shall not be illuminated.

b.	Up to 2 additional Temporary On- Premise Signs shall be allowed on a parcel where the principal structure
is currently undergoing construction, subject to the following additional standards:
1.	Any such sign area shall not exceed 80 square feet in aggregate.
2.	Maximum height shall be 12 feet.
3.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
4.	Any such sign shall be removed within 7 days of when construction is completed.

c.	An additional Temporary On-Premise Sign erected on a non-residential development project, or erected on a residential development project at the time that the development includes 10 or more dwelling units for sale or lease, is allowed in any zoning district subject to the following additional standards:
1.	One sign per road or highway frontage for each project.
2.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 64 square feet.
3.	Maximum height shall be 12 feet.
4.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
5.	A sign shall be at least 200 feet from any pre-existing residence.
6.	A sign shall not be installed until construction has started or the project is approved by the County.
7.	Sign shall be removed when the project is 80% completed, sold or leased.

d.	An additional Temporary On-Premise Real Estate sign on a parcel that is currently for sale or rent is allowed in any zoning district subject to the following additional standards:
1.	One sign per road or highway frontage.
2.	For residential property, the maximum sign area shall be 6 square feet and maximum sign height shall be 6 feet.
3.	For residential property, the maximum sign area for a parcel including a model home shall be 32 square feet and the maximum sign height shall be 12 feet.
4.	For non-residential property, the maximum sign area shall be 32 square feet and maximum sign height shall be 12 feet.
 
5.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
6.	Any such sign shall be removed within 7 days following the sale or lease of the property.

e.	An additional Temporary On-Premise Sign on non-residential property on a parcel occupied by a workplace for which one or more positions of employment are open is allowed subject to the following additional standards:
1.	One sign per road or highway frontage.
2.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 6 square feet.
3.	Maximum height shall be 6 feet.
4.	Any such sign shall be removed when all positions of employment on the property have been filled.

3.	No on-premise sign may be placed without first obtaining the property owner's permission.

d.	Temporary Off-premise Signs
1.	A Temporary Off-Premise Sign is allowed, without a permit, in any zoning district, subject to the following additional standards.

a.	The Sign may remain in place for no more than 4 continuous days, and then must be removed.
b.	No off-premise sign may be placed without first obtaining the property owner's permission.
c.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 6 square feet.
d.	Maximum height shall be 6 feet.
e.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
f.	Signs shall be placed outside and may abut the right-of-way.
g.	If the sign was manufactured to suit the design directions of a purchaser in bulk, no more than 5 such signs may be posted in the County at any one time, and only in full compliance with the remainder of this Section.
h.	A person who places one or more Signs pursuant to this subsection and fails to remove the Sign or Signs after more than 4 days have passed since it was posted, and a 4-day grace period has passed, is subject to a civil fine under Chapter 1 Citation Ordinance of the St. Croix County Code of Ordinances.

2.	A Temporary Off-Premise Sign is allowed to remain in place for more than 4 continuous days only if a permit is obtained before the expiration of the 4-day period, and subject to the following additional standards:
a.	The Sign may remain in place for no more than 4 continuous weeks, and then must be removed.
b.	After the expiration of the 4-week period, the sign may not be posted unless a new permit is sought and obtained.
c.	No off-premise sign may be placed without first obtaining the property owner's permission.
d.	Maximum area of any such sign shall be 6 square feet.
e.	Maximum height shall be 6 feet.
f.	Any such sign shall be a freestanding design.
g.	Signs shall be placed outside and may abut the right-of-way.
h.	If the sign was manufactured to suit the design directions of a purchaser in bulk, no more than five such signs may be posted in the County at any one time, and only in full compliance with the remainder of this Section.
i.	A person who places one or more Signs pursuant to this subsection and fails to remove the Sign or Signs after more than 4 continuous weeks have passed, and a 4 day grace period has also passed, is subject to a civil fine under Chapter 1 Citation Ordinance of the St. Croix County Code of Ordinances.

4.	Administration

a.	Nonconforming Signs

1.	Nonconforming permanent freestanding signs lawfully existing on July 1, 2007 shall be allowed to continue in use, but shall not be altered other than to change the message relocated, added to, or repaired in excess of 50% of the assessed value of the sign, without being brought into compliance with this section.
 
2.	Nonconforming permanent building signs lawfully existing on July 1, 2007 shall be allowed to continue in use, and may be repaired provided the repair does not increase the nonconforming aspect of the sign, but shall not otherwise be altered other than to change the message, relocated, or added to, without being brought into compliance with this section.
3.	After a nonconforming sign has been removed, it shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign.
4.	If a nonconforming permanent sign's use is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the nonconforming sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with this section within 60 days of notification by the Zoning Administrator.

b.	Permit Required. A land use permit for signage is required prior to the improvement, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement or alteration of any sign, structural component or mounting device unless otherwise provided by this section.
c.	Land Use Permit For Signs. A properly completed application for a land use permit for signs shall be made to the Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the County. The information required by § 15.590 shall be provided.
d.	Permit Decision & Appeal Process
1.	A land use permit for signs applicant or permit holder may appeal a determination or an order. Appeal procedures are established in § 15.560.
2.	When a permit of any kind is required for a sign, the Zoning Administrator shall deny, approve with conditions, or approve without conditions such permit in an expedited manner no more than 30 days from the receipt of a complete application for such a permit, including the applicable fee.
a.	If the permit is denied or approved with conditions, the County shall prepare a written decision within 10 days of its decision, stating a reason or reasons for the action and describing the applicant’s appeal rights under § 15.560 and provide it to the applicant.
b.	When the Board of Adjustment receives an appeal from the denial or approval with conditions of a permit required for a sign, the Board shall arrive at a decision on such an appeal no more than 90 days from the receipt of a complete application for such an appeal, including the applicable fee.
c.	If the appeal is denied or approved with conditions, the County shall prepare a written decision within 10 days of its decision, stating a reason or reasons for the action and provide it to the applicant.

3.	When a permit of any kind is required for a sign, and the permit application or permit appeal demonstrates that the sign would comply with all applicable requirements of this section, the permit application or permit appeal shall not be denied.

e.	Expiration
1.	Sign maintenance or construction authorized by a land use permit for signs issued under this section shall commence within 1 year from the date of approval and be substantially completed or implemented within 2 years, after which time the permit expires.
2.	Prior to expiration of a permit, applicants can request extensions of up to 6 months from the Zoning Administrator.
3.	The total time granted for extensions shall not exceed 1 year.

f.	Permit Revocation. Where the terms or conditions on any land use permit for signage are violated, the permit may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator. The Board of Adjustment may revoke a conditional use permit.

15.385 Solar Energy 	

Purpose: This section provides the standards and Procedures for solar energy. This section ensures that any proposed solar energy system or solar collector complies with applicable provisions of Wis. Stat. § 66.0401-66.0403 and this section.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to solar collectors and solar energy systems.

Note: Solar energy systems are a conditional use in any district (see § 15.285, Use Table).

2.	Limits on Restrictions. The Board of Adjustment shall review a conditional use permit application for a solar energy system and apply the criteria set forth in subsection a through c below in lieu of the criteria set out in § 15.550. No
 
restriction shall be placed, either directly or in effect, on the installation or use of a solar energy system, unless the restriction satisfies one of the following conditions:
a.	Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
b.	Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency.
c.	Allows for an alternative system of comparable cost and efficiency.

3.	Procedures. To the extent not inconsistent with state law, conditional uses shall be processed as provided in § 15.550.

15.390 Temporary Structures and Uses 	
1.

Temporary Structures and Uses

2.	Temporary Residential Uses.
a.	Applicability. This section applies to the occupancy of a vehicle for residential purposes, as provided below. This subsection supersedes any contrary provisions of this Chapter.
b.	Standards
1.	Generally. No person shall place, occupy or use a trailer, van, mobile home, recreational vehicle, tent, bus, truck, automobile or similar apparatus for residential purposes, temporary or permanent, on any parcel not having a legal and occupied principal structure other than in areas specifically zoned and approved for that occupancy.
2.	Temporary Placement
a.	The owner of a parcel who holds a valid building permit and sanitary permit for construction of a principal structure may apply for and obtain approval by a Land Use Permit, for temporary placement and occupancy of a travel trailer or manufactured home during construction on condition of connecting the unit to the use of a legal sanitary system.
b.	The Zoning Office shall send a copy of the Land Use Permit to the town wherein the lot is located.
c.	All residential occupancy of the travel trailer or manufactured home shall cease when the principal home is capable of occupancy. Additionally, when the residence becomes occupied, the manufactured home shall be removed from the property.
d.	Temporary occupancy shall not exceed 1 year, unless an extension is granted by the St. Croix County zoning office.

3.	Temporary Signs. Refer to § 15.380.

15.395	Wind Energy Systems 	

Purpose: This section provides the standards and Procedures to issue conditional use permits for wind energy systems. This section ensures that any proposed wind energy system complies with applicable provisions of Wisconsin Administrative Code PSC 128, and this section.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to wind energy systems. Wind energy systems are a conditional use in any district
(see § 15.285, Use Table).
2.	Limits on Restrictions. The Board of Adjustment shall review a conditional use permit application for a wind energy system and apply the criteria set forth in subsection a through c below in lieu of the criteria set out in § 15.550. No restriction shall be placed, either directly or in effect, on the installation or use of a wind energy system, unless the restriction satisfies one of the following conditions:

a.	Serves to preserve or protect the public health or safety.
b.	Does not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency.
c.	Allows for an alternative system of comparable cost and efficiency.

3.	Standards
a.	The County will apply Wis. Stat. § 66.0401 and Wisconsin Administrative Code PSC 128 when evaluating conditional use permit applications under this section.
 
b.	All provisions of Wisconsin Administrative Code PSC 128 are hereby adopted and by reference made part of this ordinance as if fully set forth herein. Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of Wisconsin Administrative Code PSC 128 are intended to be made part of this ordinance.
c.	The applicant shall comply with any restrictions established for public use airports or heliports under Wis. Stat. §§
114.135 or 114.136. If no such restrictions are effective, wind turbine height and setback distances shall comply with the Federal Aviation Administration obstruction standards in 14 CFR Part 77.

4.	Procedures. To the extent not inconsistent with state law, conditional uses shall be processed as provided in § 15.550.

15.396	To 15.399 Reserved. 	

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Contents:
15.400 General Provisions
15.405 Access Management & Driveways
15.410 Building Height
15.415 Grading and Land Disturbance
15.420 Screening, Landscaping & Tree Preservation
15.425 Lot Development
15.430 Parking and Loading
15.431 To 15.499 Reserved.

15.400	General Provisions 	

Purpose: this Subchapter establishes development standards that apply to land uses and zoning permit applications that are subject to this Chapter. These standards:

•	implement the Comprehensive Plan;
•	implement the purposes established for the zoning regulations;
•	ensure that new development, structures, and land uses mitigate their impacts on affected neighborhoods, the natural environment, and affected infrastructure where indicated in the applicable standard; and

•	provide  uniform  methods  for  the  application  of  the  dimensional,  site  design,  civic  space,  landscaping,  and infrastructure standards established in this Chapter.
1.	Applicability. This Article applies to:
a.	all zoning districts, and
b.	unless otherwise provided, any application for a rezoning, conditional use permit, land use permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy.

2.	Modification.

a.	The County Board may modify any provision of this Article as a condition of rezoning to any “PD” (Planned
Development) district.

b.	The Zoning Administrator may modify any other provision of this Article where specifically authorized.

c.	A modification is permitted only if it:

1.	Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and

2.	Is consistent with the public interest, and

3.	Will not place an unnecessary burden on the County or surrounding properties.

15.405 Access Management & Driveways 	
 
Purpose. This section promotes the public safety, welfare and convenience by easing congestion on the public roads, by controlling access to public roads, and by establishing setbacks from roads and road rights-of-way.

1.	Applicability
a.	This section applies to all land abutting all freeways and expressways, principal arterials, minor arterials, major collectors, minor collectors, subcollectors and access roads.
b.	Access points shall not exceed the number allowed in this section along any class of road.
c.	Structures and signs that are permitted adjacent to state and federal highways may also require permits from Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT).
d.	This section does not apply to the portion of a road located on a city, village or other county boundary.
e.	The Zoning Administrator will require approval from WisDOT for setbacks, road connection and driveway access to state and federal highways, and development on land that adjoins state and federal highways. WisDOT may require additional standards not identified in this ordinance.
f.	The Zoning Administrator will require approval from the St. Croix County Highway Department for setbacks, road connection and driveway access to county highways, and development on land that is adjoining county highways. The County Highway Commissioner may require additional standards not identified in this ordinance.
g.	The minimum standards in this section apply to all roads, unless the town with jurisdiction establishes its own standards for town roads.

2.	Measurements. All distances in this section are measured horizontally, unless otherwise indicated.

3.	Road Classification System. This section classifies roads for purposes of applying the standards in this section.
a.	Determination of Road Classification
1.	Roads are classified based on many factors, including speed and volume of traffic. Road classifications fall into a 4-category hierarchy. The classifications, in descending order, are arterial, collector, subcollector and access roads (see subsection b and Figure 15.405.1, below).
2.	The functional/jurisdictional classification of existing roads are located on the St. Croix County Official Functional Classification Road Map available from the Community Development Department, Highway Department, or WisDOT.
3.	The Wisconsin Department of Transportation (WisDOT) and the St. Croix County Highway Department determine arterial and major and minor collector road status on their respective systems. Their current functional classification applies to this section.
4.	The St. Croix County Community Development Department, in conjunction with the appropriate municipal jurisdiction, determines subcollector and access roads.
5.	Residential roads may fall into any of these classifications except arterials.

b.	Description of Functional Classifications. The functional descriptions of each of these classifications follow:
1.	Arterials. Arterials provide for rapid speed and movement of high volumes of traffic between areas. An arterial road should have no private accesses. Its function is to conduct traffic between communities and activity centers and to connect communities to major state and interstate highways. There are two types of arterials, principal arterials and minor arterials (see below).
a.	Principal arterials. Principal arterials are those highway corridors that have trip length and travel density characteristics of an interstate or interregional nature. Principal arterials, in general, serve all urban areas greater than 5,000 population and may include: interstate highways, freeways, expressways, four-lane divided highways and two-lane highways.
b.	Minor arterials. Minor arterials are those highways, which in combination with principal arterials, serve cities, communities and other major traffic generators providing intra-regional and inter-area travels. Minor arterials may include four-lane divided highways, two-lane highways and county trunk highways.

2.	Collectors. Collectors provide for moderate speed and movement of medium volumes of traffic and distribute traffic from arterial roads. There are two types of collector roads, major collectors and minor collectors (see below). As the principal road within residential or commercial areas, collectors carry relatively high traffic volumes and convey traffic from arterial roads to lower-order roads. Because a collector’s function is to
 
promote the free flow of traffic, the roads should not have parking or private residential access. A collector’s
secondary function is to serve abutting land uses.
a.	Major collectors. Major collectors provide service to moderate sized communities and other intra-area traffic generators and link those generators to larger population centers and higher function highways.
b.	Minor collectors. Minor collectors provide service to remaining smaller communities and tie local traffic generators with the rural surrounding area. Minor collectors are spaced consistent with population density to collect traffic and bring all developed areas within a reasonable distance of a higher-order road.

3.	Subcollectors. Subcollectors connect with access roads and convey traffic to major and minor collectors.
Like an access road, a subcollector provides frontage and access to residential lots but also carries some through traffic to access roads. Subcollectors include all roads not identified as major or minor arterials, major or minor collectors or access roads. Generally, subcollectors are all town roads in the original town road grid
system, and town roads identified as through roads or subcollectors on a town comprehensive plan or official
map. Some roads in a subdivision may be subcollectors instead of access roads if the two ends of the road extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and one end of the road eventually connects to another subcollector or higher order road.
4.	Access roads. Access roads are designed to conduct traffic between individual parcels or lots and higher order roads. Access roads provide for low speed and low volumes of traffic and convey traffic to subcollector, collector and arterial roads. As the lowest-order road in the hierarchy, the access road usually carries little through traffic and includes short roads, cul-de-sacs and courts. Access roads include local roads within conventional subdivisions, local roads within Conservation Design Development subdivisions, cul-de-sacs, loop roads, lakeshore roads that existed prior to 1974, and roads not otherwise classified and located in unincorporated hamlets (including Boardman, Burkhardt, Cylon, Emerald, Erin Corners, Forest, Hersey, Houlton, Huntington, Jewett, Johannesburg and New Centerville).
a.	Cul-de-sac roads. Roads that are closed at one end with turn-arounds not platted for extension.
b.	Loop roads. Loop roads are short, one-way through roads that turn back to the originating road.
c.	Temporary dead-end roads. Roads that terminate in a “T” turn-around and are platted for future extension.
d.	Private Roads. Roads located on private property and providing access to 3 or more properties.
 
Figure 15.405.1 Functional Classification System Diagram



































4.	Setbacks

a.	Setbacks from Roads or Highways
1.	No structure shall be located between the setback lines established by this section and the road right-of-way, except as provided in subsection c below.
2.	The setbacks established in Table 15.405.1 below do not apply to lots with platted setbacks shown on a recorded map. Lots with setbacks on the face of a recorded map must meet the setbacks as shown in the recorded plat.
3.	Road or Highway Setbacks shall meet the following requirements.

Table 15.405.1 Road or Highway Setback Requirements
Functional Classification	Setback from Right-of-Way
Freeways & Expressways	50 feet
Principal and Minor Arterials	50 feet
Major and Minor Collectors	50 feet
Subcollectors	50 feet
Access Roads	50 feet
One-Way Access Roads	50 feet
Permanent Cul-de-sacs	50 feet
Loop Roads	50 feet
Access, One-Way, Cul-de-sacs and Loop Roads in Conservation Design Development	35 feet
Private road serving 3 or more parcels	83 feet from the centerline

b.	Average Setbacks
1.	This subsection applies to buildings that are proposed to be erected or moved between existing buildings that have setback lines less that those established by this section and were lawfully constructed.
 
2.	The Zoning Administrator may issue a permit for the proposed building if its setback is at least the average of the setbacks of the nearest adjoining existing buildings within 150' on either side of the locations of the proposed building. If no building exists on the adjoining lot, the setback line shall be used.



Figure 15.405.2 Setback Averaging






























c.	Structures Permitted Within Setback Lines. Structures and signs may be placed between the setback line and the right-of-way on all highways and roads if:
1.	The Zoning Administrator, in conjunction with the St. Croix County Highway Department, determines that the
road’s line of sight is not impaired, and
2.	The structure is:
a.	An open fence.
b.	A parking lot located at least 20 feet from the established highway or road right-of-way.
c.	A telecommunication or power transmission pole or line, or a microwave radio relay structure (this includes all appurtenances thereto that are readily removable as a unit, including public utility equipment housing or structures).
d.	A well, septic tank, or drainfield dispersal cell.
e.	A landscaping, retaining wall or utility structure that does not obstruct the line of sight.
f.	A nonpermanent structure less than 35 square feet in area.
g.	A frontage or service road constructed according to plans approved by the jurisdiction having authority over the highway or road.
h.	A sign, but only as allowed under (§ 15.380 Signs).

5.	Intersection Visibility (Vision Triangle)

a.	The vision triangle is bounded by the highway or road edge of roadway and a line connecting points on the highway edge of roadway as shown in Figure 15.405.3.

b.	A vision triangle is established for each quadrant of every uncontrolled or yield-controlled public highway or road intersection.
 
c.	No structure shall be located within a vision triangle.

 	Figure 15.405.3 	

























d.	Vision triangles shall meet the standards in Table 15.405.2:

Table 15.405.2 Vision Triangle Standards
	Posted Speed Limit
	60 mph or greater	55 mph	50 or 45 mph	40 mph or less
Major Intersecting Highway or Road, Distance "A"	600 feet	500 feet	400 feet	300 feet
Minor Intersecting Highway or Road, Distance "B"	175 feet	160 feet	150 feet	120 feet

Major intersecting highway or road = Through traffic, which does not stop at the intersection. Minor intersecting highway or road = Controlled traffic, which stops at the intersection.
e.	A visual triangle is established in each quadrant of an at grade intersections of a road with a railroad. Each vision triangle is established by a supplementary setback line, which is a straight line connecting points located on the
setback lines along the road and the railroad right-of-way lines and 100 feet back from the intersection of the road setback lines and the railroad right- of-way.

f.	No building, fence, structure, vegetation or any other object preventing a line of sight through a vision triangle may be placed within a vision triangle.

g.	The vision triangle for an intersection may be expanded by the Zoning Administrator to fit site conditions with the approval of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or the St. Croix County Highway Department.

4.	Road Access and Driveway Separation

a.	No parcel may be improved for residential, commercial or industrial use unless it has direct access to a public roadway or permanent easement access to a public roadway.

b.	All driveway accesses installed, altered, changed, replaced or extended shall meet the following requirements:

1.	Driveway access openings for vehicular ingress and egress shall not exceed 30 feet at the right-of-way line and 50 feet at the roadway surface.

2.	Applicants are advised that driveway access to all roads under state and federal jurisdiction require WisDOT approval. [Note: WisDOT may require greater distances than those in the charts below.]
 
3.	Driveway access to all roads under county jurisdiction must be approved by St. Croix County Highway Department. Greater distances than those in the charts below may be required or lesser distances than those in the charts below may be allowed pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes § 86.07 and the WisDOT Facilities Development Manual.

4.	All driveway accesses must meet the minimum standards in Table 15.405.3. All distances shall be measured from the centerline to the centerline, unless otherwise noted.

Table 15.405.3 Driveway Separation for Intersecting Highways and Roads
Minimum Distance from Centerline for Driveways on the Following
 
Functional Classification of
 
Highways or Roads:
 

All
 
Intersecting Road or Highway
 
Freeways & Expressways
 
Principal & Minor Arterials
 
Major & Minor Collectors
 

Subcollector
 

Access Roads
 
Freeways, Expressways & Ramp Termini	No Access Allowed	1000 feet	1000 feet	1000 feet	1000 feet Principal & Minor Arterials	No Access Allowed	500 feet		500 feet	500 feet	500 feet
Major & Minor Collectors	No Access Allowed	500 feet	500 feet	500 feet	200 feet
Subcollectors	No Access Allowed	500 feet	500 feet	200 feet	200 feet
Access Roads	No Access Allowed	500 feet	500 feet	200 feet	150 feet Subcollectors or Access Roads where zoning allows
residential lots narrower than 150 feet	No Access Allowed	500 feet	500 feet	200 feet	50 feet
 
 	Figure 15.405.4 Driveway Separation from Intersecting Highways and Roads (Diagram Not To Scale) 	










































Table 15.405.4 Driveway Access Separation Requirements
Functional Classification	Minimum Distance Between Driveways, Measured from Centerline to Centerline
Freeways & Expressways	N/A No Direct Private Access
Principal & Minor Arterials	N/A Very Limited Private Access
Major & Minor Collectors	500 feet Very Limited Private Access
Subcollectors	200 feet Limited Private Access Subcollectors within Conservation Design
Development	50 feet Limited Private Access
Minimum Distance Between Driveways, Measured from the Edge of the Surface Mat to the Lot Line
Two-Way Access Roads	10 feet
One-Way Access Roads	10 feet
Bulb of a Cul-de-sac	5 feet
Curve of a Loop Road	5 feet

5.	Where there are at least 2 lots or parcels along a road with insufficient frontage to meet minimum access driveway separations, a service road of not less than 50 feet of right-of-way shall be provided along the entire frontage of each lot or parcel.

6.	Where crossovers in divided road or highway medians have been established, access driveways shall be placed directly opposite them.
 
7.	Driveway access to state or federal highways must be approved by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation.

8.	Driveway access to county highways must be approved by the St. Croix County Highway Department before the Zoning Administrator will consider and approve any request for highway access.

9.	The Zoning Administrator may approve an alternative driveway access separation distance for an individual driveway on previously platted lots or to fit site conditions and engineering standards based upon the recommendation of the Wisconsin Department of Transportation or the St. Croix County Highway Department.

10.	Commercial and industrial land use lots or parcels shall not exceed 2 driveway accesses with a maximum
width of 35’.

11.	Residential land use lots or parcels shall have a maximum of one driveway access with a maximum width of
24’. A second driveway may be permitted subject to the following conditions:

a.	Access is desired to another portion of the parcel that is not reasonably accessible from the primary driveway due to site layout, topography or other conditions, and

b.	The controlling jurisdiction (State, County or Town) approves the driveway.

12.	Driveway accesses shall meet the following standards:

Table 15.405.5 Driveway Access Standards
Maximum grade At any point along the driveway	12%
Maximum grade within 50’ of the centerline of the intersecting road	2%
Radius of curvature (min) for deflections of at least 7º	100’ from centerline
surface/mat (min)	12’

13.	Where a lot or parcel fronts on two existing State or County highways, driveway access shall be from the lower functionally classified highway unless this section and other County ordinance standards cannot be met.

15.410 Building Height 	

Purpose: the zoning districts establish maximum heights for buildings and structures. This section describes how to measure building height and exemptions to height limitations.


1.	Measurement. Building height is the vertical distance from the average ground elevation to the highest point of a flat roof, to the deckline of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip or pitched roof. The average ground elevation shall be calculated with an accurate drawing of the proposed structure with finished grade contours and spot elevations at each of the four outermost corners of the structure; Add up the spot elevations and divide by four to calculate the average ground elevation.
2.	Exceptions

a.	The regulations of this Chapter relating to building or structure height and the size of yard and other open spaces
are subject to the following exceptions:
1.	Religious assemblies, schools and other public and quasi-public buildings may be erected to a height up to 60 feet or 5 stories if the required street, side and rear setbacks increase at least 1 foot for each additional foot of height above the height limit otherwise established for the district.
2.	Chimneys, cooling towers, church steeples or spires, cupolas, tanks, water towers, television antennas, microwave radio relay or broadcasting towers, masts or aerials, farm silos, barns and other farm structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances are exempt from the height regulations of this chapter and may be erected in accordance with other regulations or ordinances of the County, or of other jurisdictions such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
3.	The Shoreland Overlay (SO) and Lower St. Croix Riverway Overlay (SCR) districts have different structure height regulations.
 

 	Figure 15.410.1 - Roof Types 	
 
 	Figure 15.410.2 - Average Ground Elevation Calculation 	










































15.415 Grading and Land Disturbance 	

Purpose: this section establishes standards for grading to mitigate the impacts of development on water resources and
stormwater runoff, and to avoid erosion.

1.	Applicability

a.	This section applies to construction or land disturbance activities above the thresholds specified in this section.
b.	Slopes as described in this section are measured over a horizontal distance of 50 feet. The 50 foot segment will be selected by County staff to include any slope segment inclusive of the proposed disturbance, using a County- generated slope map.

2.	Standards and Prohibitions. All permitted construction or land disturbance activities subject to this section require:
a.	a land use permit, and
b.	an erosion and sediment control plan that incorporates Best Management Practices (BMPs) that meet or exceed the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) Stormwater Management Technical Standards.

[Note: refer to §15.590 (Submittal Requirements) for contents of erosion and sediment control plan.]

3.	Requirements and Prohibitions. The following  requirements or prohibitions apply to construction  or land disturbance activities indicated below:
 
Table 15.415.1 Grading and Land Disturbance Requirements
Slope / Type of Construction
 



Requirement
 


> 4,000 sf on 12-19.99%
slopes
 
> 20-24.9% Slopes or
Public improvements affecting slopes 25-
29.9%
 

slopes 25% and greater (other than public improvements)
public improvements on slopes 30% and greater
 


An approved Land Use Permit and Erosion Control Plan as
 

* = required | X = development prohibited
 
provided above	*	*	X
A stormwater management plan shall be submitted and shall
meet the performance standards described in Wisconsin	*	X
Administrative Code NR 151 Subchapter III, Non-Ag Performance
Standards.
The property owner shall execute and record an affidavit
describing the approved stormwater management plan and	*	X
maintenance requirements with the County Register of Deeds
within 30 days after construction is completed.
The affidavit shall alert subsequent purchasers of the land of the
maintenance requirements of the plans.	*	X
The property owner shall submit a copy of the affidavit along with a record drawing and photos of the stormwater
retention/detention devices and drainage ways to the Zoning	*	X
Administrator.
Construction may not proceed until the Zoning Administrator has
approved the plans.	*	X


15.420 Screening, Landscaping & Tree Preservation 	

Purpose: this section establishes specifications for planting and landscape areas. The County finds that this section promotes the public health, safety and general welfare by:

•	increasing compatibility with adjacent land uses by requiring a buffer or screen between uses;
•	minimizing the harmful impact of noise, dust, debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted or created by adjoining or nearby uses;
•	preserving scenic views and/or otherwise enhancing the rural landscape as seen from perimeter roads;
•	minimizing soil erosion;
•	reducing flood hazards and managing stormwater by providing leaf canopies that help reduce erosion caused by falling rain, porous surface areas where rain water lands and evaporates, and roots that take up water and create soil conditions that promote infiltration;
•	promoting ground and surface water stabilization and decreasing the adverse impact of the water table fluctuations caused by the removal of vegetation;
•	protecting air quality which is significantly affected by the natural clearing of the atmosphere by the trees through particulate matter interception and the release of oxygen into the atmosphere as a byproduct of photosynthesis, and by absorbing carbon dioxide and supplying oxygen;
•	reducing the effects of noise, glare, dust, and other objectionable activities generated by some land uses, including avoiding the increase in noise pollution created by the removal of buffer trees;
•	protecting existing vegetation from greater wind velocities by planting trees or avoiding the removal of buffer trees;
•	safeguarding and enhancing property values by promoting compatibility and avoiding the adverse aesthetic and ecological effects of tree removal;
•	stabilize the urban wildlife habitat and ecosystem balance;
•	buffering and screening adjacent properties;
 
•	promoting and improving the County’s image, charm and beauty, including the character of its neighborhoods and
commercial areas;
•	providing shade and reducing urban heat islands;
•	preserving the economic base attracted to the County by its natural beauty; and
•	promoting aesthetically pleasing developments that preserve the appearance and character of the community.

[Note: Subdivision plats are subject to the landscaping and screening requirements of Chapter 13.H.]

1.	Applicability

a.	This section applies :
1.	where landscaping is required by the applicable zoning district

[Note: The following zoning districts require landscaping: Residential (R-3 only), Commercial (C-1, C-2, C-3), and Industrial (I-1 and I-2)]

2.	to parking lots containing 5 or more parking spaces and located in or adjacent to residential districts R-2 or R-3.

3.	For Planned Development (PD), standards for landscaping, screening and buffering are established as a condition of rezoning. Unless the conditions provide a different standard, at least 15% of a PD site shall be landscaped in accordance with this section.

2.	Landscaping Plans. If this Section requires landscaping, the applicant shall provide a Landscaping Plan. [refer to
§15.590 (Submittal Requirements) for contents of erosion and sediment control plan.]

3.	Tree Protection Encouraged. Property owners are encouraged to protect and retain existing trees, shrubbery and grasses not located in rights-of way, drainageways, vision triangles, and the like, and to protect and preserve trees during construction.

4.	Alternative Requirements. The Zoning Administrator may approve alternative landscaping requirements if:

a.	the applicant preserves a unique native landscape such as a native prairie, oak savannah or woodland, and the decision maker determines that the native landscape has at least an equivalent area and durability as the landscaping normally required by this section, or

b.	the applicant provides alternative landscape treatments that have a buffering or screen capacity equal to or greater than required by this section, or

c.	the applicant demonstrates unique site constraints that inhibit compliance with this section and provides alternative landscape treatments appropriate to those constraints

5.	Required Landscaping

a.	Generally. Landscaping shall occupy the minimum percent of a lot or parcel as provided in the applicable zoning district. All of the buffer and parking lot landscaping required by this section shall be provided, even if those requirements exceed the minimum percentage required.

b.	Any required landscape area shall be planted with any combination of perennial plants, woody shrubs and/or trees, but excluding mowed turf grass. Required landscape areas shall be planted at a sufficient density of plants to achieve 80% ground coverage within 3 full growing seasons. The use of mulch or landscape stone is required in the first three years to prevent erosion and weed growth, and is encouraged thereafter.

c.	Civic Space Credits

1.	Qualifying Civic Space. The following civic space types are credited toward up to 10% of the landscaping required by this section:

a.	Bio-retention or rain gardens;

b.	Greenways;

c.	Pedestrian walkways;

d.	Plazas;
 
e.	Squares;

f.	Courtyards; and

g.	Greens.

2.	Minimum Specifications. To qualify for a landscaping credit, a civic space shall have a minimum total area of 300 square feet.

6.	Location and Design of Plantings

a.	Table 15.420.1 indicates required landscaping locations. Required landscaping locations (R) must be provided if those plantings exceed the minimum percentage required by this section. Optional landscaping locations (O) may include landscaping that is needed to meet the minimum percentage required, or landscaping that exceeds the percentage required.

b.	This section does not prohibit landscaping in other locations.

 
Table 15.420.1 Landscaping Location Location
 


Required (R) or Optional (O)
 
Road setback areas	R
Side and rear yards	O
Buffers (see subsection ***** below)	R
Parking Perimeter Landscaping	R
Parking Interior Landscaping	R


c.	Landscaping may overlap drainage and/or utility easements. Howerver, plantings shall not:

1.	impede the flow of water within a drainage easement, or

2.	obstruct any portion of an existing or dedicated public road or right-of-way.

d.	Where space allows, landscape plantings shall be placed in an informal, random pattern to create a naturalized landscape.


7.	Planting Material Specifications

a.	Applicability. This subsection applies to all landscaping required by this section.

b.	Generally
1.	Size specifications and landscape materials shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock.
2.	Areas to be landscaped shall be prepared, improved and planted as specified by current Wisconsin Department of Transportation standards as specified in the Facilities Development Manual (FDM).
8.	Species and Materials

a.	The landscaped buffer area may contain any combination of preserved natural vegetation or newly installed plantings.
b.	Landscape materials shall allow growth to the required height and opacity.
c.	Landscape species shall be indigenous or proven adaptable to the climate, but shall not be invasive species as identified by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
d.	Landscape species should include a mix of trees and shrubs and can also include herbaceous materials such as grasses, vines, aquatic plants, wild flowers, tall-grass prairie, and other vegetative materials.
e.	The landscape plantings shall include low-maintenance, drought and salt tolerant species.
f.	Landscape materials shall be tolerant of heat, drought, salt, or other conditions that could degrade quality and survivability.

9.	Plant Size. Minimum plant size shall be as specified in Table 15.420.2. To determine trunk size, caliper inches are measured 6 inches above ground level.
 

Table 15.420.2 Plant Size
Plant Type	Minimum Size
Trees
Evergreen	4' in height
Deciduous Overstory	1-½ caliper inches
Deciduous Ornamental	1 caliper inches
Shrubs
Evergreen or Deciduous	18" in height

e.	Preservation Credits

1.	Purpose: Preserving existing healthy, native, non-invasive vegetation should always take precedence over planting new vegetation and is encouraged by crediting preservation toward these landscaping requirements.

2.	Preservation of existing trees or shrubs count toward the landscaping required by this section if:

a.	For road setback, parking area perimeter or residential buffers, they meet an opacity of at least 80 percent, and

b.	they meet the minimum plant sizes specified in Table 15.420.2 above.

10.	Screening.
a.	Applicability
1.	Screening is required in Parking Perimeter and Residential Buffer landscaping areas.
2.	Any trash or recycling containers not otherwise stored inside an approved structure shall be screened with a combination of fences or walls.

b.	Berms, Fences or Walls
1.	Generally. If a berm, fence or a wall is used where allowed by this section:
a.	it shall be visually dominated by planted vegetation as viewed from the street or neighboring lot, and
b.	within 36 months or 3 growing seasons after planting,
1.	the planted vegetation shall attain 50 percent coverage within the opacity zone, which is the first 4 feet or 6 feet above the surrounding ground level, as required by this ordinance, and
2.	newly planted vegetation shall be established on the residential or existing use side of the fence or wall.

2.	Berms. In addition to subsection b.1. above, berms shall comply with the following requirements:

a.	If berms are used to supplement or replace some of the planting requirements the width of the landscaped area must be adequate to accommodate the size of the berm, based on the berm slope, crown, height and form.
b.	The applicant shall demonstrate that any reduction in required new plantings shall not reduce the effectiveness of the buffer area screen.
c.	Berms shall contain side slopes not exceeding 4 feet of horizontal distance to one foot of vertical distance (4:1) with a maximum height of 6 feet.
d.	Berms shall be natural in appearance and undulating wherever possible.

3.	Fences and Walls.
a.	If used to screen exterior trash or recycling containers, fences or walls shall be no less than 6 feet in height and no greater than 8 feet in height, and shall be 100% opaque.
b.	If used as part of Parking Perimeter or Residential Buffer landscaping requirements, fences and walls shall be at least 80% opaque.

c.	Hedges/Combinations. If a hedge or hedge/berm combination is used, the approved vegetative material shall be at least 2 feet in height at time of planting or capable of growing to that height in the first growing season. Vegetative material of sufficient screening density shall be spaced according to growth needs of the species to attain he height required for its screening purpose and 80% opacity at maturity.
 
Figure 15.420.1 Landscape Buffer Opacity















11.	Requirements for Specific Landscaping Locations
a.	Street Setback Landscaping

1.	Applicability. A landscaped area shall be provided in the street setback area.
2.	Location / Size. Street Setback Landscaping shall extend at least 10 feet in depth for at least half of the street right-of-way frontage.
3.	Content. Street setback landscaping may include vegetated planting areas, berms, fences or walls, subject to the design constraints of this section.
4.	Design
a.	The street setback area shall include at least one shade tree per 100 feet of street frontage.
b.	All plantings shall be appropriately spaced according to growth requirements of the species and shall not obscure street-facing windows or doors at maturity.
c.	Street Setback Landscaping is limited to 2 feet in height within the vision clearance triangle of a driveway access or road/railroad intersection (see § 15.405).

b.	Parking Perimeter Landscaping

1.	Applicability. This section applies to parking lots containing 5 or more parking spaces and located in or adjacent to residential districts R-2 or R-3.
2.	Location / Size.
a.	A landscaped buffer at least 10 feet in width shall abut the perimeter of parking lots/pavements.
b.	If an area is newly planted, the landscaped buffer shall include plants with a minimum height of 18 inches at the time of planting. If plants are preserved they must be shrubs or trees in order to count toward the requirement.

3.	Content. Parking perimeter landscaping may include vegetated planting areas, berms, fences or walls consistent with the preceding section on Screening.
4.	Design
a.	Opacity. The buffer shall attain 80 percent opacity at maturity.
b.	Height. Parking Perimeter Landscaping shall be maintained at a minimum height of 4’.
c.	Planting. Parking Perimeter Landscaping shall contain –
1.	one 2-½ caliper overstory tree per 60 linear feet of parking lot frontage, or
2.	a combination of deciduous and coniferous shrubs and a decorative wall or fence made of wood, brick or ornamental iron railing, with a minimum height of 3 feet.

c.	Parking Interior Landscaping

1.	Applicability. This section applies to parking lots containing 5 or more parking spaces in the  C-3, I-1, I-2 and PD districts.
2.	Location / Size. Rows of parking shall be broken every 10 spaces by a landscape median at least 7 feet in width.
 
3.	Content. Parking perimeter landscaping may include vegetated planting areas, berms, fences or walls.
4.	Design. At least 1 indigenous shade tree is required per median. The remainder of the median shall consist of shrubs and ground cover.

d.	Residential Buffers
1.	Applicability.

a.	For purposes of this section, a “buffer” means a yard along the perimeter of a lot or development, that includes landscaping, fencing, and/or berms that are designed to minimize visual, noise, lighting, stormwater, and related impacts on adjacent uses and surrounding areas.
b.	The buffer shall consist of an area of land located within and along the outer perimeter of a lot or boundary line.

2.	Location / Size
a.	The following districts shall maintain a buffer between the County (R-1, R-2, and R-3), City and Village residential districts.
b.	The minimum buffer width is as follows:

Table 15.420.3 Residential Buffer Width

Zoning District for property requiring a buffer	Adjoining District
	R-1	R-2	R-3
R-3	5'	5'	5'
C-1	5'	5'	10'
C-2	5'	5'	10'
C-3	10'	10'	15'
I-1	10'	10'	15'
I-2	10'	10'	20'

c.	Content. Residential buffers may include vegetated planting areas, berms, fences or walls.
d.	Design

1.	The residential buffer shall reach 6 feet in height within three full growing seasons.
2.	The landscaped buffer shall attain 80 percent opacity at maturity.
3.	The landscaped buffer area may include vegetated planting areas, berms, fences or walls consistent with the preceding section on Screening.

12.	Timing of Installation. If a subdivision plat is not required, plantings and screening shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The applicant may propose, and the Zoning Administrator may approve, alternative timing for installation of landscaping subject to a schedule specified in a Developer’s Agreement, a condition of zoning or conditional use permit approval, or another legally enforceable condition or agreement.
13.	Maintenance

a.	Existing healthy trees and shrubs shall be properly protected from construction activities in accordance with sound
conservation practices.
b.	Financial assurances shall cover the cost of installation of plant materials and replacement of all dead, dying, defective or diseased plant material for a period of 18 months.

15.425 Lot Development 	

Purpose: This section includes standards and rules of interpretation for applying the lot area, setbacks and yards
requirements for the zoning districts established in this Chapter.

1.	Generally. A lot, yard or other open space provided for a building to comply with this chapter does not count as part of a lot, yard or other open space required for another building.

2.	Lot Area
 
a.	Generally. This subsection applies to any zoning district that establishes a minimum lot area requirement. [Note: The following zoning districts include minimum lot area requirements: AG-1, AG-2, R-1 (Standard Design), R-2 (Standard Design), R-3 (Standard Design), C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2. The Lower St. Croix Riverway (SCR) includes additional standards for net lot area.]
b.	Lot Area. Lot area is the contiguous area within lot lines, excluding any street, highway, access easement or railroad right-of-way.

3.	Setbacks and Yards. The following standards apply to setbacks and yards within the applicable zoning districts where setbacks are established as indicated below:
a.	Generally. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed, except for permitted
encroachments.
b.	Street Setback. A street yard extends the full width of the lot, and is measured between the street right-of-way to the nearest principal building. The street setback is a line contiguous to the nearest part of the main building (excluding permitted encroachments) from the street right-of-way.
c.	Rear Setback. A rear yard extends the entire width of the lot, and is measured from the rear lot line to the rear setback. The rear setback is a line contiguous to the nearest part of the main building (excluding permitted encroachments) from the rear lot line.
d.	Side Setback
1.	A side yard extends from the front yard to the rear yard and is measured from the side lot line to the side setback. The side setback is a line contiguous to the side wall of the main building.
2.	When an accessory building is constructed as part of the main building or constructed on one side of the main building, the side yard requirements apply to the accessory building.
3.	For lots less than 80' wide and of record at the date of the passage of this Chapter:
a.	the aggregate width of the side yards is equivalent to 3" for each foot of the lot width, and
b.	no single side yard shall be less than 40% of the aggregate width, and
c.	the buildable width of any lot shall not be reduced to less than 24'.

e.	Corner Lots. A corner lot is considered to have a front yard on each lot line abutting a street, and a side lot line abutting an interior lot.
f.	Encroachments. The features designated and as conditioned below may encroach into a required yard subject to height limitations, vision triangle requirements (§ 15.405) and building code separation requirements.

 




Feature
 
Table 15.425 Encroachments
Yards
where encroachment is permitted
 



Maximum Encroachment
 



Minimum Setback from property line
 
Arbors (maximum footprint of 80 sf and maximum height
of 12’)	Any yard	No restriction	--
Accessory buildings (not otherwise listed)	Rear yard	No restriction	5'
Basketball goal	Any yard	No restriction	--
Balconies (open) at second floor or higher levels, wing
walls, stoops, landings, patios, and decks	Any yard	5'	--
Bird houses, dog houses	Any yard	No restriction	--
Ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices,
 
buttresses, eaves, chimneys, buttresses, eaves, spouts/gutters, brackets, pilasters, grill work, trellises and similar architectural features
 
Any yard	20"	--
 
Canopies, Freestanding	Street/rear	--	10'
Canopies having a roof area up to 60 sf	Street/rear	6’ into yard	--
Clothes line (up to 2 poles)	Rear/Side	No restriction	--
Driveways	Any Yard	No restriction	5'
Equipment, ancillary (Residential or Commercial districts)	Interior Side/Rear	No restriction	--
Fences, walls, poles, posts and other customary yard
accessories, ornaments and furniture	Any yard	No restriction	--
 




Feature
 
Table 15.425 Encroachments
Yards
where encroachment is permitted
 



Maximum Encroachment
 



Minimum Setback from property line
 
Open fire escapes / enclosed outside stairways / handicap ramps required by the building code
 
Any	3½'	--

Rear	--	5'
 

Flag Pole                                                                                        Any                       No restriction                                -- Garages, attached or detached and loaded from an alley                    Rear                       No restriction                        -- Gates                                                                                                           Any                       No restriction                                --
Heating and cooling units                                                                     Side/Rear                   No restriction                               20"
Landscaping, lawns, berms, trees, shrubs                                           Any yard                   No restriction                                --
Light Poles                                                                                               Any yard                    No restriction                                --
Mailboxes                                                                                                Any yard                    No restriction                                --
Playground equipment, trampolines                                                    Any yard                   No restriction                                --
Open pools, screened or enclosed pools, spas, and
 
uncovered decks or patios, up to 20 feet from a dwelling
unit on an abutting lot
Overhanging roof, pier, awnings, marquees, and second- story balconies, steps, structural overhangs or projections
 
Rear/Side	No restriction	--


Shall not extend within a
 
enclosing habitable living space, or similar architectural features

Parking spaces (except as otherwise permitted as part of
 
Any yard
 
planting strip or tree well
area
 
5'


Minimum 20' from street
 
an approved shared parking design for adjacent non- residential parcels)
 
Any yard	No restriction
 
ROW, 5' from other property
lines, and outside of required buffers
 
Porches, residential unenclosed and covered	Street/rear	6 feet into yard	--
Projecting overhangs on the ground floor not listed above	Any yard	No restriction	3'
Projecting windows such as bays, bows, oriels, or dormers	Any yard	5'	20" or as required by building
code
Ramps for citizens with disabilities	Any yard	No restriction	--
Retaining Walls	Any yard	No restriction	--
Sidewalks	Any yard	No restriction	--
Steps, uncovered	Street	No restriction	--
 
Stormwater detention or retention facilities or ditches, unless the Zoning Administrator finds that underground stormwater management facilities are not currently available
 

Rear (R-3, C-3),
Any yard (all other districts)
 


No restriction	--
 
Vending Machines, ATMs	Any yard	No restriction	--



4.	Reasonable Accommodation for Disabled Persons
a.	Ramps, walkways or decks to provide a disabled person with reasonable access to their property as required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, the Federal Fair Housing Act and the Wisconsin Fair Housing Act are allowed by land use permit, subject to the following standards:

1.	Only the minimum relaxation of dimensional, density or other standards needed to provide reasonable access may be approved.
2.	No use, structure or other relaxation of standards may be approved that would violate or undermine the stated purposes of this Section.
3.	The land use permit will expire and the structure removed once the property is no longer primarily used by a disabled person. Subsequent landowners no longer needing disabled access shall not replace or expand the facilities. Routine maintenance is allowed.

b.	An affidavit describing the approved land use permit shall be executed and recorded with the County Register of Deeds by the property owner within 14 days after approval of the permit.
 
c.	The affidavit shall state that the ramp, walkway, or deck must be removed as required above, and shall alert subsequent purchasers of the land of the requirements of the land use permit.

5.	Outlots. An outlot may not be developed for any use or structure that requires a private, onsite wastewater treatment system.

15.430 Parking and Loading 	

Purpose: This section provides safety, comfort and convenience to parking lot users, pedestrians and motorists. These standards:

•	reduce the effect of parking demand on traffic movement on adjacent streets, and
•	prevent the occurrence of undesirable conditions caused by the construction of parking lots which would adversely affect adjacent property owners; and
•	establish minimum levels of parking to capture vehicular traffic while avoiding the undesirable effects of excessive parking, and
•	consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, discourage excessive paved surfaces, and
•	ensure that parking does not interfere with pedestrian, bicycle, or other modes of transportation.

1.	Applicability. All uses regulated by this Chapter shall provide off-street parking and loading consistent with the standards established in this section.

2.	Generally
a.	An off-street parking space shall have a minimum width of 9 feet and minimum area of 162 sf. This excludes ingress and egress driveways that connect with a public thoroughfare. A single stall in any garage may replace a required parking space.
b.	Where four or more off-street parking spaces are provided and an access aisle is necessary, that aisle shall meet the following minimum width standards

Table 15.430.1 Parking Lot Aisle Minimum Width	
Angle of Parking (degrees)	Width of one-way drive aisle (feet-inches)
0	12-0
45	12-10
60	14-6
75	17-10
90	24

c.	A private garage may be rented to private passenger vehicles for persons who do not reside on the premises, up to the following amounts:
1.	Garage with capacity of up to 2 vehicles: 100%
2.	All other: 50%

d.	No commercial motor vehicle exceeding 5 tons rated capacity shall be stored in a private garage in an R-2 or R-3
district.
e.	No building for which off-street parking space is required may be added to, structurally altered or converted in use, to encroach upon or reduce the parking spaces below the required minimum.
f.	No parking spaces required under this section may be used for another purpose.
g.	Parking spaces are not allowed in the vision clearance triangle.
h.	For all non-residential uses along a County road or street with a speed limit greater than 25 MPH, parking shall be configured so that ingress to and egress from the parcel can be achieved by driving forward, including space to turn around on the parcel as necessary. Parking spaces with direct access from the right-of-way will not be permitted in these circumstances.
i.	All parking spaces and access drives and lanes shall be graded to prevent the accumulation of surface water.
 
3.	Paving
a.	Parking spaces and access lanes in the following districts shall be provided with a dust free, bituminous or concrete paved surface adequate for the proposed vehicle use: R-3, C-3, I-1, I-2. Storage and staging areas in the I-1 and I-2 districts shall be provided with such a paved surface or a gravel surface as described in this section.
b.	Parking spaces and access lanes in the following districts shall be provided with a gravel surface adequate for the proposed vehicle use and appropriate to the subsurface soil conditions, typically including a base of 3" stones with fines and topped with 3/4" crushed stone: AG-1, AG-2, R-1, R-2, C-1, C-2.
c.	Unpaved field areas may be used for special event parking up to 30 days per year and up to 9 consecutive days if the ground is dry and maintained with living vegetative ground cover (e.g. grass) to prevent erosion. Access to such field areas must be provided via an approved paved or gravel driveway to reduce the tracking of mud or other materials onto the public roadway. If vegetative ground cover cannot be maintained, a gravel surface shall be provided consistent with this section and as approved by the County.

4.	Landscaping. Refer to § 15.420.

5.	Lighting. Lighting on parking lots located in or adjacent to an R-1, R-2 or R-3 district shall be shielded to prevent glare or illumination of adjoining property in those districts.

6.	Required Off-Street Parking Spaces.

a.	For purposes of Table 15.430.2, "sf" means the entire gross floor area of all buildings in which the use is conducted. Outdoor spaces are excluded from consideration, unless indicated otherwise in the table. For buildings with multiple distinct uses, the gross floor area is allocated by use and parking spaces are calculated accordingly.

b.	Any use not specifically named shall be assigned to the most appropriate classification as provided in § 15.285. If an appropriate classification is not apparent, the Zoning Administrator may consult the most current version of the Parking Generation Manual by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).



 	15.430.2 Parking Spaces Required 	
Use Category	Parking Spaces Required
AGRICULTURE
	
Agriculture, Aquaculture	--
Agriculture, Beekeeping	--
Agriculture, Crop or Forage Production	--
Agriculture, Enrolled Land	--
Agriculture, Floriculture	--
Agriculture, Forest Management	--
Agriculture, Fur Farm	--
Agriculture, Keeping Livestock	--
Agriculture, Sod or Christmas Tree Production	--
Agriculture, Wholesale Nursery	--
Agricultural Resource Production (including sawmills)	1 per 500 sf
Animal Production, Other	--
Community Garden	--
Community Supported Agriculture	--
Crop/Limited Agriculture	--
Grazing	--
Greenhouse	--
Harvesting of Wild Crops	--
Livestock Facility (< 200 animal units) (§ 15.360; L where required by Table 15.360.1)	--
Livestock Facility (200-499 animal units) (§ 15.360; L where required by Table 15.360.1)	--
Livestock Facility (> 500 animal units) (§ 15.360; L where required by Table 15.360.1)	--
Manure Storage	--
 

 	15.430.2 Parking Spaces Required 	
Use Category	Parking Spaces Required
Pick-Your-Own Operations	--
Raising of Chickens and Ducks	--
Raising of Waterfowl, Fowl, and Fish	--
Stock Yard or Livestock Auction Facility	--
NATURAL RESOURCES	
Filling, Draining, or Dredging of Wetlands	--
Undeveloped Natural Resources and Open Space Land Use	--
RESIDENTIAL	
Residences	
	
	
Caretaker Unit	2 per dwelling
Conservation Design Development (§ 15.325)*	1 per dwelling
Dwelling, Rental or Secondary	2 per dwelling
Dwelling, Single-Family	2 per dwelling
Dwelling, Two-Family	2 per dwelling
Manufactured Home	2 per dwelling
Mobile Home Park	2 per dwelling
Mobile Home	2 per dwelling
Modular Home	2 per dwelling
Multifamily Dwelling	2 per dwelling
Temporary Residence	2 per dwelling
Group Living	
Community Living Arrangement (9-15 persons)	1 + 1 per 4 bedrooms
Community Living Arrangement (> 15 persons)	1 + 1 per 4 bedrooms
Foster Home / Adult Family Home	1 per dwelling
Life Care or Continuing Care Service	1 per 4 bedrooms
Retirement Housing Service	1 per 2 dwelling units
Skilled-Nursing Service (above intermediate level nursing care)	1 per 4 bedrooms
LODGING	
Boarding House	1 per 2 guest rooms
Bed and Breakfast	1 per 2 guest rooms
Campground, Private	1 per campsite
Campground, Public	1 per campsite
Motels and Hotels	1 per guest room
Seasonal Rustic Shelter/Primitive Rural Hunting Cabin	--

Short-Term Rental	1 per dwelling (provided as part of the dwelling unit - no additional parking required)
ART, ENTERTAINMENT, & RECREATION	
Adult Establishment (§ 15.310)*	1 per 400 sf
Agricultural Entertainment (< 15 days) (§ 15.315 )	5 + 1 per 400 sf
Agricultural Entertainment (> 15 days) (§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)	per approved event plan or conditional use permit
Amusement or Theme Park	15 per acre
Drive-In Theater	1 per 400 sf
Farm Exhibition (< 5 days)(§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)	5 + 1 per 400 sf
Farm Exhibition (> 5 days)(§ 15.315; L if > 100 persons during 24 hour period)	5 + 1 per 400 sf
Game Arcade	1 per 400 sf
Golf Course	6 per hole
Hiking, Biking, and Bridle Trails	--
Indoor Recreational Facility	1 per 400 sf
 

 	15.430.2 Parking Spaces Required 	
Use Category	Parking Spaces Required
	
Miniature Golf	15 per acre
Museum	1 per 400 sf

Outdoor Entertainment Facility - including all athletic courts and fields	1 per 3 users (participants and spectators) at maximum capacity, plus one stall per two employees

Outdoor Recreational Facility - including all athletic courts and fields	1 per 3 users (participants and spectators) at maximum capacity, plus one stall per two employees
Racetrack	1 per 4 seats
Stadium, Arena, or Conference Center	1 per 4 seats
Theater, Movie, or Performing Arts	1 per 300 sf
Zoos, Botanical Gardens, Arboreta, and similar uses	12 per acre
COMMERCIAL/MIXED USE	
Animal Services	
Game Management	1 per 1,500 sf
	
Kennel, Commercial	1 per 1,500 sf
Stable, Commercial	1 per 400 sf
Veterinary Clinic	1 per 1,500 sf
Automotive	
Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores	1 per 500 sf
Automotive Service, Repair, and Towing	1 per 500 sf
Car Wash	--
Dealerships (Motor, Off-Road, Watercraft, and Implements)	1 per 500 sf
Service Station	1 per 500 sf
Truck Service, Repair, and Towing	1 per 500 sf
Day Care	
Child Care Home, Family (< 8 children)	1 per 350 sf
Child Care Center (Wis.Stat. § 48.65)	1 per 350 sf
Group Day Care	1 per 350 sf
Financial Services	
Financial or Investment Institution	1 per 400 sf
Food & Beverage Sales/Service	

Bar or Tavern	1 per 100 sf, including outdoor seating area dimensions
Grocer	1 per 500 sf
Liquor Store	1 per 400 sf

Restaurant	1 per 100 sf, including outdoor seating area dimensions
Roadside Produce Stand	5 spaces
Sales - Processed or Preserved Agricultural Products and Produce	1 per 500 sf
Mixed Uses	
Vertical Mixed Use (retail or office on ground floor, residential on upper floors)	1 per 400 sf retail/office + 1.5 per dwelling
Office, Business & Professional	
Courier and Messenger Service	1 per 400 sf
Office	1 per 400 sf
Plant or Livestock Genetic Laboratory	1 per 1,500 sf
Postal Service	1 per 800 sf
Personal/Business Services	
Barber or Beauty Shop	1 per 400 sf
 

 	15.430.2 Parking Spaces Required 	
Use Category	Parking Spaces Required
Business Support Services	1 per 400 sf
Funeral Home	1 per 150 sf of group seating or assembly areas
Indoor Maintenance and Repair of Goods and Equipment	1 per 400 sf
Laundry	1 per 400 sf
Retail Sales	
Contractor Sales and Service	1 per 1,500 sf
Convenience Store	1 per 300 sf
Drug Store/Pharmacy	1 per 400 sf

Garden Center	1 per 400 sf plus 1 per 1,000 sf of outdoor sales area
Landscape Supply and Contracting Business (Plant or Tree Nursery)	1 per 1,000 sf
Notion, Variety, or Gift Shop	1 per 400 sf
Retail Sales and Service (< 2500 sf)	1 per 400 sf
Retail Sales and Service (> 2500 sf)	1 per 400 sf
Riding Supply	1 per 500 sf
Miscellaneous Commercial	
Agricultural Supply	1 per 400 sf
Business Conducted By Owner/Operator of Farm	--
Farm-Related Exhibition, Sale, or Event (5 days or less)	--
Farm-Related Exhibition, Sale, or Event (more than 5 days)	--
Home Occupation, Major	--
Home Occupation, Minor	--
Motion Picture or Sound Recording	1 per 500 sf
Sale or Storage of Agricultural Byproducts	--
INFRASTRUCTURE	
Transportation/Parking	
Airstrip	--
Motor Freight Terminal	--
Parking Facility	--
Taxi and Limousine Service	1 per 1,000 sf
Transit System	--
Utilities	
Air Conditioning and Steam Supply	1 per 1,500 sf
Biopower Facility	--
Dam*	--
Electric Generating Facility (Large Scale)	--
Electric Generating Facility (Small Scale)	--
Flowage Area*	--
Irrigation and Industrial Water Supply	--
Power Plant*	--
Solar Collector / Solar Energy System	--
Utility, Major	--
Utility, Minor	--
Wind Energy System (§ 15.395)*	--
Wired Communication/Cable Facility*	--
Communications Uses	
Radio and Television Broadcasting Studio	--
Mobile Support Structures And Facilities (§ 15.365; may require L)*	--
Waste-Related	
Hazardous Waste Collection, Treatment, and Disposal	--
 

 	15.430.2 Parking Spaces Required 	
Use Category	Parking Spaces Required

Salvage Yard	1 per employee of largest shift plus 1 per 0.75 acres of lot area
Septic Tank and Related Services	--
Solid Waste Collection, Treatment, and Disposal	--
Solid Waste Processing or Transferring	--
PUBLIC, CIVIC, & INSTITUTIONAL	
Assembly	
Governmental, Institutional, or Nonprofit Community Use	1 per 300 sf
Club or Lodge	1 per 300 sf
Religious Institution	1 per 300 sf
Civic and Open Space	
Cemetery	--
Historic or Natural Resource	--
Open Space	--
Park	--
Educational Services	
Personal Instruction Services	--
Private One-Room Schoolhouse	--
School (public or private)	4 per classroom or office; 1 per 150 sf of group seating area (auditorium, gymnasium, etc.)

Technical or Trade School	4 per classroom or office; 1 per 150 sf of group seating area (auditorium, gymnasium, etc.)
Public Administration / Institutional	
Library	1 per 400 sf
Correctional or Military Institution*	1 per 500 sf
Hospital*	1 per 400 sf
Medical Clinic*	1 per 400 sf
Public Safety	1 per 800 sf
Social Services and Non-Profit Organizations	
Child and Youth Services	1 per 400 sf
Elderly and Disabled Services	1 per 400 sf
Family Services (food, emergency, etc.)	--
INDUSTRIAL/PRODUCTION	
Manufacturing & Employment	
Agricultural Products Processing	1 per 500 sf
Asphalt Plant	1 per 500 sf
Brewery or Distillery	1 per 500 sf
Building Construction Services	1 per 500 sf
Composting, Commercial	1 per 500 sf
Forest Products Processing	1 per 500 sf
Heavy Construction Services	1 per 500 sf
Industry, Heavy	1 per 500 sf
Industry, Light	1 per 500 sf
Manure Processing Facility	1 per 500 sf
Recycling Facility	1 per 500 sf
Renewable Fuel Manufacturing	1 per 500 sf
Slaughterhouse	1 per 500 sf
Winery	1 per 500 sf
Mining & Natural Resource Extraction	
Heavy Industrial Mining	--
Metal Extraction	--
 

 	15.430.2 Parking Spaces Required 	
Use Category	Parking Spaces Required
Non-Metallic Mineral Extraction	--
Warehousing, Storage & Distribution	
Contractor Storage Yard	1 per 1,500 sf
Dead Stock Hauling Service	--
Propane Storage and Distribution	--
Seasonal Storage	--
Self Storage Facility	1 per 1,500 sf
Warehouse (Greater than 20,000 sf)	1 per 1,500 sf
Warehouse (Less than 20,000 sf)	1 per 1,500 sf
Wholesaling	1 per 1,500 sf
Wrecking and Demolition Service	1 per 1,500 sf
MISCELLANEOUS	
Accessory Structures & Uses	--
Portable Storage Unit	--
Notes: sf = gross sf building area of the principal structure unless otherwise indicated; "--" = not applicable

6.	Shared Parking. Two or more uses on different, adjacent parcels may share off-street parking provided the number of stalls shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of the individual uses computed separately. If the owners can demonstrate that hours of parking use will not overlap for certain land uses, the total number of stalls may be reduced to eliminate excess parking spaces, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. Any such exception shall be documented in a Shared Parking Plan filed with the CDD.

7.	Loading
a.	Applicability. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be provided and maintained for any Commercial/Mixed Use or Industrial/Production use that is subject to the minimum parking requirements in a Commercial or Industrial District.
b.	Amounts of Off-Street Truck Loading Facilities Required. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be provided in the minimum amount required by Table 15.430.3 for all structures subject to this section.

Table 15.430.3 Loading Spaces Required
Required Number of Spaces
 
Gross Floor Area (sf)
 
(see subsection c below for classification)
 
0 up to and including 12,500   1 (small)
12,501 up to and including 25,000   2 (small)
25,001 up to and including 40,000   1 (large)
40,001 up to and including 100,000   2 (large)
For each additional 80,000 over 100,000   1 (large)
c.	Size Categories. There are 2 sizes of off-street truck loading spaces, "large" and "small":

Table 15.430.4 Loading Space Size Categories

Minimum Specifications	Size Category
	Large	Small
Overhead Clearance (min)	14'	10'
Width (min)	12'	10'
Length (min)
(excludes access or maneuvering area, platform, and other appurtenances)	
50'	
20'
d.	Location
1.	Off-street truck loading facilities shall be located on the same building site where the structure they serve is located.
 
2.	Shared Loading Facilities as permitted below may be located off-site and within 300 feet of the structure they serve.
3.	Access, maneuvering area, ramps and other appurtenances shall be:
a.	furnished off the street right-of-way, and
b.	arranged so that vehicles are not required to back from the street into the loading area or to back from the loading area into the street.

4.	Loading Specifications. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in accordance with the following specifications:
a.	Drainage and Surfacing. Loading areas shall be properly graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, or asphalt and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris.
b.	Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged so that the source of light does not shine directly into adjacent residential properties or into traffic.
c.	Entrance and Exits. Loading areas shall be provided with entrances and exits located to minimize traffic congestion or backing from the street into the area.
d.	Circulation. Where access and drives to off-street loading facilities occur in conjunction with off-street parking facilities that provide parking at street level for more than 200 cars, provision shall be made to maintain separate circulation routes within the facilities.

5.	Shared Loading Facilities
a.	Off-street truck loading facility requirements for 2 or more structures may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the requisite number of spaces for each use in a common truck loading facility, cooperatively established and operated (“shared loading facility”).
b.	The total number of spaces required for the shared loading facility designated is at least the sum of the individual requirements. The Zoning Administrator may approve a lesser number of spaces , taking into account the respective times of usage of the truck loading facilities by the individual users, the character of the merchandise, and related factors.
c.	To eliminate a multiplicity of individual facilities, to conserve space where space is at a premium, to maximize efficiency and capacity, and to promote orderly development generally, the Zoning Administrator may approve a Shared Loading Plan that groups off-street truck loading facilities cooperatively for a number of truck loading generators within close proximity. The Zoning Administrator shall obtain consent for the group from the participants in the Shared Loading Plan.

15.431 To 15.499 Reserved. 	

PROCEDURES

Contents:

15.500 General Provisions
15.505 General Procedural Requirements & Authority
15.510 Pre-application
15.515 Completeness Review
15.520 Notice Provisions
15.525 Public Hearings
15.530 Town Recommendation
15.535 Specific Processes
15.540 Text Amendments
15.545 Rezonings
15.550 Conditional Use Permits
15.555 Land Use Permits
15.560 Appeals
15.570 Variances
 
15.571 To 15.574 Reserved.

15.500 General Provisions 	

Purpose: This Subchapter -

•	Establishes the workflows associated with zoning and subdivision plat processes, and
•	Assures that the processes comply with state law, and
•	Assigns decision making authority, completeness review, and deadlines to ensure that the processes are efficient and fair to applicants, and
•	For discretionary or legislative decisions, provide notice and an opportunity to be heard by persons affected by the application.
1.	Generally. This Subchapter applies to any application for zoning approval in St. Croix County.
2.	Permits and licenses. If a use is subject to this Subchapter, no permit, license, or other document of approval shall be issued by any County department, agency or board until the Zoning Administrator certifies that it complies with this Chapter.

15.505 General Procedural Requirements & Authority 	
1.	Common Procedures. This Subchapter sets up rules for Procedures, such as pre-application, neighborhood notification, notices and public hearings. It then describes the process for specific land use decisions. The Procedures all have a common workflow and description, as follows:

Table 15.505-1
Element	What does this mean?
Applicability	The type of development or situation that is subject to the process.
Initiation	This is how the applicant begins the process, including which department or official receives the application.
Completeness	This is how St. Croix County determines that the application has sufficient information to be processed.
Notice	This describes the type of notice, and how it is provided.
Decision	This states who approves the application, and the type of proceeding that leads to the decision.
Approval Criteria	These are any standards that apply to the application. All applications are subject to this Chapter and zoning district
regulations.
Subsequent Applications	If an application is denied, some processes have a waiting period before that type of application can be re-filed for the property.
Appeals	This provides a way to review an application that is denied, or that have conditions that the applicant disagrees with.

Scope of Approval	This states the activities that the application authorizes. For example, some approvals send the applicant to the next step in the overall process, while others authorize construction or use.
Recordkeeping	This states how the formal decision of approval is maintained.

2.	Summary. The processes established in this Subchapter are summarized below:

Table 15.505-2 General Procedural Requirements

Process	Agency	Notice	
Reference
	ZA	CDC	CB	BOA	Publication	Mail	
Text Amendment	I	R-PH	D		*	*	15.540
Rezoning	I	R-PH	D		*	*	15.545
Conditional Use Permit	I			D-PH	*		15.550
Land Use Permit	D			A-PH			15.555
Appeal	I			D-PH			15.560
Variance	I			D-PH			15.570
 
Note: this table is a general summary. Refer to the referenced sections for the specific procedure. If there is any conflict between the text section referenced here and this Table, the text section controls.

Building permits and certificates of occupancy are issued by the Towns subject to the applicable building code. Key:
ZA = Zoning Administrator

CDC = Community Development Committee

CB = County Board of Supervisors BOA = Board of Adjustment
I = intake, review and referral

R = Recommendation D = Decision
A = Appeal

PH = public hearing

* = required

[] = notice is required for specific situations as indicated in the referenced Procedures



15.510 Pre-application 	
1.	Applicability.

a.	This section applies to any of the following applications:

1.	Rezoning,
2.	Conditional use permits, and
3.	Appeals or variances,

b.	The Zoning Administrator may waive the pre-application meeting upon finding that the applicant has sufficient familiarity with the approval process that a pre-application meeting would not serve a valid purpose.

2.	Timing. The pre-application meeting shall occur
a.	at least 10 days before the application is filed.

3.	Meeting Contents
a.	The applicant shall provide a brief overview of the project, including proposed location, uses, densities, project layout, and design features.
b.	Zoning Administrator will provide information and comments at the pre-application meeting, but will not take formal action on the application. In addition to providing verbal information, the Zoning Administrator may provide a Pre-application meeting checklist.
c.	The applicant’s and Zoning Administrator’s comments are for purposes of information, but are not binding on
either the City or the applicant.
d.	The pre- application meeting shall include the following:
1.	A discussion of technical studies, plans and other information deemed relevant to the specific application request,
2.	Discussion of the anticipated level of citizen interest,
3.	Identification of Town notification and Neighborhood Meeting requirements, if applicable, and
4.	A discussion of the general project consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.

4.	Documentation
 
a.	If presented during the meeting, Zoning Administrator will review and complete an informational checklist, based on the scope of the application.
b.	The Zoning Administrator will record in writing any pertinent information concerning the project scope, as described by the applicant, as well as verbal guidance provided by County staff.
c.	After the pre-application meeting is completed, the Zoning Administrator and the applicant shall certify in writing that the meeting occurred. The Zoning Administrator will retain a copy of the certification as an official record for the project file.

15.515 Completeness Review 	

1.	General Requirements
a.	Applications filed under this Subchapter must include the information required by the Submittal Requirements. All applications shall be made on forms prepared by the Zoning Administrator. St. Croix County will not process incomplete applications.
b.	An application is not complete until all required items are submitted (see Submittal Requirements).
c.	Review for completeness of application forms is solely to determine whether preliminary information required for submission with the application is sufficient to allow further processing. It does not constitute a decision as to whether an application complies with this Chapter.
d.	An application is not complete unless it is accompanied by the required fee. The Board of Supervisors may establish fees for all applications required in this Subchapter by resolution.

2.	Completeness Review Process
a.	When applications are filed, the Zoning Administrator will review them for completeness.
b.	The time period to process an application does not commence until the Zoning Administrator determines that the application contains all the information required on the initial checklist.
c.	The Zoning Administrator will determine whether any additional information is needed to complete the review of the application and will transmit the determination to the Applicant.
d.	If the Zoning Administrator determines that additional information is necessary, the Zoning Administrator will provide to the applicant a list and description of the information necessary to complete the review. The Zoning Administrator and the decision-making agency are not obligated to further review the application until the required information is provided.
e.	The Zoning Administrator or the decision making agency may provide submission deadlines for materials required in support of any application provided for in the Submittal Requirements. Compliance with those deadlines is required to have the application placed on an agenda to be heard by the decision making agency.

15.520 Notice Provisions 	

1.	Generally
a.	State law establishes various requirements for public notice. Unless otherwise provided, the notice established in this Subchapter is as provided in 15.520.1 below.
b.	This Chapter does not prohibit the Zoning Administrator from providing additional notice not required by this Subchapter or state law.

Table 15.520.1 Type and Description of Notice
Type of notice	Description
Publication	Class 2 notice under Wis. Stat. chapter 985, unless otherwise provided.
Mail	The Zoning Administrator will mail the notices. Regular mail is sufficient, unless certified mail is required by a specific process or state law.
Electronic Transmission	▪	The County may communicate with the applicant or persons requesting notice by electronic transmission.
▪	Electronic transmission may include email, or communication through social media or online notification procedures established by the Zoning Administrator.
2.	Required Information. Notice shall include the following information, unless the process includes a different requirement:
 
a.	A brief summary of the proposed ordinance or application,
b.	Time, date, and place of the public hearing or meeting;
c.	The type of land use or development decision that is being considered;
d.	A telephone point of contact within the Community Development Department; and
e.	The Zoning Administrator’s website address (URL); and
f.	the address or location of the subject parcel.

3.	Failure to Provide Notice. The failure of St. Croix County to provide any notice not otherwise required under State law does not affect the validity of any action undertaken pursuant to this Chapter, and no person may challenge an action for lack of notice where the County has complied with the applicable State law governing notice.



15.525 Public Hearings 	

A public hearing gives interested parties an opportunity to be heard. The specific processes for providing testimony and conducting the hearing are established by the agency that conducts the hearing.

15.530 Town Recommendation 	

Purpose: This Section establishes a process for the Towns to review and submit a recommendation on applications.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any of the following applications:
a.	Rezoning (including planned development § 15.280), or
b.	Conditional use permit, or
c.	Variances to the Board of Adjustment.

2.	Submittal. The Town may provide a written recommendation on the application.
3.	Time of Recommendation. The Town's recommendation should be submitted at or before the public hearing. If the Town fails to submit a recommendation, the public hearing shall occur without a Town recommendation.

15.535 Specific Processes 	

Sections 15.540 through 15.574 set out processes for specific types of permits or decisions required by this Chapter.

15.540 Text Amendments 	

Purpose: This section establishes processes for the County Board to amend this Chapter. Three (3) major steps occur:

•	The Community Development Committee holds a hearing and makes recommendations to the County Board.
•	The County Board votes on the proposal. The County Board's vote is subject to a protest petition, which triggers a supermajority voting requirement.

•	In the case of amendments to general zoning outside shoreland and floodplain areas, the affected town board can veto an amendment adopted by the County Board.

The procedures in this Section are subject to state law, including Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 87.30 and subchapter V of Ch. 91.

1.	Applicability
a.	Generally. This section applies to:
1.	Any amendment to the text of this Chapter, or
2.	Any comprehensive revision, as defined in subsection b. below.

b.	Comprehensive Revisions. A comprehensive revision may be adopted as a single ordinance by the County Board, following its normal amendment procedure. For purposes of this subsection, a "comprehensive revision" is defined in Wis. Stat. § 59.69(5)(d).
 
2.	Initiation

a.	A petition for amendment to this Chapter may be filed by:

1.	any property owner in the area affected by the amendment,

2.	the town board of any town where Chapter is in effect,

3.	any member of the County Board, or

4.	any member of the Community Development Committee (CDC).

b.	The applicant shall present the petition to the Community Development Department.
c.	The County Development Department shall refer the petition to the CDC with notice to the County Board.
d.	Upon receipt of the petition, the CDC shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the petition and shall publish notice of the application.

3.	Completeness. See § 15.515.
4.	Notice
a.	The notice required by Table 15.540.1 applies to any amendment.

b.	A written notice of the public hearing on any proposed shoreland amendment shall be submitted to the district office of the Department of Natural Resources at least 10 days prior to the CDC hearing.

Table 15.540.1 Notice Required for Text Amendments	
Type	Required?	To Whom?	When?

Publication	
Yes - Class 2	
--	Once each week for 2 consecutive weeks, with the last notice at least 1 week before the hearing

Mail	
Yes - registered mail	
Town Clerk of each town affected by the proposed amendment	10 days before the CDC hearing 7 days after adoption subject to subsection 9.a.2 below
Electronic Transmission	Optional	--	--

5.	Decision

a.	CDC Action

1.	Public Hearing. The CDC shall conduct a public hearing and shall recommend approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the proposed amendment.

2.	CDC Recommendation

a.	If the CDC action is favorable to the proposed amendment as originally sought in the petition or with modifications, it shall submit a proposed ordinance with its recommendations to the County Board.

b.	If the CDC action is unfavorable to the petition, the CDC shall report its recommendations of denial to the County Board along with a statement of its reasons.

c.	The report to the County Board shall contain the CDC recommendations, proof of publication of the notice of public hearing, proof of notice of hearing to town clerks, and copies of all town board resolutions that were received.

d.	A copy of the CDC's findings and recommendations on every proposed shoreland amendment shall be sent to the district office of the Department of Natural Resources within 10 days after the submission of those findings and recommendations are sent to the County Board.

b.	Town Board Disapproval of CDC Action

1.	If the majority of Town Boards of Towns affected by a proposed text amendment submits a certified copy of an adopted resolution disapproving the proposed change, the CDC shall not recommend approval. The CDC may only recommend disapproval or approval with modifications.

2.	The resolutions must be filed with the CDC at the time of or within 10 days after the public hearing.
 
3.	This subsection applies to amendments to this chapter affecting the Shoreland, St. Croix Riverway, or
Floodplain Overlay districts.

c.	County Board Action. The County Board shall:

1.	refuse to deny the petition as recommended by the CDC and refer the petition to the CDC with instructions to draft an ordinance approving the petition and report the ordinance back to the County Board, which may then adopt or reject the proposed ordinance.

2.	refuse to adopt the ordinance submitted or amended by the CDC, or

3.	adopt the ordinance submitted by the CDC or with amendments, or

4.	A protest petition may be processed, and has the effect, as provided in Wis. Stat. § 59.69(5)(g).

d.	Town Board Disapproval of County Board Action. The County Clerk shall provide notice of text amendments that do not affect Shoreland, St. Croix Riverway, or Floodplain Overlay districts notice to the town clerks of all towns affected by the proposed change. Disapproval or approval of the proposed change shall occur by action of a majority of the town boards subject to and affected by the amending ordinance.

6.	Approval Criteria
a.	Amendments to this Chapter are committed to the County Board’s legislative discretion, and subject to any
applicable requirements of state or federal law.
b.	The zoning amendment shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. [See Wis. Stat. § 66.1001(3)(j)]

7.	Appeals. A text amendment is not appealable.
8.	Scope of Approval
a.	Generally. The following procedures apply to all amendments specified in Wis. Stat. § 91.38, or that affect district boundary lines and provisions other than the Shoreland, St. Croix Riverway, or Floodplain Overlay districts:

1.	If the amending ordinance makes only the change sought in the petition and if the petition was not subject to a disapproval resolution by the town boards of a majority of the towns affected at or within 10 days of the hearing before the CDC, the ordinance is effective on passage.

2.	The County Clerk shall submit all other amending ordinances that affect district boundary lines to the town clerk of each town with land affected by the amendment. The ordinance shall be submitted in duplicate by certified mail within 7 days after adoption. The ordinance is effective 40 days after adoption unless the town boards of a majority of towns affected files with the County Clerk a certified copy of a resolution disapproving the ordinance. If a majority of town boards approve the ordinance, the ordinance is effective upon the receipt of the approving town boards resolutions by the County Clerk.

b.	Comprehensive Revision. A comprehensive revision (see subsection 1.b above) may provide that the existing County zoning ordinance remains in effect for the shorter of to 1 year or until the revision is approved by the Town Board. If a Town Board fails to approve the comprehensive revision within 1 year, neither the comprehensive revision nor the prior County zoning is effective in that town.

9.	Recordkeeping

a.	The County Clerk shall:

1.	record in its office the date when amending ordinances become effective, and

2.	notify the town clerk of all towns of the effective dates, and

3.	make a report to the County Board, which shall be printed in the proceedings of the County Board.

b.	Amending ordinances which affect portions of this chapter which apply to shorelands and floodplains shall be printed in the proceedings of the County Board.

15.545 Rezonings 	

Purpose: This section establishes processes for the County Board to amend the Zoning Map for a specific property or area. Three (3) major steps occur:
 
•	The Community Development Committee holds a hearing and makes recommendations to the County Board.
•	The County Board votes on the proposal. The County Board's vote is subject to a protest petition, which triggers a supermajority voting requirement.
•	In the case of amendments to general zoning outside shoreland and floodplain areas, the affected town board can veto an amendment adopted by the County Board.

The procedures in this Section are subject to state law, including Wis. Stats. §§ 59.69, 87.30 and § 91.48

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any change in the district boundaries (also referred to as a "rezoning"), other than a Comprehensive Revision as defined in § 15.540.
2.	Initiation

a.	A rezoning is initiated by filing a petition for amendment to this Chapter. A petition for amendment to this Chapter may be filed by:

1.	any property owner in the area affected by the amendment,

2.	the town board of any town where Chapter is in effect,

3.	any member of the County Board, or

4.	any member of the Community Development Committee (CDC).

b.	The applicant shall present the petition to the County Clerk.

c.	The County Clerk shall refer the petition to the CDC with notice to the County Board.

d.	Upon receipt of the petition, the CDC shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the petition and shall publish notice of the application.

3.	Completeness. See § 15.515.
4.	Notice
a.	The notice required by Table 15.545.1 applies to any rezoning.

b.	A written notice of the public hearing on any proposed shoreland amendment shall be submitted to the district office of the Department of Natural Resources at least 10 days prior to the CDC hearing.

c.	The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection shall be notified of all the petitions to rezone land out of the AG-1 or AG-2 districts by sending :

1.	a copy of the CDC’s hearing notice on the petition, and

2.	the disposition of the petitions, through:

3.	the proceedings of any County Board meeting that involves a vote on the rezoning ordinance), or

4.	a recording of a receipt of town board resolutions on the amendment.

Table 15.545.1 Notice Required for Rezonings	
Type	Required?	To Whom?	When?

Publication	
Yes - Class 2	
--	Once each week for 2 consecutive weeks, with the last notice at least 1 week before the hearing
			

Mail	
Yes - registered mail	
Town Clerk of each town affected by the proposed rezoning	10 days before the CDC hearing 7 days after adoption subject to subsection 9.a.2 below
Electronic Transmission	Optional	--	--

5.	Decision

a.	CDC Action
 
1.	Public Hearing. The CDC shall conduct a public hearing and shall recommend approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the proposed amendment.

2.	CDC Recommendation

a.	If the CDC action is favorable to the proposed amendment as originally sought in the petition or with
modifications, it shall submit a proposed ordinance with its recommendations to the County Board.

b.	If the CDC action is unfavorable to the petition, the CDC shall report its recommendations of denial to the County Board along with a statement of its reasons.

c.	The report to the County Board shall contain the CDC recommendations, proof of publication of the notice of public hearing, proof of notice of hearing to town clerks, and copies of all town board resolutions that were received.

d.	A copy of the CDC's findings and recommendations on every proposed shoreland amendment shall be sent to the district office of the Department of Natural Resources within 10 days they are sent to the County Board.

3.	Town Board Disapproval of CDC Action

a.	If the Town Board of a Town affected by a proposed rezoning submits a certified copy of an adopted resolution disapproving the proposed change, the CDC shall not recommend approval. The CDC may only recommend disapproval or approval with modifications.

b.	The resolutions must be filed with the CDC at the time of or within 10 days after the public hearing.

c.	This subsection does not apply to amendments to this chapter affecting the Shoreland, St. Croix Riverway, or Floodplain Overlay districts.

4.	County Board Action

a.	The Board may notice and conduct a hearing on the proposed rezoning.

b.	The County Board shall:

1.	adopt the ordinance submitted by the CDC or with amendments, or

2.	refuse to adopt the ordinance submitted or amended by the CDC, or

3.	refuse to deny the petition as recommended by the CDC and refer the petition to the CDC with instructions to draft an ordinance approving the petition and report the ordinance back to the County Board, which may then adopt or reject the proposed ordinance.

c.	A protest petition may be processed, and has the effect, as provided in Wis. Stat. § 59.69(5)(g).

5.	Town Board Disapproval of County Board Action. See subsection 9 below.

6.	Approval Criteria
a.	Generally
1.	A rezoning committed to the County Board’s legislative discretion, and subject to any applicable requirements
of state or federal law.
2.	The rezoning shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. [See Wis. Stat. § 66.1001(3)(j)]

b.	Agricultural Districts (AG-1 & AG-2)

1.	The following standards apply to any petition to rezone land out of the AG-1 or AG-2 districts:

a.	The standards of Wis. Stat. § 91.48, and

b.	There are adequate public facilities to serve the proposed and potential land use changes that would be enabled by the rezoning, and

c.	The burdens on the County or Town for providing the needed services to the proposed and potential land use changes that would be enabled by the rezoning are reasonable, and
 
d.	The development will not cause unreasonable air or water pollution, soil erosion, or adverse effects on valued natural areas, and

e.	The soil productivity rating has been considered in the location of the area proposed for rezoning.

2.	These standards shall be read into the record of the meeting of the CDC, the County Board, and the town board before votes may be taken to approve the rezoning. The report accompanying the County Board ordinance and the Town Board Resolution of approval, or the ordinance and resolutions themselves, shall contain findings that the rezoning meets standards in subsection 1 above.

c.	Planned Development District (PD)

1.	The following standards apply to any petition to rezone land to the PD District:

a.	The proposed General Development Plan is consistent with the County and Town comprehensive plans.

b.	The proposed development is compatible with the physical nature of the site, with particular concern for protection of surface water and groundwater resources.

c.	There is adequate service and infrastructure capacity to support the development, including roads, water and wastewater.

d.	The  proposed  zoning  will  result  in  development that  is aesthetically  and ecologically desirable, economically viable, and functionally practical.

7.	Subsequent Applications. There are no limits on refiling a rezoning.
8.	Appeals. A rezoning is not appealable.
9.	Scope of Approval. The following procedures apply to all rezonings that affect district boundary lines and provisions other than the Shoreland, St. Croix Riverway, or Floodplain Overlay districts:

a.	The County Clerk shall submit all other rezoning ordinances to the town clerk of each town with land affected by the amendment. The ordinance shall be submitted in duplicate by registered mail within 7 days after adoption. The ordinance is effective 40 days after adoption unless the town board files with the County Clerk a certified copy of a resolution disapproving the ordinance. If the town board approves the ordinance, the ordinance is effective upon the receipt of the approving town board resolution by the County Clerk.

b.	If the rezoning ordinance makes only the change sought in the petition and if the petition was not subject to a disapproval resolution by the town board of the town affected at or within 10 days of the hearing before the CDC, the ordinance is effective on passage.

10.	Recordkeeping

a.	The County Clerk shall:

1.	record in its office the date when rezoning ordinances become effective, and

2.	notify the town clerk of all towns of the effective dates, and

3.	make a report to the County Board, which shall be printed in the proceedings of the County Board.

b.	Rezoning ordinances which affect portions of this chapter which apply to shorelands and floodplains shall be printed in the proceedings of the County Board.

15.550 Conditional Use Permits 	

Purpose: Conditional uses are those that have a special nature or impacts, and depend on specific circumstances, such that it is impractical to determine in advance where or when they should be permitted. This Chapter provides a public hearing by the Board of Adjustment to determine whether they meet the criteria of this Chapter.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any use designated as a conditional use by the applicable zoning district, or any other situation designated by this Chapter as a conditional use.
2.	Initiation

a.	An application for approval of a conditional use permit is filed with the Zoning Administrator.
 
b.	Conditional Use permit applications can include single parcels of land or groupings of parcels contiguous or noncontiguous.

3.	Completeness. See § 15.515.
4.	Notice
a.	The notice required by Table 15.550.1 applies to any conditional use permit.

b.	The Zoning Administrator shall notify the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection of any conditional use application involving lands in the AG-1 and AG-2 Districts, by sending the Department:

1.	a copy of the hearing notice published for the application, and

2.	the disposition of the application through a copy of the Board of Adjustment's written decision.

c.	When the matter concerns the Shoreland Overlay (SO), Lower St. Croix Riverway (SCR) or Floodplain
Overlay (FO), the Board shall submit to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources:
1.	a copy of the notice and application so that it is received at least 30 days before the hearing, and
2.	a copy of the decision within 10 days after it is rendered.

Table 15.550.1 Notice Required for Conditional Use Permits	
Type	Required?	To Whom?	When?

Publication	
Yes - Class 2	
--	Once each week for 2 consecutive weeks, with the last notice at least 1 week before the hearing
Mail	No	--	--
Electronic Transmission	Optional	--	--

5.	Decision

a.	Public Hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing. Upon the hearing, a party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney.

b.	Time to Act Upon Application. The Board shall act on an application in the manner described above within 90 days of receiving the application unless information is required by the Board as provided below.

c.	Action. After the hearing is closed, the Board will approve, approve with conditions, or deny the conditional use permit.

d.	Determination in Writing

1.	The conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing by the Board of Adjustment and made a permanent part of the minutes.

2.	The Board shall reduce its decision in writing within 10 days after its decision, stating its reasons for the action. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the written decision to the applicant.

e.	Majority Rule. A majority vote of the board of adjustment is required to decide in favor of the applicant.

f.	Requests for Additional Information. Before passing upon an application for a conditional use, the Board of Adjustment may require the applicant to furnish further relevant information (see Submittal Requirements, § 15.590). The requirement may apply to specific points, or may include an environmental impact statement as described in the Submittal Requirements.

g.	Written Decision. The Board shall render its decision in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and conclusions of law.

6.	Approval Criteria. The Board of Adjustment shall approve a conditional use if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that it complies with all of the following standards or can be made to comply with reasonable conditions:
a.	The proposed use complies with all applicable standards of the zoning district, the Development Standards, and any applicable Use Regulations.
 
b.	The proposed use will not cause a reduction of the property values in the affected neighborhood. For purposes of
this section, the “affected neighborhood” includes any area within:
1.	A contiguous residential subdivision or a planned development, and
2.	Any other area where a person demonstrates that their property would be adversely affected by the proposed conditional use.

c.	The proposed use would not constitute a nuisance by reason of noise, dust, smoke, odor, lighting, water or air contaminants, traffic, stormwater runoff quantity or quality, pests, or similar factors.

d.	The use does not violate the spirit or intent of this chapter.

e.	The use is not contrary to the public health, safety or general welfare.

7.	Subsequent Applications. There are no limits on refiling a conditional use permit.

8.	Appeals. A conditional use permit is not appealable to a County agency. An applicant or aggrieved party may commence an action pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 59.694(10).
9.	Scope of Approval
a.	Generally. The land use and structures permitted and the conditional use approved apply only to the structures, use and property described in the approved conditional use permit application, subject to any modifications approved by the Board of Adjustment.
b.	Conditions. The Board of Adjustment may make the granting of an application for a conditional use contingent upon express conditions as it considers necessary to comply with the criteria listed in subsection 6 above. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, specifications of:
1.	The period of time in which all or part of the use may be permitted.
2.	Increased setback and yard dimensions.
3.	Specified sewerage disposal and water supply facilities.
4.	Specified stormwater management facilities.
5.	Lighting control.
6.	Screening and landscaping
7.	Location and design of property access.
8.	Operational control.
9.	Sureties.
10.	Deed restrictions.
11.	Location of docks, piers or other structures, signs, etc.
12.	Location and amount of parking facilities.
13.	Type of construction.
14.	Type of shore cover.

c.	Termination. Where a conditional use does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the original approval, the Board of Adjustment may terminate the use after a public hearing and notice to affected parties.

10.	Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator shall retain a record of any approved conditional use, along with all conditions of approval. The applicant shall maintain the record as certified by the Zoning Administrator at the location of the conditional use.

15.555 Land Use Permits 	

Purpose: Land Use Permits are required to provide for the administrative review of compliance with this Chapter, and where specifically required by individual sections of this Chapter. Land Use Permits do not require a public hearing, but are appealable to the Board of Adjustment.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any use or situation that requires a land use permit by the applicable zoning
district, use regulation, or any other situation where this Chapter requires a land use permit.
 
Note: this Chapter requires a land use permit for the following uses or situations:

•	Agricultural Entertainment or Farm Exhibition anticipated to have attendance of more than 100 persons during a 24 hour period (§ 15.315)
•	Animal Waste Storage Facility (Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11)
•	Contractor Storage Yard
•	Farm Exhibition
•	Filling, Draining, or Dredging of Wetlands
•	Floodplain development (where indicated by § 15.270)
•	Grading & Filling, 12-24.9% Slopes (§ 15.415)
•	Livestock Facilities (where required by § 15.360)
•	Lower St. Croix Riverway District development (where indicated by § 15.265)
•	Mobile support structures, radio broadcast services and facilities, and co-locations (where required by § 15.365)
•	Museum
•	Nonmetallic Mining Operations (Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14)
•	Private One-Room Schoolhouse
•	Shoreland Overlay development (where indicated by § 15.260)
•	Signs (where required by § 15.380)
•	Temporary Occupancy (§ 15.390)
5.	Initiation. An application for approval of a land use permit is filed with the Zoning Administrator.
6.	Completeness. See § 15.515.
7.	Notice. Notice of the application is not required, unless specifically required for the use or situation by this Chapter.
8.	Decision

a.	Consideration of Application. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for a land use permit when it is complete.

b.	Time to Act Upon Application. Unless otherwise provided for the specific use or situation, the Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 30 days of receiving a complete application.

c.	Determination in Writing. The Zoning Administrator shall state the conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval in writing.

d.	Requests for Additional Information. Before passing upon an application for a land use permit, the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to furnish further relevant information (see Submittal Requirements, § 15.590).

9.	Approval Criteria. The Zoning Administrator shall approve a land use permit if the proposed use complies with all applicable standards of the zoning district, the Development Standards, and any applicable Use Regulations.

10.	Subsequent Applications. There are no limits on refiling a land use permit.
11.	Appeals. A land use permit appealable to the Board of Adjustment as provided in § 15.560.
12.	Scope of Approval
a.	Generally. The land use and structures permitted and the use approved apply only to the structures, use and property described in the approved land use permit application, subject to any modifications approved by the Zoning Administrator.
b.	Termination. Where a use does not continue in conformity with the conditions of the original approval, the Zoning Administrator may initiate an Enforcement action (see § 15.765).
 
13.	Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator shall retain a record of any approved use or development, along with all conditions of approval. The applicant shall maintain the record as certified by the Zoning Administrator at the location of the conditional use.

15.560 Appeals 	

Purpose: This section establishes a process for the Board of Adjustment to consider an appeal from an administrative official in administering or enforcing this Chapter.

1.	Applicability. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the county affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator, or other administrative officer.
2.	Initiation

a.	The appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment.

b.	The applicant shall file a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment.

c.	The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.

d.	An appeal stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, in accordance with Wis. Stat. § 59.694(5).

3.	Completeness. See § 15.515.
4.	Notice. The notice required by Table 15.560.1 applies to any appeal.

Table 15.560.1 Notice Required for Appeals	
Type	Required?	To Whom?	When?

Publication	
Yes - Class 2	
--	Once each week for 2 consecutive weeks, with the last notice at least 1 week before the hearing
Signs	No	--	--
Mail	No	--	--
Electronic Transmission	Optional	--	--

5.	Decision

a.	Public Hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing and render a decision as provided below.

b.	Action

1.	After the hearing is closed, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,decision or determination appealed from, and may make the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.

2.	The Board shall render its decision within a reasonable time.

3.	A majority vote of the Board of Adjustment is required to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any an administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant.

4.	Written Decision. The Board shall render its decision in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and conclusions of law.

6.	Approval Criteria. The Board of Adjustment may approve the appeal if the decision subject to the appeal:
a.	Is the result of an incorrect interpretation of this chapter, or
b.	Would violate Wisconsin or federal statues, or
c.	Would violate the applicant’s state or federal constitutional rights..
 
7.	Appeals. A Board of Adjustment's decision is not appealable. An applicant or aggrieved party may commence an action pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 59.694(10).
8.	Scope of Approval. If the appeal is approved:
a.	the applicant may apply for any permits or approvals required for development or establishment of the use, building or structure, as provided in this Chapter and any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of Adjustment, or
b.	if the appeal challenges an administrative action, the administrative action is terminated or reversed in accordance with the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of Adjustment.

9.	Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator shall retain a record of any approved appeal. The applicant and appellant shall maintain the record as certified by the Zoning Administrator.

15.570 Variances 	

Purpose: This section establishes a process for the Board of Adjustment to vary a standard of this Chapter that is proven to create unnecessary hardship.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to any request for a variance from this chapter.
2.	Initiation.

a.	The variance application shall be filed as an appeal (see § 15.560.2).

3.	Completeness. See § 15.515.
4.	Notice.
a.	The notice required by Table 15.570.1 applies to any variance.
b.	When the matter concerns the Shoreland Overlay (SO), Lower St. Croix Riverway (SCR) or Floodplain
Overlay (FO), the Board shall submit to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources:
1.	a copy of the notice and application so that it is received at least 30 days before the hearing, and
2.	a copy of the decision within 10 days after it is rendered.

Table 15.570.1 Notice Required for Variance	
Type	Required?	To Whom?	When?

Publication	
Yes - Class 2	
--	Once each week for 2 consecutive weeks, with the last notice at least 1 week before the hearing
Mail	No	--	--
Electronic Transmission	Optional	--	--

5.	Decision

a.	Public Hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing and render a decision as provided below.

b.	Action

1.	After the hearing is closed, the Board may authorize or deny the variance.

2.	The Board shall render its decision within a reasonable time.

3.	A majority vote of the Board of Adjustment is required to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any an administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant.

c.	Written Decision. The Board shall render its decision in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and conclusions of law.

d.	Conditions. In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards that conform with the purposes of this Chapter.

6.	Approval Criteria
 
a.	The Board of Adjustment may approve the variance if the property owner demonstrates that the application complies with the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 59.694(7)(c).
b.	A variance shall not:

1.	Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss, or

2.	Be granted for a hardship which is self-created, or

3.	Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area, or

4.	Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure,

5.	Allow in any district uses not permitted in that district, or

6.	Otherwise violate Wisconsin law.

7.	Appeals. A Board of Adjustment's decision is not appealable to a County agency. An applicant or aggrieved party may commence an action pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 59.694(10).
8.	Scope of Approval. If the appeal is approved:

a.	the applicant may apply for any permits or approvals required for development or establishment of the use, building or structure, as provided in this Chapter and any conditons of the variance and any provisions of this Chapter not affected by the order authorizing or denying the variance

9.	Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator shall retain a record of any approved variance. The applicant shall maintain the record as certified by the Zoning Administrator.

15.571 To 15.574 Reserved. 	

SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

Contents:
15.575 General Provisions
15.580 Technical Plans or Studies
15.585 Digital applications
15.590 Application Checklists
15.595 Fees
15.596 To 15.599 Reserved.

15.575 General Provisions 	

This Subchapter establishes the information that applications must include in order to be considered complete for review under the Procedures.

15.580 Technical Plans or Studies 	

Purpose: In the administration of this chapter, the various boards and committees which are assigned decision-making responsibilities will occasionally confront proposed land use changes which have unusually significant consequences or which arouse unusually high levels of citizen interest. In those cases, the decision maker may find that the procedures specified in the sections of this chapter which govern the case do not allow a full and complete examination and articulation of the environmental and other impacts of the proposed change in use. This situation is expected since those procedures are generally tailored to the more average or routine cases and are designed to balance the need of the board or committee for information against the burdens which a more complete procedure imposes upon landowners. Therefore, this section provides a special procedure to handle more complex cases or applications.

1.	Applicability. This section applies to:
a.	Proposed amendments to the County land use regulations governed by subchapter §§ 15.540 and 15.545.
b.	Proposed conditional uses.
 
c.	Variances and appeals governed by this section.
d.	Proposed minor or full subdivisions to which the suitability standards of § 13.7.J of the subdivision regulations are applied.

2.	Determination that Impact Studies are Needed
a.	The board or committee which has before it a matter listed in this subsection may, for reasons stated in a written determination, decide that the particular application, petition or matter raises unusually significant questions of impact (environmental or other) or that an unusually high level of citizen interest is evidenced in the proposed use, change or amendment, or both. The determination shall be followed by adoption by the board or committee of a resolution in which it shall set forth the impact questions on which it requires research, data and input from affected or interested persons.
b.	The listing of impact questions can include items of data which this chapter already enables the board or committee to obtain, or it may include additional items of information which are relevant to the impact questions specified in the resolution.
c.	The resolution may also assign responsibility for the acquisition of data on the specified impact questions to County agencies or officials, or to officials or agencies in other units of government who have or may be willing to assist or to the developer or applicant.
d.	The resolution may set:
1.	a date for the return of the requested data and information, and
2.	the format in which the data is to be presented.

3.	Hearings on the Impact Studies

a.	Following the return to the board or committee of the data called for in the resolution adopted under subsection 2 above, the board or committee shall cause the information to be compiled in the form of an impact report.
b.	The board or committee shall make the report available for scrutiny by the applicant or petitioner and by other interested persons or agencies, and shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the findings of the report.
c.	The hearing shall be preceded by a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stat. Ch. 985.
d.	The board or committee shall afford persons attending the hearing an opportunity to comment on the report and to make recommendations as to the weight which the board or committee should give to the report or data in deciding the matter pending before it.

4.	Suspension of Time Limits to Allow for Impact Study and Review
a.	Prior to commencing activities under this Section, the board or committee shall consult the sections under which it is operating and its legal counsel to determine the time limits, if any, which are placed upon its deliberations on the matter before it.
b.	Those time limits which are not specified in State law and which do not permit the board or committee sufficient time to conduct an impact review under this section may be suspended by passing the resolution described in subsection 2. This supersedes any contrary provision of this chapter.
c.	If the time limits set by State law conflict with the availability of reasonable time for an impact review, the board or committee may formally request that the applicant consent to a reasonable and adequate extension of time.

15.585 Digital applications 	

Applications plans shall include a digital copy with different improvements and requirements shown on separate layers. The digital file shall be provided in *.DXF or *.DWG format compatible with AutoCAD or other software prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.

15.590 Application Checklists 	

1.	Generally

a.	Table 15.590.1 provides the information required for rezonings, conditional use permits, land use permits, appeals and variances.
 
b.	If Table 15.590.1 requires the same information for two separate applications, the information is required only once for one of the applications. If the information is revised and the applications are approved in sequence, the revised information is required for the successive application.

Table 15.590.1 Submittal Requirements

Item	Text Amendment	
Rezoning	Conditional Use Permit	Land Use Permit	
Appeal	
Variance
General						
Property Owner		*	*	*	*	*
Contractor/Agent	*	*	*	*	*	*
Contact information for property owner and contractor/agent (mailing address, daytime phone and mobile number, email)	
*	
*	
*	
*	
*	
*
Site Address		*	*	*	*	*
Property Location (Town, township, section and range)		*	*	*	*	*
Computer number		*	*	*	*	*
Parcel number		*	*	*	*	*
Application fee		*	*	*	*	*
Proof of ownership (provide most recent tax bill from
County Treasurer’s office)		
*	
*			
For adjoining property (including property across roadways), names and mailing addresses of property owners		
*	
*			
Concurrent or related applications (e.g., Rezoning, Conditional Use permit, Land Division, Variance)				
*		
Existing Conditions						
Area subject to application (acres)	*	*				
Metes and Bounds description or boundary description (prepared by a registered land surveyor)		
*				
Recorded Warranty Deed			*	*		*
Existing zoning district		*	*			
Any Farmland Preservation agreement for the site		*				
Aerial Photo (from County website)		*				
Scaled map with exact boundaries of subject parcel		*				
Proposed Development						
Proposed zoning district		*	*	*		*
Drawing of short term or long term plans for the property identifying future use, density, layout, etc.		
*				
Use requested			*	*		
Site Plan						
Signature indicating that the plan was prepared by a registered surveyor			
*	
*		
*
Project location in the town			*	*		*
Lot/parcel dimensions with total lot area, property lines and all applicable setbacks			
*	
*		
*
Location of existing access roads, right-of-way, road setbacks, and recorded easements			
*	
*		
*
Topographic map (minimum of 2-foot contours			*			
Pre- and post-contours with grading limits (minimum 2-foot contours)			
L	
L		
*
Location of all existing and proposed structures and their square footage and distance from setbacks			
*	
*		
*
 

Table 15.590.1 Submittal Requirements

Item	Text Amendment	
Rezoning	Conditional Use Permit	Land Use Permit	
Appeal	
Variance
Location of existing and proposed POWTS, wells, driveways, parking areas, access, signs, and other features			
*	
*		
*
Location and type of landscaping and trees as needed to determine compliance with § 15.420.			
*			
*
Location of navigable waterways with accurate OHWM, delineated wetlands, floodplains, bluff lines, slopes in excess of 12%, wooded areas, and any other unique limiting conditions of the property			
*	
*		
*
Location of slopes 12% and greater (minimum contours to be determined by the Zoning Administrator)			
*	
*		
*
Blufflines and slope preservation zones (Riverway) and setbacks from blufflines			
*	
*		
*
Location of the OHWM of any abutting navigable waterways and all setbacks from the OHWM			
*	
*		
*
Location and landward limit of all wetlands, specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland alteration				
*		
Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and vegetative cover				
*		
Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property			
*	
*		
*
Any other unique limiting conditions of the property or information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator			
*	
*		
*
Analyses						
Written analysis of how application complies with the approval criteria in Procedures		
*	
*		
*	
Intersection Warrants Analysis if required, as prescribed by County Highway Department		
*				
Statement of whether a private water or sanitary system is to be installed			L	L		
Detailed drawings (scale not greater than 1" inch = 200')			
L	
L		
Grading plan showing grading limits and pre and post contours			
L	
L		
Project schedule and contractor list			L	L		
Erosion control plan (Best Management Practices)			L	L		
Storm water management plan stamped by an engineer and including all runoff calculations				
L		
Vegetation plan including schedule, seeding rates, and species size, type and location				
L		
Other documents				L		
* = information required | L = information required if project involves land disturbance request

2.	Conditional Use Permits. The following information is required for conditional use permits, in addition to the information provided in subsection 1:
a.	Airstrips. An application for a conditional use permit for an airstrip shall comply with the following:
1.	The application shall:
a.	be in the names of and signed by all of the owners of the real estate on which the proposed airstrip is to be located, and
b.	dated as of the date on which the applicant filed the application with the Zoning Administrator.

2.	The application shall contain the following information:
 
a.	The names of the owners of the real estate on which the proposed airstrip is to be constructed or located.
b.	The length of the proposed airstrip.
c.	The types or models of all aircraft presently owned by the applicant and the type or model of any aircraft proposed to be purchased by the applicant in the foreseeable future.
d.	The legal description and approximate acreage of the real estate owned by the applicant.
e.	Statement indicating whether or not the proposed airstrip has been approved by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics, including a copy of that approval.
f.	Statement by the applicant indicating whether the applicant is proposing a personal or private airstrip.
g.	Statement by the applicant indicating the actual or foreseeable intentions concerning the use of the airstrip in question.
h.	Statement by the applicant indicating that the applicant is strictly liable for any and all damage caused to any person or property by the operation of any aircraft to or from the airstrip in question.
i.	Proof that that applicant has sufficient liability insurance for any and all airplanes presently owned by the applicant (include as an attachment).
j.	Names and addresses of all owners of real estate which adjoins that owned by the applicant or is located closer than 1/2 mile from each boundary of the applicant's real estate.
k.	An attachment with a drawing on plain white paper at least 15"x20" in size, drawn at a scale of 1"=250', with the proposed airstrip to be located at the center of the drawing containing the following:
1.	The boundaries of the real estate owned by the applicant.
2.	All section lines and quarter section lines in the vicinity of the airstrip in question.
3.	The location and length of the proposed airstrip.
4.	The distances from the proposed airstrip to any fixed object or structure within 500' of the airstrip.
5.	The heading and elevation of the proposed airstrip.
6.	The location of all public roads, overhead utility lines, waterways or other natural obstacles.
7.	The names of owners of all real estate shown on the drawing.
8.	The approximate location of any turkey or mink commercial operations, or any other livestock
operation, on the drawing.
9.	The present use of all lands shown on the drawing.

l.	A copy of the most recent aerial photograph from St. Croix County of the real estate in which the proposed airstrip is to be located.

b.	Shoreland Overlay Districts. For a conditional use permit application within the Shoreland Overlay (SO) or Lower St. Croix Riverway (SCR) districts, the Board of Adjustment may require the applicant to furnish the following information prior to rendering a decision, in addition to the information normally required:

1.	A plan of the area showing contours, soil types, high water mark, groundwater conditions, bedrock, slope and vegetative cover.
2.	Location of buildings, parking areas, traffic access driveways, walkways, piers, open spaces and landscaping.
3.	Plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities, water supply systems and arrangements of the operations.
4.	Specifications for areas of proposed filling, grading, lagooning or dredging.
5.	Other pertinent information necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the requirements of this chapter.

3.	Land Use Permit for Signs. The following information is required in an application for a Land Use Permit for Signs:

a.	Applicant contact information.
b.	Property owner contact information.
c.	Property information, site address, legal description, tax identification number, zoning district.
d.	Project information including a description of the sign plan for the site and total proposed signage, including all permanent and temporary signage.
e.	A site plan, drawn to scale, to include:
 
f.	Dimensions and area of the lot or parcel.
g.	Location of all existing and proposed structures and signs with distances measured from the lot lines and right- of-way of all abutting roads or highways.
h.	In the Riverway, Shoreland and Floodplain Overlay Districts, location of the bluffline, OHWM of any abutting navigable waterways, floodplain, floodway and floodfringe limits as determined from floodplain zoning maps used to delineate floodplain areas
i.	Location of existing or future access driveways and roads or highways.
j.	Conceptual drawings of all proposed signs with dimensions.
k.	Information on all lighting and electrical components.
l.	Method of construction and/or attachment to a building or in the ground shall be explained in the plans and specifications.
m.	Contact information for whomever will be erecting the sign(s).
n.	Attach all related permits or permit applications.
o.	Calculations for compliance with the Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Sign Code for construction.
p.	Additional relevant information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to apply all applicable ordinance requirements and standards, such as photos, cross- section drawings, specialized engineering plans and landscaping.
q.	If additional information is requested, the application shall not be considered a properly completed application and timeframes for processing shall not commence until the additional information is received.

4.	Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
a.	An erosion and sediment control plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect, professional soil scientist, professional engineer, engineer in training, certified professional in erosion and sediment control, certified professional in storm water quality, certified soil tester, or other licensed professional acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.
b.	The erosion and sediment control plan shall include all of the following items:
1.	Description of construction sequencing.
2.	Contact information for property owner, grading contractor, and erosion control subcontractor as applicable.
3.	Site map showing all of the following:
4.	Property boundaries.
5.	Existing and proposed buildings.
6.	The location of buildings on adjoining properties.
7.	Soil types.
8.	Grading limits.
9.	Pre and post construction 2-foot contours.
10.	Pre and post construction drainage patterns.
11.	The locations and quantities of all BMPs.
12.	Water bodies with OHWM and OHWM setback.
13.	Wetland boundaries.
14.	Existing and proposed wells and POWTS.
15.	Existing and proposed vegetation.

5.	Stormwater Management Plan

a.	A stormwater management plan must be prepared and submitted by a registered landscape architect, professional soil scientist, professional engineer, engineer in training, certified professional in erosion and sediment control, certified professional in storm water quality, certified soil tester, or other licensed professional acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.
b.	The stormwater management plan shall meet the performance standards described in Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 151 Subchapter III, Non-Ag Performance Standards.
 
6.	Mobile Support Structures (§ 15.365). Applications for new mobile support structures and facilities or Class 1 or 2 Co-Locations (see § 15.365) shall include the following information:

a.	The application must be signed by both the property owner and the applicant or his/her agent.

b.	The following information shall be provided for new mobile support structures and facilities and Class 1 Co- Locations:

1.	A site plan prepared and certified by a professional engineer which shows the location of the mobile support structure and facilities, lot or parcel boundaries, the associated equipment on the ground, fencing, landscaping, lighting, access driveway and public road.

2.	If an application is to construct a new mobile service support structure, an explanation as to why the applicant chose the proposed location and why the applicant did not choose co-location. The explanation must include a sworn statement from an individual who has responsibility over the placement of the mobile service support structure attesting to one of the following:

a.	That co-location within the applicant’s search ring would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity.

b.	That co-location is technically infeasible.

c.	That co-location is economically burdensome to the mobile service provider.

3.	If the application is to construct a new mobile service support structure , a construction plan which describes the proposed mobile service support structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment that will be placed on or around the new mobile service support structure.

4.	If the application is a Class 1 co-location , which would substantially modify an existing support structure, a construction plan which describes the proposed modifications to the support structure and the equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment associated with the proposed modifications.

5.	A permit fee, not to exceed $3,000.

c.	The following information shall be provided for a Class 2 Co-Location:

1.	The location of the proposed mobile service facilities.

2.	A permit fee, not to exceed $500.

15.595 Fees 	

Fees for approvals required by this Chapter are established by ordinance of the Board of Supervisors and published on the County's website. [Reference: Wis. Stat. § 59.696]

15.596 To 15.599 Reserved. 	

NONCONFORMITIES & VESTED RIGHTS

Contents:

15.600 General Provisions
15.605 Nonconforming Uses
15.610 Nonconforming Lots
15.615 Nonconforming Structures
15.620 Nonconforming Site Improvements 15.625 Applications and Projects in Progress 15.626 To 15.699 Reserved.

15.600 General Provisions 	
 
Purpose and Findings: The County finds that nonconformities adversely affect the orderly development and value of other property in a zoning district, and should not continue unless restricted. This subchapter -

•	Protects property rights by providing for the continuation of nonconforming buildings, structures, lots, site improvements, and applications, and
•	Specifies those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconformities may continue in order to implement the comprehensive plan, promote the purposes of the County’s Zoning Districts and other requirements of this Chapter, and to protect neighboring residents and community character, and
•	Implements the statutory requirements for the State of Wisconsin to protect nonconformities (see Wis. Stat. §§
59.69(10) - (10m) and 66.10015, and Wisconsin common law on nonconformities and vested rights.

1.	Applicability. This subchapter applies to any nonconformity. A “nonconformity” means any nonconforming use, nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure, nonconforming site improvement, or application or project in progress on the effective date.

2.	Effective Date. For purpose of this subchapter, the “effective date” means the time that any ordinances that create
a nonconformity take effect.

3.	Record of Nonconforming Uses. This subsection provides an alternate procedure, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 59.69(10)(d), for establishing documentary evidence regarding (1) when the use was first established; (2) that the use at the time of establishment was done consistent with the rules and regulations in effect at that time, if any; (3) that it has continued continuously, without cessation of more than 12 continuous months; and (4) the nature of the use.
4.	Registration. A property owner may register a nonconforming use when applying for any other permit in this Chapter or may register when there is no application pending. The procedure is as follows: :

a.	The applicant shall provide the registration on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator.

b.	The applicant shall provide the following information:

1.	the specific uses that are the subject of the registration,

2.	when use in question was legally established;

3.	how the use does not comply with one or more of the requirements of this Chapter; and

4.	evidence that the use has continued from the date, or approximate date, of establishment to the date of registration without an interruption of more than 12 continuous months.

c.	The Zoning Administrator shall take the following action:

1.	approve the registration,

2.	approve the application with conditions needed to establish that the use was lawfully established before the Effective Date,

3.	deny the registration on the grounds that the registration does not demonstrate the that the use is lawfully nonconforming, or

4.	take no action pending receipt of additional information needed to establish that the use is lawfully nonconforming.

d.	The Zoning Administration shall render its decision or no-action determination within forty (40) days after the date that a complete registration is filed.

e.	If the registration is approved or conditionally approved, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing and shall list the use on the listing of nonconforming uses in the Community Development Department.

f.	If the registration is denied, the applicant may file an appeal pursuant to § 15.560.

g.	Disclaimer. Given the nature of the listing, the County does not warrant that the information is complete and/or accurate in all respects.

15.605 Nonconforming uses 	
 
A nonconforming use (including any building, premises, structure, or fixture for any trade or industry for which the building, premises, structure, or fixture is used at the Effective Date), may continue subject to the following limitations:

1.	No Increase in Nonconformity. Except as provided in subsection 2 below, no nonconforming use shall be expanded, enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity.

2.	Structural Alteration, Addition or Repair. No structural alteration, addition or repair to any nonconforming use shall exceed 50% of its assessed value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use, unless the use is permanently changed to a conforming use. This includes any existing building, premises, structure, or fixture used to carry on any prohibited trade or new industry within the district where the buildings, premises, structures, or fixtures are located. The value of alterations, additions and repair work shall include the value of all labor and material, even if contributed or provided without cash outlay.

3.	Discontinuance. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building, premise, structure or fixture shall conform to this Chapter.

4.	Nuisances. Uses or their adjuncts which are or become nuisances are not entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.

5.	Conditional Uses. Except as provided in subsection 4 above, any use which is permitted as a conditional use is not considered a nonconforming use.

6.	Specific Districts or Uses

a.	Dwelling Units in AG-1/AG-2 Districts. In the AG-1 and AG-2 districts, any dwelling unit lawfully existing as of January 1, 2014 may continue in residential use, and is exempt from any limitations imposed or authorized under Wisconsin’s non-conformities statute (Wis. Stat. § 59.69(10)) if it remains residential and meets all applicable dimensional standards of the zoning district, and all other county ordinance requirements.

b.	Manufactured Home Communities. A manufactured home community licensed under Wis. Stat. § 101.935 that is a legal nonconforming use continues to be a legal nonconforming use notwithstanding the occurrence of any of the following activities within the community:

1.	Repair or replacement of homes.

2.	Repair or replacement of infrastructure.

c.	Temporary Structures. The continuance of the nonconforming use of a temporary structure is prohibited.

15.610 Nonconforming Lots 	
1.	Generally. A legal nonconforming lot may be used for an allowable use in the applicable zoning district, if that use complies with all other development standards of the applicable zoning district.
2.	Alteration of property boundary lines
a.	The location of a property boundary line of a legal nonconforming lot shall not be modified by any means, except as follows.
b.	The Zoning Administrator may approve a change to a property boundary line for purposes of subsection 1 of this section if:
1.	the change will lessen the nonconformity, and
2.	the change is consistent with the intent of this Chapter.

c.	All requirements of the County's subdivision regulations (Chapter 13 of the County Code of Ordinances) shall also be followed, which may be more restrictive.
d.	If the boundary change is made and:
1.	the resulting lot still does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter, the lot shall continue to be nonconforming, or
2.	the resulting lot conforms to the requirements of this Chapter, the lot shall no longer be considered nonconforming.

15.615 Nonconforming Structures 	

1.	Damage or Destruction
 
a.	Damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures may be restored to the size, location and use that they had immediately before the damage or destruction occurred, without limitation as to the costs of repair reconstruction, or improvement, if all of the following apply:
1.	A Land Use Permit per § 15.555 is required.
2.	The nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed after March 2, 2006.
3.	The damage or destruction was caused by violent wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold or infestation.
4.	A land owner has demonstrated by a permit application and approval the scope, nature and extent of the damage, and the dimensions of the damaged structure and proposed restoration.
5.	Repair and reconstruction are limited to that part of a structure and its specific improvements which were actually damaged and similar building materials are employed.
6.	Repair and reconstruction comply with applicable provisions of this Chapter and other County, State and Federal requirements.

b.	The size of a structure shall be allowed to be larger than the size it was immediately before the damage or destruction, if necessary for the structure to comply with applicable County, State or Federal requirements.

c.	Boat Houses. Maintenance and repair of nonconforming boat houses which are located below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable waters shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stat. § 30.121.

15.620 Nonconforming Site Improvements 	

1.	Applicability.
a.	This section applies to Nonconforming Site Improvements.
b.	This section does not apply to minor repairs and renovations (less than 10% of the structural value of a structure
or site improvements), which are considered conforming.

2.	Generally. On lots with nonconforming site improvements, no additions to, or exterior repairs or alterations of any
building, structure or site improvement that exceeds that threshold provided in § 15.615.1 are allowed, unless:

a.	the nonconforming site improvements are brought into complete conformity with the regulations applicable to the use, building, structure or zoning district, or

b.	the activity is authorized by a land use permit.

3.	Permitted Improvements. When an addition to, or repairs or alterations to, any structure or site improvement is proposed on a lot with a nonconforming site improvement, the Zoning Administrator may approve a nonconforming site permit allowing the addition, repairs or renovation if it finds that all of the following criteria apply:
a.	The nonconforming site improvement(s) is the only nonconformity pertaining to the property.
b.	Compliance with the site improvement requirements applicable to the zoning district in which the property is located is not reasonably possible. Mere financial hardship does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance with the site improvement requirements are not reasonably possible.
c.	The property can be developed as proposed without any significant adverse impact on surrounding properties or the public health or safety.
d.	The owner has committed to other site design measures to reduce the negative impacts associated with the nonconformity or to accomplish the purpose of the required site improvement.

15.625 Applications and Projects in Progress 	

Purpose: Wisconsin follows a "bright-line" vested rights rule. This provides that a property owner's rights do not vest until the developer has submitted an application for a building permit that conforms to the zoning or building code requirements in effect at the time of application. This section applies that rule, protecting the rights of property owners with vested rights while allowing County zoning administration to distinguish between applications that are vested and those that are subject to changes in zoning regulation.

1.	Situations Vested. This Chapter, or an amendment to this Chapter, does not require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building or structure if:
 
a.	the application for a building permit is filed that qualifies for vested rights under Wisconsin law, in that the application:
1.	strictly conforms to the requirements of this Chapter in effect at the time of that application, and
2.	is filed before the Effective Date, or

b.	construction has started pursuant to a lawfully issued building permit, or
c.	the particular use has commenced, or
d.	bona fide construction contract is entered into before the effective date of this Chapter.

2.	Applications not Vested
a.	A valid land use permit, conditional use permit, or building permit issued prior to the Effective Date does not establish vested rights, and is subject to this Chapter and any applicable amendments to this Chapter.
b.	An ordinance adopting an amendment to this Chapter may exempt categories of applications that are exempt from the application of the amendments based on their progress or expenditures committed toward completion of the project.

15.626 To 15.699 Reserved. 	

AGENCIES

Contents:

15.700 General Provisions
15.705 Zoning Administrator
15.710 Community Development Committee (CDC) 15.715 Board of Adjustment
15.716 To 15.749 Reserved.

15.700 General Provisions 	

This Subchapter formally establishes committees, agencies or officials, or recognizes existing committees, agencies or officials, that administer this Chapter. It establishes the composition of those agencies, their jurisdiction, and related administrative matters.

15.705 Zoning Administrator 	
1.	Created. There is created the office of County Zoning Administrator with the powers and duties set forth in subsection 2 below.
2.	Powers and Duties. The Zoning Administrator shall:
a.	Advise Applicants. Advise applicants for permits as to the provisions of the chapter and assists them in preparing applications.
b.	Issue Permits. Issue permits as provided for specific processes in this Chapter or the County Code of Ordinances, including:
1.	Land Use Permits (§ 15.555), and
2.	Septic Tank Permits (County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12).

c.	Keep Records. Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and other official actions.
d.	Determine District Boundaries. Determine questions of the exact location of district boundaries.
e.	Inspect Water and Sewage Systems. Inspect new and existing water and sewage systems to determine compliance with applicable ordinances.
f.	Make  On-site  Investigations  of  Subdivisions.  Make  on-site  investigations  required  for  subdivision
administration as provided in County Code of Ordnances, Chapter 13.
g.	Access to Premises for Inspection Purposes. Access any structure or premises to perform the duties provided in this Section. This power shall be exercised at a reasonable hour and after a 24-hour notice.
 
h.	Enforcement. Take actions to enforce violations of this Chapter as provided in § 15.765.

15.710 Community Development Committee (CDC) 	

1.	Created. The Community Development Committee (CDC) is created as a standing committee of the County Board of Supervisors.
2.	Powers and Duties. The CDC is organized and has the powers assigned by the Rules And Bylaws of the Board of Supervisors, St. Croix County Wisconsin (effective March 6, 2018, as amended). This includes the power and duty to act as the County Zoning Agency pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 59.69(2).

15.715 Board of Adjustment 	
1.	Created. A Board of Adjustment is created pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 59.694.
2.	Authorization and Composition. The County Board Chairman shall appoint a Board of Adjustment consisting of 5 members and 2 alternates. All appointments shall be subject to confirmation by the County Board.
3.	Procedural Rules
a.	The Board of Adjustment shall select its own chairman and meet at the call of the chairman and at other times that the Board determines, at a fixed time and place.
b.	All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public.
c.	The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator as a public record.
d.	In the case of all appeals, the Board of Adjustment shall solicit and weigh information and comments from the CDC.

4.	Powers and Duties. The Board of Adjustment shall:
a.	Adopt rules that it considers desirable for the conduct of business, subject to the provisions of this Section and relevant State Statutes.
b.	Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the Enforcement or administration of this chapter. All appeals are governed by § 15.560.
c.	Grant variances pursuant to § 15.570.
d.	Grant conditional uses pursuant to § 15.550.

15.716 To 15.749 Reserved. 	

ENFORCEMENT

Contents:

15.750 General Provisions
15.755 Violations
15.760 Penalties
15.765 Enforcement Procedures
15.770 Revocation of Permit or Approval 15.771 To 15.799 Reserved.

15.750 General Provisions 	

This section provides for enforcement and penalties for violations of this chapter. The County may initiate court action to enforce the chapter. An enforcement can result in a citation, court injunction, and/or forfeitures.

15.755 Violations 	
 
1.	Declaration of Violations. Any of the following are considered unlawful and a violation of this Chapter, and are subject to the enforcement remedies provided by § 15.760 and Wisconsin state law:
a.	Generally
1.	Any of the following activities if they occur in a manner that does not conform to this Chapter, including the
district where the land or structure is located:
a.	The use or occupancy of any land, premises, building or structure,
b.	The construction, placement, design, erection, moving, alteration, use or occupancy of a building or structure,
c.	Establishing, changing, or expanding a use, building or structure,
d.	Operating a use,
e.	Designing, erecting, constructing, or altering a structure, or
f.	Reducing or enlarging a building, site, or development area.

2.	Examples of ways that the activities described above may not conform to this Chapter include:
a.	Buildings or structures that exceed the applicable height limits,
b.	Buildings or structures with less lot area than required by this Chapter,
c.	Buildings, structures or lots with larger, wider, narrower or smaller front, side and rear yards than required by the district where the structure is located.

b.	Development or use without, or inconsistent with, permit or approval. Any activity that is not authorized or is inconsistent with all of the required permits, approvals, certificates and authorization required by this Chapter (see Procedures).
c.	Development or use inconsistent with this Chapter. Any use or activity that:

1.	is not allowed by the applicable zoning district,
2.	does not include any conditional use permit or other authorization required by the zoning district or this Chapter,
3.	does not comply with the dimensional standards or other regulations of the applicable district,
4.	does not comply with any applicable Development Standards,
5.	does not comply with any applicable Use Regulations, or
6.	that is a nonconformity, but:
a.	was not lawfully established, or
b.	is operated in a manner that becomes unlawful after it is lawfully established, or
c.	does not comply with any lawful conditions relating to its operation, expansion, or continuation.

d.	Development or use inconsistent with conditions. With regard to any term, condition or qualification placed by the County upon a required permit, certificate, rezoning, conditional use permit, variance, appeal, land use permit, or other form of authorization granted by the County to allow the use, development or other activity upon land or improvements of land:

1.	Any non-compliance with the condition, by act or omission, or
2.	failure to timely fulfill the condition.

e.	Making setbacks or yard nonconforming. To reduce or diminish any lot area so that the setbacks, yards or
open spaces are smaller than prescribed by this Chapter.
f.	Increasing use intensity. To increase the intensity and/or density of use of any land or structure in a way that exceeds any limits prescribed by the applicable zoning district.
g.	Removing, defacing, obscuring notice. To remove, deface or obscure, or otherwise interfere with, any notice required by this Chapter.

2.	Violations of Prior Regulations

a.	All violations of prior County zoning regulations as of the effective date of this Chapter, continue to be violations and are not considered legal nonconforming situations under this Chapter.
 
b.	The County has the same authority to secure remedies for violations of those regulations to the same extent that it may secure civil remedies for violations of this Chapter.

3.	Identification and Liability of Parties
a.	The following parties shall comply with all provisions of this Chapter which bear upon their area of competency and responsibility:
1.	owners of land or properties,
2.	occupants of land or premises,
3.	agents of owners or occupants including without limitation, building contractors, surveyors, plumbers, installers, soil technicians, road builders, grading and excavating contractors and their agents, and
4.	lending institutions and insurers, and their agents .

b.	Any person who violates or aids or abets in a violation of this Chapter is liable to prosecution or remedial action.
c.	This  Chapter  applies  fully  to  all  public  governmental  and  quasi-public  and  quasi-  governmental  lands, developments and activities unless specifically exempted by State or federal law.

4.	Continuation a Separate Offense. Each day a violation exists or continues is a separate offense.

15.760 Penalties 	

1.	Citations. For a violation, a citation may be issued pursuant to Chapter 1 of the St. Croix County Code of Ordinances.

2.	Forfeitures. For a violation, a forfeiture of not less than $100 nor more than $500 may be imposed upon conviction or adjudication, plus the cost of prosecution for each violation if so ordered by the court.
3.	Injunctions/Restraining Orders. As a substitute for or an addition to forfeiture actions, the Corporation Counsel may, on behalf of the County, seek enforcement of any and all parts of this Chapter by court actions seeking injunctional or restraining orders.

4.	Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the County may stop work on any development, building, or structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this Chapter or a violation of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the County.

5.	Other Remedies.

a.	No provision of this chapter shall be construed to bar action to enjoin or abate the use or occupancy of any land or structure as a nuisance under Wisconsin law.

b.	In addition to the enforcement powers and remedies specified in this Section, the County may exercise any and all enforcement powers and remedies granted to it by Wisconsin state law.

6.	Cumulative. These remedies are cumulative.

15.765 Enforcement Procedures 	
1.	Investigation and Notice of Violations
a.	Zoning Administrator to Enforce Chapter. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall inspect and investigate compliance of land use activities with the terms of this Chapter.
b.	Notice of Violation.
1.	The Zoning Administrator or designee shall:
a.	inspect and investigate conditions that are or are likely to become a violation (as defined in § 15.755), and
b.	immediately notify the parties responsible and potentially liable pursuant to § 15.755 above of the detected violation, and
c.	is authorized to report the violation to the Corporation Counsel and to sign a complaint.

2.	Contents of Notice of Violation. The notice of violation shall include:
a.	The person(s) responsible for the violation,
b.	The nature of the violation,
 
c.	A demand that the condition that is alleged to constitute the present or potential violation be halted, prevented from occurring or remedied; or
d.	A statement that a complaint on the condition and demand for prosecution has been or will be transmitted to the Corporation Counsel or enforcement officials, State agencies or both.

c.	Referral for Prosecution. If an enforcement demand is issued under subsection c above and is not complied with, the Zoning Administrator may file a complaint and demand for prosecution, unless an administrative appeal is commenced and a stay order is issued pursuant to § 15.560.

2.	Prosecution

a.	The Corporation Counsel shall prosecute violations of this chapter reported by the Zoning Administrator.
b.	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent private prosecutions of violations pursuant to Wis. Stat. §
59.69(11) or other sections of the Wisconsin Statutes or common law.

15.770 Revocation of Permit or Approval 	
1.	Permits
a.	A permit may be revoked by the official issuing the permit at any time prior to the completion of the use, building, structure or sign for which the permit was issued, when any of the following conditions are present:

1.	There is departure from the plans, specifications or conditions as required under the terms of the permit,
2.	The permit was procured by false representation, or
3.	The permit was issued by mistake, or
4.	Any provision of this Chapter is being violated.

b.	Written notice of the revocation shall be:

1.	served upon the owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed in the building or
structure for which the permit was issued, or

2.	posted in a prominent location on the property, or

3.	sent by certified mail.

c.	Where notice of revocation is served or posted, no further construction or use of the property shall proceed.

d.	Any revocation of a permit may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment as provided in § 15.560.

2.	Conditional Use Permit, Variance or Appeal. Where a conditional use, appeal or variance is approved subject to specified conditions and where those conditions are not complied with, the Board of Adjustment may conduct a hearing following procedures similar to those followed in considering the granting of the a conditional use, appeal or variance. Finding of noncompliance with the conditions originally imposed is grounds for revocation.
3.	Rezoning. Where a rezoning is approved subject to specified conditions and where those conditions are not complied with, the CDC, Board of Supervisors, or Zoning Administrator may initiate a rezoning to the prior zoning district, or an appropriate zoning district, pursuant to § 15.545. The rezoning shall be processed as provided in § 15.545.

15.771 To 15.799 Reserved. 	

DEFINITIONS & RULES OF INTERPRETATION

Contents:
15.800 General rules of interpretation 15.805 Definitions
15.807 Acronyms
15.810 Interpretation of Zoning Map 15.815 Conflicting Rules
15.816 To 15.899 Reserved.
 
15.800 General Rules of Interpretation 	

Purpose: This subchapter contains basic rules on how this Chapter is interpreted. In addition to the general statements in this section, which primarily repeat rules of legal interpretation established by the State Legislature or by the courts, the reader should consult:

•	§ 15.805, which contains definitions of terms found throughout this Chapter;
•	§ 15.807, which provides a list of acronyms used throughout this Chapter;
•	§ 15.810, which provides rules for interpreting the Zoning Map and boundary determinations, and
•	§ 15.815, which describes how to apply conflicting rules.
1.	This Chapter shall be interpreted and applied as minimum requirements.
2.	This Chapter shall be liberally construed in favor of the County.
3.	This Chapter shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
4.	The terms or words used in this Chapter shall be interpreted as follows:
a.	Words used in the present tense include the future.
b.	Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular.
c.	The words “shall” or “must” are mandatory. The word “should” is permissive.
d.	“Building,” “land” or “area” includes any part of a building, land or area unless otherwise provided.
e.	“Including” or “includes” is without limitation because of enumeration, unless otherwise provided.
f.	All distances, unless otherwise specified shall be measured horizontally.

5.	Any reference to a building, structure or facility also refers to a part of the building, structure or facility.
6.	Section references are to the County Code of Ordinances unless otherwise indicated.
7.	All definitions that refer to Wisconsin Statutes or the Wisconsin Administrative Code shall incorporate any revisions or amendments to the statutory language or regulations.

15.805 Definitions 	

This section defines key words and phrases used throughout this Chapter.

"A" Zones: Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which would be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the availability of data for a given area.

Abut: To share a property line, or lie directly across a street or stream. Includes "adjacent," "adjoin," "adjoining" or "abutting."

Access and Viewing Corridor: A strip of vegetated land that allows safe pedestrian access to the shore through the vegetative buffer zone.

Accessory Building: A subordinate building or portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to the permitted use of the main building.

Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same lot as the principal structure or use of the property. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to, detached garages, sheds, barns, gazebos, swimming pools, hot tubs, fences, retaining walls and detached stairways and lifts; and impervious, pervious or porous driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, patios and decks (both detached and attached).

IBC reference: Carports, fences more than 6 feet (1829 mm) high, private garages, retaining walls, sheds.

Accessory Use: A use subordinate to, serving, and customarily incidental to the principal use on the same lot or parcel. An accessory use is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or use served. Accessory uses include, but are not limited to, Home Child Care, Home Occupations, and Roadside Stands.
 
Adult Bath House: An establishment or business which provides the services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, that is not operated by a medical practitioner or a professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Wisconsin and which establishment provides to its patrons an opportunity for engaging in “specified sexual activities” as defined in this ordinance.

Adult Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business wherein patrons are afforded an opportunity to paint images on a body which is wholly or partially nude. For purposes of this ordinance, the adult body painting studio shall not be deemed to include a tattoo parlor.

Adult Bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade in books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.

Adult Cabaret: An establishment or business which features male and/or female topless and/or bottomless dancers, go- go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, burlesque shows, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.

Adult Establishment: An "adult establishment" as defined by the applicability section of § 15.310.

Adult Massage Parlor: An establishment or business with or without sleeping accommodations which provides the services of massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, not operated by medical practitioner or professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Wisconsin and which establishment provides for its patrons the opportunity to engage in "specified sexual activity" as defined in this ordinance.

Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein for observation by patrons therein.

Adult Modeling Studios: An establishment or business which provides the services of modeling for the purpose of reproducing the human body wholly or partially in the nude by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or otherwise.

Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein for observation by patrons therein.

Adult Motion Picture Theater (Outdoor): A parcel of land from which individuals may view a motion picture presented out of doors which present material distinguishably characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activity" or "specified anatomical areas".

Adult Novelty Shop: An establishment or business having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade in novelty or other items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on, or designed for, “specified sexual activity” as defined herein or stimulating such activity.

Adult Video Store: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in videotapes for sale or rent which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, display or rental of such material.

Agricultural Accessory Building or Structure: Any building or structure that performs an incidental function in support of the primary agricultural use of property and which is customarily associated with the primary agricultural use of the property.

Agricultural Accessory Use: A use that is incidental to and customarily associated with an agricultural use of property. To be deemed incidental, a use must not be the principal use of the property but is one that is minor in significance to the principal use and which has a reasonable relationship to the principal use. To be deemed customary, a use must be commonly and by long practice established as being reasonably associated with the primary agricultural use. See. 15.305.
 
Agricultural Entertainment: A farm based enterprise or business that combines the elements and characteristics of agriculture and tourism. Agricultural Entertainment includes a wide array of farm and farm-related activities, including outdoor recreation (nature based tourism, fishing, hunting, wildlife study, horseback riding); educational experiences (day camps, hands-on chores, cannery tours, cooking classes, wine tasting, on-farm museums); entertainment (harvest festivals, barn dances, "petting" farms); and hospitality services (weddings, overnight farm or ranch stays, guided tours, on-farm direct sales, "pick-your-own" operations, roadside stands, and farmers markets). The uses listed in this definition apply only to C-2 and state certified zoning districts, AG-1 and AG-2.

Agricultural Products Processing: A facility used for the cooking, dehydrating, refining, bottling, canning, or other treatment of agricultural products which changes the naturally grown product for consumer use. Does not include slaughterhouses, animal reduction yards, tallow works, or rendering plants. May include warehousing and packaging as secondary uses. Warehousing may include controlled atmosphere and cold storage of processed and/or packaged agricultural products. Packaging may include washing, sorting, crating, and other functional operations such as drying, field crushing or other preparation in which the agricultural product remains essentially unaltered.

IBC reference: Factory Industrial Group F-1 including bakeries, food processing establishments and commercial kitchens (not associated with restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities more than 2,500 sf in area), tobacco.

Agricultural Related Use: A facility, whether or not located on a farm, that has at least one of the following as a primary, and not merely incidental, purpose: (a) Providing agricultural supplies, agricultural equipment, agricultural inputs or agricultural services directly to farms, including farms in the farmland preservation zoning district. (b) Storing, processing or handling raw agricultural commodities obtained directly from farms, including farms in the farmland preservation zoning district. (c) Processing agricultural by- products or wastes received directly from farms, including farms in the farmland preservation district. The uses listed in this section apply only to state certified zoning districts, AG-1 and AG-2.

Agricultural Resource Production: The production of end products from materials grown or extracted from agricultural or forested land (excluding uses listed under the Mining & Natural Resource Extraction category in § 15.285, Use Table), including sawmills. A "sawmill" means a machine and related equipment or area that (1) saws dimension lumber, boards, beams, timber, poles, ties, shingles, shakes, siding, and wood chips from logs or bolts; or (2) saws round wood poles, pilings, and posts and treating them with preservatives.

Agricultural Supply: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales, sale or rental of farm tools and implements, feed, grain, tack, animal care products, large implements (such as tractors and combines), and other farm supplies. This includes food sales and farm machinery repair services.

Agricultural Use: Any of the following activities conducted for the purpose of an income or livelihood crop or forage production, keeping livestock, beekeeping, wholesale nursery, sod or Christmas Tree production, floriculture, aquaculture, fur farming, forest management, or enrolling land in a federal agricultural commodity payment program or a federal or state agricultural land conservation payment program.

Air Conditioning and Steam Supply: An establishment that produces or distributes steam, heated air, cooled air, geothermal steam, or trailer-mounted air conditioning units used as back-up cooling systems. Distribution may be through pipes or mains.

Airstrip: Any area of land or water which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and take-off of aircraft. This includes any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use, for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located in those areas. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 114.002 (7)]

IBC reference: Airport traffic control towers; aircraft hangars, accessory to a one- or two-family residence.

Alcoholic Beverage: fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor.

Amateur Radio Antenna: A freestanding or building-mounted structure, including any base, tower or pole, antenna, and appurtenances, intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission.

Amusement or Theme Park: An establishment primarily engaged in operating a variety of attractions, such as mechanical rides, water rides, games, shows, theme exhibits, refreshment stands, and picnic grounds.

IBC reference: Amusement park structures.
 
Animal Production, Other: Establishments raising animals and insects (except cattle, hogs and pigs, poultry, sheep and goats, and Aquaculture, or other animals separately listed under Agriculture - Keeping Livestock or Livestock Facilities) for sale or product production.

IBC reference: Livestock shelters.

Animal Unit: As defined in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 243.

Animal Waste: Manure, milking center waste and other organic waste generated by a livestock facility. [Source: ATCP
51.01(43)]

Animal Waste Storage Facility: One or more animal waste storage structures , including stationary equipment and piping used to load and unload an animal waste storage structure if the equipment is specifically designed for that purpose and is an integral part of the facility. It does not include equipment used to apply animal waste to land . [Source: ATCP 51.01(43)]

Animal Waste Storage Structure: A waste storage impoundment made by constructing embankments, excavating a pit or dugout, or fabricating a structure. It does not include:

1.	equipment used to apply waste to land, or
2.	for purposes of §§ ATCP 51.12 (2) (manure storage structure setbacks) and 51.14 (odor):
a.	A structure used to collect and store animal waste under a livestock housing facility, or
b.	A manure digester consisting of a sealed structure in which manure is subjected to managed biological decomposition.

[Source: ATCP 51.01(44)]

Animal Waste Utilization: The application of animal waste on suitable land in a manner which will achieve compliance with livestock performance standards and prohibitions established in Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter NR 151, NRCS Conservation Practice Standard Code 590, and other designated water quality standards adopted by the State of Wisconsin or the County.

Antenna: Communications equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals and is used in the provision of mobile services.

Applicant: Any person who applies for a permit or rezoning under this Chapter.

Aquaculture: Aquaculture conducted for the purpose of an income or livelihood. "Aquaculture" means the the controlled cultivation of aquatic plants and animals, using "normal aquaculture activities" as defined in Wis. Stat. § 281.36.

Asphalt Plant: A building and associated equipment used for to produce materials used in the construction or maintenance of public roads, and that is limited in duration to the project in which its products are used. Also referred to as a "Ready- Mix Concrete Plant."

Attached: A building having any portion of one (1) or more walls in common with adjoining buildings.

Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores: Establishments that are principally engaged in the retail sale of parts, accessories, and supplies used for the repair, maintenance, and modification of motor vehicles.

Automotive Service, Repair, and Towing: Repairs, incidental body and fender work, replacement of parts and motor services, towing and steam cleaning to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight.

Bar or Tavern: A building or part of a building open to the public, where alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises. The following are not considered a bar or tavern:

•	a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are sold only at tables and only in conjunction with meals;
•	a club not open to the public where alcoholic beverages are sold in conjunction with the operation of the club;
•	premises where alcoholic beverages are sold by established organizations in conjunction with the operation of a picnic, fair or other amusement enterprise.

IBC reference: Taverns and bars, night clubs.
 
Barber or Beauty Shop: An establishment that provides personal appearance care services to individual consumers. Includes services that provide appearance care not otherwise listed, such as nail salons, tanning salons, ear piercing services, steam or turkish baths, massage parlors, tattoo parlors, and non-medical diet and weight reducing centers.

IBC reference: Barber and beauty shops.

Base Flood: A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See also Regional Flood)

Base Flood Elevation: An elevation equal to that which reflects the height of the base flood as defined above.

Basement: Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.

Base Zoning District: The zoning districts that generally apply throughout the unincorporated County, including AG-1, AG-2, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 (§§ 15.220 through 15.251 of this Chapter) and CON (§ 15.275 of this Chapter).

Bed and Breakfast: Any place of lodging that -

1.	provides 8 or fewer rooms for rent to no more than a total of 20 tourists or transients,
2.	Provides no meals other than breakfast and provides that breakfast only to renters of the place,
3.	Is the owner's personal residence,
4.	Is occupied by the owner at the time of rental,
5.	Was originally built and occupied as a single-family residences, or, prior to use as a place of lodging, was converted to use and occupied as a single-family residence.

[Source: Wis. Stat. § 97.01]

In the AG-2 district, a bed and breakfast occurs in an existing dwelling located on a farm, and shall constitute an Agricultural Accessory Use.

Bedrock: The solid rock that underlies the soil and other unconsolidated material or that is exposed at the surface.

Beekeeping: Beekeeping for the purpose of an income or livelihood (also known as "apiculture"). “Beekeeping” means the maintenance of bee colonies in hives. “Bee” means any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera species. “Hive” means a structure for the housing of a bee colony. Hives are typically a series of boxes stacked one on top of the other..

Best Management Practice (BMP): A practice or industry standard designed to minimize environmental damage.

Biopower Facility: An establishment engaged in the production, distribution, and sale, both retail and wholesale, of energy generated by biomass. "Biomass" a resource that derives energy from wood or plant material or residue, biological waste, crops grown for use as a resource or landfill gases. “Biomass” does not include garbage, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 289.01(9), or nonvegetation−based industrial, commercial or household waste. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 196.378]

Bluffline, Riverway: A line along the top of the slope preservation zone, as defined by NR118. There can be more than one bluffline.

Bluffline, Shoreland: The top of a steep slope that is 25% or greater (over a horizontal distance 50 feet). The top is identified either where there is a clearly identifiable break in the slope, or at the uphill end of the first 50-foot horizontal segment to reach 18% in average slope.

Board of Adjustment: The St. Croix County Board of Adjustment.

Boarding House: A building where, for compensation, meals and lodging are provided for more than 3 guests not members of a family, and that are not transients. A "Boarding House" includes any building other than a hotel or motel where lodging only is provided for compensation. Examples include fraternities, sororities, or dorms. This use type does not include a hotel, motel, or multi-family building. A multifamily building includes separate dwelling units occupied by a single household, while a boarding house includes separate households sharing kitchen facilities. This does not include migrant labor camps, which are defined, conditioned and permitted by Wis. Stat. § 59.69(4e). Also referred to as a "Lodging House."

IBC reference: Residential board and care facilities, boarding houses (transient) with more than 10 occupants, boarding houses (nontransient) with more than 16 occupants, boarding houses (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants, boardinghouses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants, lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms.
 
Boathouse: A building or portion thereof used for the housing or care of boats and other associated marine equipment for noncommercial purposes and not permitted to be used for human habitation.

Brewery: A facility for the manufacture of fermented malt beverages, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 125.02, and associated authorized activities, as described in Wis. Stat. § 125.29.

Building: A structure used, designed or intended for the protection, shelter, enclosure or support of person, animals or property. When a building is divided into separate parts by a division wall without openings, extending from the ground up, each part shall be deemed a separate building.

Building Construction Services: An establishment primarily engaged in the construction or remodeling of both residential
and nonresidential buildings.

Building Envelope: The three-dimensional space within which a structure is built.

Building Line: A line measured across the width of a lot at that point where the principal structure is placed in accordance with setback provisions.

Business Support Services: Establishments that provide routine support functions that businesses and organizations traditionally do for themselves, such as: document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, mailing (except direct mail advertising), court reporting, and steno typing. They may operate copy centers, which provide photocopying, duplicating, blueprinting, or other copying services besides printing. They may provide a range of support activities, including mailing services, document copying, facsimiles, word processing, on-site computer rental, and office product sales.

IBC reference: Print shops.

Bulkhead Line: A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by this Chapter and approved by the WI DNR pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the OHWM, except where the filling is prohibited by the floodway provisions of this Chapter.

Business Conducted By Owner/Operator of Farm: The operation of a use listed under the "office" category or the sale of items listed in the "retail sales and service" or "notion, variety, or gift shop" category, within the principal dwelling or a farm building.

Camouflage Design: A wireless communication service facility that is disguised, hidden or screened, but remains recognizable as a tower or antenna.

Campground, Private: Any parcel of land owned by a private entity which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 2 or more camping units, wherein a fee is charged for use. See § 15.322.

Campground, Public: Any parcel of land owned by a public entity which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 2 or more camping units, wherein a fee is charged for use. See § 15.322.

Camping Unit: Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping or travel trailer, motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, tent or other mobile recreational vehicle.

Car Wash: Establishments primarily engaged in cleaning, washing, and/or waxing automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, and trailers.

IBC reference: Car wash.

Caretaker Unit: a dwelling that is accessory to a Self Storage Facility, and occupied by:

•	the person who owns or is employed by the Self Storage Facility to care for and protect the property, and
•	that person's family.

Cemetery: A place used for interment of human or animal remains or cremated remains, including a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments, or a combination thereof.

Centerline: A line connecting the points on highways from which setback distances shall be measured, at any point on the
highway.

Certificate of Compliance: A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure complies with all of the provisions of this Chapter.
 
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct normal flow of water.

Child and Youth Services: An establishment primarily engaged in providing nonresidential social assistance services for children and youth. These establishments provide for the welfare of children in areas such as adoption and foster care, drug prevention, life skills training, and positive social development.

Child Care Center: A facility where a person provides care and supervision for less than 24 hours a day for at least 4 children under the age of 7 who are not related to the provider. This includes any “Family child care center" licensed by the Wisconsin Department of Children and Families under § 48.65, Stats., and ch. DCF 250.

IBC reference: Day care.

Child Care Home, Family: A dwelling licensed as a child care center by the Department of Children and Families under Wis. Stat. § 48.65 where care is provided for not more than 8 children. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 66.1017] These are certified by the Wisconsin Department of Children and Families pursuant to Wisconsin Administrative Code DCF 250.

Class 1 Co-Location: The placement of a new mobile service facility on an existing support structure such that the owner of the facility does not need to construct a free standing support structure for the facility but does need to engage in substantial modification.

Class 2 Co-Location: The placement of a new mobile service facility on an existing support structure such that the owner of the facility does not need to construct a free standing support structure for the facility or engage in substantial modification.

Club or Lodge: A building owned, rented, or leased by a non-profit association of persons for the exclusive use of its members and guests. This includes fraternal organizations, clubs, lodges, banquet halls, community halls, or other meeting facilities of private or non-profit groups that are primarily used by group members. This includes any "club" as defined by Wis. Stat. Chapter 125.

IBC reference: banquet halls, community halls.

Cluster Subdivision: A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally required in the zoning district
in which the development is located, in return for the provision of permanent undeveloped land.

Co-Location: Class 1 or class 2 collocation or both.

Commercial: Open to the public for a fee or operated with the intention of making a profit.

Commercial Speech: Any sign wording, logo or other representation advertising a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment for business purposes.

Committee: The St. Croix County Community Development Committee.

Community Garden: A site operated and maintained by a group (such as a homeowners association, condominium association, or membership association) to cultivate trees, herbs, fruits, vegetables, flowers, or other ornamental foliage for the following uses: personal use, consumption, donation or off site sale of items grown on the site.

Community Living Arrangement: A place where adults who are not related to the operator or administrator and who do not require care above intermediate level nursing care reside and receive care, treatment or services that are above the level of room and board but that include no more than 3 hours of nursing care per week per resident (Wis. Stat. § 50.01 (1g)).

IBC reference: Group homes, halfway houses, social rehabilitation facilities.

Community Supported Agriculture: An area of land managed and maintained by an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food and/or horticultural products for shareholder consumption or for sale or donation. This does not include a personal garden.

Compliant Building Location: An area on a lot where a building could be located in compliance with all applicable requirements of this Chapter.

Composting, Commercial 	

Composting, Commercial: A composting facility that handles organic material from businesses and/or government entities.
 
Conditional Use: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district, but would not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare with appropriate conditions.

Conservation Design Development: A subdivision or development that complies with § 13.7.K of the County Code of Ordinances. This type of development provides the controlled, sustainable development of land, which allows for commercial and residential development while ensuring the protection of natural environmental features such as open spaces and vistas.

Conservation Practice: A facility or practice that is designated to prevent or reduce soil erosion, prevent or reduce non- point pollution, or achieve or maintain compliance with soil and water conservation standards; it includes a nutrient management plan.

Construction Permit: A written document issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing design, location, enlargement, construction and/or reconstruction of an animal waste storage facility.

Contiguous: Adjacent to or sharing a common boundary.

Contractor Sales and Service: An establishment engaged in: (1) providing building property maintenance services including but not limited to extermination and pest control; janitorial services; plumbing; carpet and upholstery cleaning; lawn, pool and garden care; snow plowing and removal; packing and crating; security services; locksmiths; building equipment and machinery installation; excavation; and tree trimming and removal, or (2) selling equipment to establishments engaged in the services listed above.

Contractor Storage Yard: The outdoor portion of a lot or parcel that is used to store and maintain construction or service equipment and other materials customarily used by the construction or service contractor. If permitted to be used in this manner, the entire lot or parcel is classified as a contractor's storage yard and will be required to conform to all applicable zoning district standards and regulations for a Contractor Storage Yard. [See §§ 15.285 (Use Table), 15.330 (Contractor Storage Yard Use Regulations)]


Convenience Store: A facility associated with the sale of gasoline products that also offers for sale prepackaged food items and consumer goods, primarily for self-service by the consumer. Hot beverages, fountain-type beverages and pastries may be included in the food items offered for sale.

Correctional Institution: Any building or area that is used to confine persons who are either arrested, incarcerated, imprisoned, or otherwise detained or incarcerated by any law enforcement or immigration agency, or a private entity under contract to a law enforcement or immigration agency.. This does not include uses that are exempt from County zoning pursuant to state law. [See Wis. Stat. § 301.046(1)(Community residential confinement); Wis. Stat. § 301.048(4)(b)(Intensive sanctions program); Wis. Stat. § 301.13 (community correctional residential centers initially established prior to July 2, 1983)].

IBC reference: Correctional centers, detention centers, jails, prerelease centers, prisons, reformatories.

Courier and Messenger Service: An establishment that provides air, surface, or combined courier delivery services of parcels and messages within or between metropolitan areas or urban centers. These establishments may form a network including local, and point-to-point pick up and delivery.

Crawl Space: An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than 5 feet in height, used for limited access to plumbing and electrical utilities. Also referred to as a "crawlway."

Crop or Forage Production: Growing or producing crops or forage for the purpose of an income or livelihood. "Crop" means a cultivated plant that includes any of the following: (a) Field crops, including corn, wheat, oats, rye, barley, hay, potatoes, and dry beans; (b) Fruits, including apples, grapes, cranberries, cherries, and berries; (c) Vegetables, including tomatoes, carrots, sweet corn, and squash; (d) Plants raised for culinary, medicinal, or aesthetic purposes, including herbs and spices, ginseng, and ornamental shrubs and trees; (e) Plants raised for energy production, including switchgrass, or textile use, including cotton or bamboo; or as defined by ATCP 49. "Forage" means bulky food for animals when taken by browsing or grazing.

IBC reference: Agricultural buildings, barns, grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy.
 
Crop/Limited Agriculture: An area of land managed and maintained by an individual or group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops, horticultural and limited animal products (including flowers, trees, bees and apiary products, and chickens) for off-site sale in locations where retail sales are an allowed use. Crop/limited agriculture may be a principal or accessory use.

Dam: Any artificial barrier in or across a watercourse which has the primary purpose of impounding or diverting water. A dam includes all appurtenant works, such as a dike, canal or powerhouse. [Source: Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 333.03] A "dam" includes a levee.

Dead Stock Hauling Service: An establishment that collects dead animals for disposal, processing or rendering.

Dealerships (Motor, Off-Road, Watercraft, and Implements): Establishments primarily engaged in retailing or leasing new and used automobiles and light trucks, such as sport utility vehicles, passenger and cargo vans, and/or manufactured homes.

IBC reference: Motor vehicle showrooms.

Decision Making Agency: The agency or entity with final authority to render a decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application required by the Procedures. For example, the Board of Supervisors is the Decision Making Agency for text amendments and rezonings, and the Board of Adjustment is the Decision Making Agency for appeals and variances.

Deck: An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a permeable floor that allows the infiltration of precipitation.

Density: the number of dwelling units per gross acre.

Department: The St. Croix County Community Development Department, unless otherwise indicated.

Detached: A building having open space on all sides, and that is not an attached building.

Development: Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.

Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): The width of a tree as measured at 4.5 feet above the ground surface.

Disabled: Having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.

Distillery: A facility for the manufacture or rectification of intoxicating liquors, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 125.02, and associated authorized acitivities, as described in Wis. Stat. § 125.52.

District: Parcels or sections of St. Croix County, Wisconsin, for which the regulations governing the use of land and
buildings are uniform.

Dock, Pier or Wharf: Structures extending into the water to facilitate the launching or mooring of watercraft or for fishing during the open water season.

Drainage System: One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater
and convey it to a point of discharge.

Drive-In Theater: An establishment consisting of a movie screen, projection booth, concession stand, and parking lot
with the purpose of showing movies to customers who view them from their parked vehicle.

Drug Store/Pharmacy: An establishment that is principally engaged in retailing prescription or nonprescription drugs and medicines. These establishments may also sell candies, food products, cosmetics, and household items incidental to their principal business.

IBC reference: Drug stores.

Dryland Access: A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
 
Duly Licensed: The use or activity has obtained all required licenses or permits from local, state or federal agencies with jurisdiction to license or permit the use or activity.

Dwelling: A room or suite of rooms occupied or capable of being occupied as an independent and separate housekeeping
establishment by only 1 family, and which contains independent cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities.

Dwelling, Rental or Secondary: A dwelling in existence on a farm as of January 1, 2014 and no longer utilized in the operation of the farm.

Dwelling, Multifamily: A building or portions thereof designed for and used by 3 or more families. Classification of a residential structure shall be determined by its present or projected occupancy and design and not by the characteristics of ownership and tenancy such as condominium arrangements. Includes any townhouse/rowhouse or triplex.

IBC reference: Apartment houses, hotels (nontransient), motels (nontransient), convents, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, and monasteries.

Dwelling, Single-Family: A detached dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. This includes any
community living arrangement for up to 8 persons pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 59.69(15)(c).

Dwelling, Two-Family: A detached or semidetached building designed for and occupied exclusively by 2 families.

IBC reference: Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units.

Earth-tone: Colors that harmonize with the natural surroundings on the site during leaf on conditions.

Elderly and Disabled Services: An establishment primarily engaged in providing nonresidential social assistance services to improve the quality of life for the elderly, persons diagnosed with intellectual and developmental disabilities, or persons with disabilities. The establishment may provide for the welfare of these individuals in such areas as day care, non-medical homemaker services, social acitivities, group support, and companionship.

Electric Generating Facility: Electric generating equipment and associated facilities that, together, constitute a complete facility for the generation of electricity. “Electric generating equipment” means any of the following: (1) an electric generator, (2) a machine that drives an electric generator, including an engine, turbine, water wheel, or wind mill, (3) Equipment that converts a fuel or source of energy into energy that powers a machine that drives an electric generator, including a boiler, but not including a nuclear reactor. (4) A fuel or photovoltaic cell. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 196.52]

Electric Generating Facility (Large Scale): An electric generating facility designed for nominal operation at a capacity of 100 megawatts or more [See Wis. Stat. § 196.491] This does not apply to testing activities undertaken by an electric utility for purposes of determining the suitability of a site for the placement of an electric generating facility, to the extent prohibited by statute.

Electric Generating Facility (Small Scale): An electric generating facility designed for nominal operation at a capacity of less than 100 megawatts [See Wis. Stat. § 196.491]

Encroachment: Any fill, structure, equipment, building, use, accessory use or development in the floodway.

Enrolled Land: Land that is enrolled in a federal agricultural commodity payment program or a federal or state agricultural land conservation payment program.

Establishment: A place of business, government, or nonprofit activity.

Excavation: any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the resulting conditions.

Expansion: An addition to an existing structure regardless of whether the addition is vertical or horizontal or both.

Facility: A structure or place which is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose.

Family: The body of persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a single housekeeping entity.

Family Services: An establishment primarily engaged in at least one of the following: collecting, preparing, and delivering food for the needy; providing short-term emergency shelter, temporary residential shelter, transitional housing, volunteer construction or repair of low-cost housing, and/or repair of homes for individuals or families in need; or providing food, shelter, clothing, medical relief, resettlement, or counseling to victims of domestic vor international disasters or conflict.
 
Farm: All contiguous land under common ownership that is over 50% devoted to agricultural use per the St. Croix County's tax assessment records.

Farm Animals: Dairy cattle, beef cattle, swine, sheep, horses, ducks, chickens, turkeys and animals or fowl of similar character and customarily maintained in a large parcel setting for food, recreational, breeding, zoological or similar purposes.

Farm Exhibition: see Farm-Related Exhibition, Sale, or Event.

Farm-Related Exhibition, Sale, or Event: An exhibition, sale or event that is accessory to a farm or agricultural use, or that directly promote the County's agricultural economy. Examples include auctions, dairy breakfasts, exhibitions of farm machinery and technology, agricultural association meetings and similar activities but not to exceed 5 calendar days per calendar year. This use must comply with Wis. Stats 91.01 (1).

Farmland, Prime: Land identified within the county’s certified farmland preservation plan as having Land Evaluation Scores (LESA) greater than 66 points.

Farmland, Protected: Lands that are considered to be any of the following: located in a farmland preservation zoning district as certified under Wis. Stat. ch. 91, covered by a farmland preservation agreement under Wis. Stat. ch. 91, covered by an agricultural conservation easement under Wis. Stat. § 93.73, or otherwise legally protected from nonagricultural development.

Federal Emergency Management Agency: The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.

Fence: Any non-masonry vertical structure constructed to prevent physical or visual access to a parcel or portion thereof.

Fill:
any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location and shall include the resulting conditions.

Filling, Draining, or Dredging of Wetlands: The act of altering existing wetlands through their filling, draining, or dredging, as follows:

•	"Filling" means the activities referred to in the definition of "discharge of fill material" in 40 CFR 232.2 in a wetland, regardless of whether the wetland is a "water of the United States."
•	"Draining" means any human activity that diverts or reduces wetland groundwater and/or surface water sources.
•	"Dredging" means the activities referred to in the definition of "discharge of dredged material" in 40 CFR 232.2 in a wetland, regardless of whether the wetland is a "water of the United States."

Filtered View of the St. Croix River: A view in which one can see the river through the vegetation, while any structure
remains visually inconspicuous.

Financial or Investment Institution: An establishment primarily engaged in the dealing of monetary transactions such as deposits, loans, investments and currency exchanges.

IBC reference: Banks.

Flag: Any fabric, bunting or other lightweight material that is secured or mounted so as to allow movement caused by the atmosphere.

Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:

1.	The overflow or rise of inland waters,
2.	The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, or
3.	The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or other unanticipated force of nature.

Includes "Flooding."

Flood Frequency: The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year.
 
Floodfringe: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway, which is covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather than flowing water.

Flood Hazard Boundary Map: A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered “A” Zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.

Flood Insurance Rate Map: A map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both special flood hazard areas (the floodplain) and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by FEMA.

Flood Insurance Study: A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered “A” Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.

Floodplain: Land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the regional flood. It includes the floodway
and the floodfringe, and may include other designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.

Flood Profile: A graph or a longitudinal line showing the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along a stream or river.

Floodproofing: Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.

Flood Protection Elevation: An elevation of two feet of freeboard above the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood.

Flood Storage: Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.

Floodway: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.

Floor Area: The area within the exterior wall lines of a building. This floor area of a dwelling does not include space not usable for living quarters, such as attics, basements or utility rooms, garages, breezeways, unenclosed porches or terraces.

Footprint: The land area covered by a structure at ground level, measured on a horizontal plane. The “footprint” of a
residence includes attached garages and porches, but excludes decks, patios, carports and roof overhangs.

Floriculture: Floriculture conducted for the purpose of an income or livelihood. "Floriculture" means an establishment
engaged in the production of field-grown or greenhouse-grown plants for their flowers or showy leaves.

Flowage Area: A body of water formed by overflowing or damming.

Forest Management: Forest management for the purpose of an income or livelihood. "Forest Management" means establishments that grow and harvest timber on a production cycle of at least 10 years and that specialize in various stages of the production cycle, including reforestation, timber production, and timber harvesting. Reforestation means the production of seedlings in specialized nurseries. Timber production means the maintenance of natural forest or growing timber on areas of land that are available for the entire production cycle. Timber means the use of specialized machinery to gather forest products, such as timber, gums, barks, balsam needles, rhizomes, fibers, Spanish moss, and ginseng and truffles. Examples include timber tract operations, logging, forest nurseries (growing trees for reforestation, and gathering forest products.

Forest Products Processing: A facility used for the dry processes of chipping, grinding, sawing, and planing of cut trees, which changes them for consumer use. This use does not include any wet processing such as paper manufacturing. May include warehousing and packaging as secondary uses.

Foster Home / Adult Family Home: A dwelling that is the primary domicile of a foster parent who is licensed under Wis. Stat. § 48.62 or a dwelling that has been certified as an adult family home under Wis. Stat. § 50.032(1m)(b).

IBC reference: Adult day care, foster care facilities, care facilities that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons
receiving care, residential board and care facilities.
137
 
Foundation: The underlying base of a building or other structure, including pillars, footings, and concrete and masonry walls.


Freeboard: A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development, and aggregation of the river or stream bed.



Freight Terminal: A facility where freight brought to the lot by motor truck or rail is assembled and/or sorted for routing in intrastate and interstate shipment by motor truck or rail. "Freight" includes commodities that are prepared for shipment, including palletized and containerized materials.

Frontage: That side of a lot abutting on a street or road and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. To determine yard requirements on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets are considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated in § 15.425.

Funeral Home: An establishment primarily engaged in preparing the dead for burial or interment and conducting funerals. Includes cemeteries.

IBC reference: funeral parlors.

Fur Farm: A commercial operation that raises and harvests wild game and fur producing animals for fur, including such animals as deer, elk, mink and chinchilla.

Game Arcade: An indoor structure, open to the public, that contains coin-operated games, rides, shows, and similar entertainment facilities and devices. Also known as an "amusement arcade."

IBC reference: Amusement arcades.

Game Management: A commercial and duly licensed operation raising and harvesting wild game for meat, including animals such as deer and elk.

Garden Center: An establishment where retail and wholesale garden products and produce are sold to the consumer. These centers, which may include a nursery and/or greenhouses, import most of the items sold, and may include plants, nursery products and stock, potting soil, hardware, power equipment and machinery, hoes, rakes, shovels, and other garden and farm variety tools and utensils.

Golf Course: A tract of land laid out with at least 9 holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse (which may include dining, social events and gatherings, and other recreational facilities) and shelters as accessory uses. Golf Courses may provide golf equipment rental and golf instruction services.

Governmental, Institutional, or Nonprofit Community Use: A building or land area not otherwise defined in this Chapter, that:

•	Is used to administer, oversee, or manage public programs exercising executive, legislative, or judicial authority, or
•	Nonprofit and civic functions described in 26 U.S.C. § 501(c) such as grantmaking, charitable trusts or fundraising, social or political advocacy, preservation and protection of the environment and wildlife, promoting the civic and social interests of a nonprofit organization, or promoting public or professional interests such as business associations, professional organizations, labor unions, and political organizations,

•	provides meeting spaces for the general public or a neighborhood, such as a meeting hall, community center, or exhibition hall.

IBC Reference: courtrooms, civic administration, exhibition halls.

Grading: filling, placing or moving of rock and soil material.

Grazing: The use of public and/or private land for the free range feeding of livestock (cattle, pigs, sheep, etc.). Unlike
Keeping Livestock, grazing does not involve buildings or structures (other than fences used to confine the livestock).

138
 
Greenhouse: A building constructed for the propagation of food crops (e.g., fruits, melons, tomatoes), mushrooms, or other plants under glass or protective cover.. This definition does not include private greenhouses with no commercial sales.

IBC reference: Greenhouses.

Grocer: The sale of agricultural, food and dairy products not produced or grown on the premises.

Ground Cover: Small plants such as mosses, forbs, ferns, grasses, and undershrubs growing on a forest floor.

Groundwater: Any of the Waters of the State occurring in a saturated subsurface geological formation of permeable rock or soil. [See Wis. Stat. § 281.75]

Group Day Care: A facility where a person for less than 24 hours a day provides care and supervision for 9 or more children who are not related to the provider. It includes preschools and nursery schools, and any “group child care center” licensed by the licensed Wisconsin Department of Children and Families under s. 48.65, Stats., and ch. DCF 251.

IBC reference: Day care, day care facilities, child day care.

Habitable Structure: Any structure used or designed for occupation by humans for the purpose of cooking, eating, sleeping, recreation and general living periods.

Harvesting of Wild Crops: The use of machinery to reap the fruit and/or seed produced by wild plants on undeveloped public and/or private land. Unlike Agriculture - Crop or Forage Production, Harvesting of Wild Crops does not involve buildings or structures, or the use of seeds or fertilizers to propogate plant growth.

Hazardous Waste Collection, Treatment, and Disposal: A site or structure for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste as defined by Wis. Stat. § 291.01, and includes all of the contiguous property under common ownership or control surrounding the site or structure.

Heavy Construction Services: Establishments that engage in the construction of infrastructure projects such as bridges,
roads, and dams, and industrial and other nonbuilding construction.

Heavy Industrial Mining: Any "nonmetallic mining site" as defined by Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 135.03 that has a particularly high impact on the environment and nearby properties including frac sand mining, mining that impacts the groundwater table, and mining operations that involve loud or noxious material processing. This includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1.	The operation of an establishment that is engaged in excavating or otherwise removing from the land any sand or sandstone by any means, including any associated stripping of overburden, removal of sand or sandstone washing, screening, sorting, beneficiation, drying, loading, stockpiling or other processing or preparation of sand or sandstone for any use other than construction aggregate.

2.	Extraction from the earth of sand, sandstone bedrock, fluvial sands, alluvial sands or aggregates for offsite use or sale of industrial sand products including associated activities such as drilling, blasting, excavation, stripping, grading and dredging of such materials and removing, relocating or disposing of overburden and other wastes of the mining process.

3.	Stockpiling of industrial sand products, rail transloading of industrial sand products, non-metallic mining waste materials, or topsoil intended for use in reclaiming a non-metallic mine site.
4.	Manufacturing or processing operations on the mining site that involve the use of equipment for crushing, screening, separation, beneficiation, classification, washing dewatering, drying coating, or blending of the industrial sand or products obtained by extraction from the mining site.
5.	Reclamation of the mine site.


High Flood Damage Potential: Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its contents.

Highway: Any arterial, as defined by § 15.405.

Hiking, Biking, and Bridle Trails: A linear corridor that is a public right-of-way or private easement reserved for
recreation and travel by foot, bicycle, horseback, or other forms of non-motorized travel.

Historic or Natural Resource: Any of the of the following uses that are preserved for the uses listed below by a local, state or federal agency, or a conservation easement:
 
•	An Historic Structure, and
•	Any land that is preserved for scenic, scientific or wildlife use.

Historic Structure: any structure that is:

•	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
•	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

•	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
•	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved program.

Home Occupation: A gainful occupation conducted by members of the family only within their place of residence, such as handicrafts, dressmaking, millinery, laundering, preserving and home cooking.

Home Occupation, Major: A "Major Home Occupation" as defined by § 15.345.

Home Occupation, Minor: A "Minor Home Occupation" as defined by § 15.345.

Hospital: A facility that provides 24-hour continuous inpatient medical and nursing service to patients. This includes any "hospital" as defined by Wis. Stat. § 50.33. [Note: hospitals are approved by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services pursuant to Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter DHS 124.]

IBC reference: Hospitals and psychiatric hospitals.

Hotel or Motel: A building or group of buildings containing rooms which are offered for compensation for the temporary accommodations of transients and where there is no permanent occupancy of any unit except by the owner, his agent or employees. Includes any "hotel" as defined by Wis. Stat. § 97.01.

IBC reference: Hotels (transient), motels (transient), vacation timeshare properties.

Household Pet: Any animal commonly found in a residence as a pet. Examples include dogs, cats, birds, and other small animals, if they are not raised or reared for commercial resale.

HUD Code: The federal construction code for manufactured homes, codified at 42 USC 5401 to 5425 and the corresponding regulations implemented by HUD (24 CFR part 3280).

Hunting Facilities (with compost toilets only): Land used for: (1) commercial hunting and trapping; (2) operating commercial game preserves, such as game retreats; or (3) operating hunting preserves. Buildings may include only compost toilets, and are not connected to a public or private water or sewer system.

Impervious Surface: Any land cover that prevents rain or melting snow from soaking into the ground, such as roofs including overhangs, roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways and parking lots, including gravel surfaces.

Increase In Regional Flood Height: A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevation, equal to or greater than
0.01 foot, based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.

Indoor Maintenance and Repair of Goods and Equipment: An establishment operating inside a building that repairs and services small engines or small motors (such as lawn mowers, washing machines, sewing machines, jet ski, four wheelers and small equipment such as guns, chain saws, and shoes).
 
Industry, Heavy: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes using toxic, corrosive, flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, and odor. Examples include the leather and allied products, chemicals, plastics, rubber products, primary and fabricated metals, machinery, automobiles and transportation equipment, and petroleum and coal products refining.

IBC reference: Aircraft (manufacturing, not to include repair), Factory Industrial Group F-1 including automobiles and other motor vehicles, bicycles, boats, business machines, cameras and photo equipment, construction and agricultural machinery, disinfectants, dry cleaning and dyeing, engines (including rebuilding), leather products [such as tanneries], machinery, metals, millwork (sash and door), photographic film, plastic products, recreational vehicles, shoes, soaps and detergents, trailers, wood distillation, ceramic products, foundries, glass products, gypsum, metal products (fabrication and assembly), any building, structure or use classified as High-Hazard Group H.

Industry, Light: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including research, development, processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of those products, but excluding basic industrial processing, which activities are conducted wholly within an enclosed building. Examples include textiles and clothing mills, industrial launderers, and manufacturing of paper and printing materials, furniture, electronics, jewelry, silverware, toys, games, musical instruments, office supplies, and signs. Includes research laboratories not otherwise listed.

IBC reference: Laboratories: testing and research; Factory Industrial Group F-1 including appliances, athletic equipment, beverages (over 16-percent alcohol content), beverages (up to and including 16-percent alcohol content), brooms or brushes, canvas or similar fabric, carpets and rugs (includes cleaning), clothing, electronics, furniture, hemp products, jute products. laundries, musical instruments, optical goods, paper mills or products, printing or publishing, textiles, upholstering, woodworking (cabinet), or ice.

Indoor Recreational Facility: A recreational use that occurs inside a building. Examples include indoor tennis, racquetball, skating rinks, driving ranges, curling, dance schools, ice arenas, shooting ranges, pool hall, bowling alleys, and health clubs.

IBC reference: Dance halls (not including food or drink consumption), gymnasiums (without spectator seating), indoor swimming pools (without spectator seating), Indoor tennis courts (without spectator seating), pool and billiard parlors, arenas, skating rinks, swimming pools (inside of a building), tennis courts (inside of a building).

Inland Wetlands: Wetlands at least 1 acre in size, located throughout unincorporated St. Croix County that are not within a shoreland.

Institutional: A nonprofit or quasi-public use. See examples in the Use Table, § 15.285.

Irrigation and Industrial Water Supply: A water treatment plant and water supply systems that provide irrigation and industrial supply only. The water supply system may include pumping stations, aqueducts, or distribution mains.

Junction: The point upon which 2 highway centerlines, or a highway centerline and the centerline or a railway right-of- way, meet.

Junk: Items, materials, or products that are no longer used as originally intended and, though capable of being repaired or converted to another use, are not actually still being used.

A motor vehicle is junk if it meets any of the following criteria:

1.	It is not currently registered; or
2.	It is not capable of operation, lawful or otherwise, on public highways of Wisconsin.

This definition does not apply to a vehicle licensed as an antique or special interest vehicle under Wis. Stat. §§ 341.265 or 341.266, or to any one parts car, if the vehicle(s) is stored as required by Wis. Stat. § 341.266(4).

Karst Feature: An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, disappearing streams, sinkholes, springs, seeps or swallets.
Keeping Livestock: Keeping livestock (other than Livestock Facilities) for the purpose of an income or livelihood. IBC reference: Livestock shelters.
 
Kennel, Commercial: An establishment, structure or premises where 5 or more adult dogs or cats, six months of age or older, are bred and raised for sale, taken in and sheltered for adoption, boarded, groomed and/or trained as a service.

IBC reference: kennels and pounds.

Land Disturbance Activity: Any alteration or disturbance that may result in soil erosion, sedimentation, or change in runoff including, but not limited to, filling, grading, trenching, excavating and removal of ground cover.

Land Division: As defined in § 13.13 of the County Code of Ordinances.

Landscape Architect: A person who has graduated with a major in landscape architecture from a college accredited by the American Society of Landscape Architects.

Landscape Supply and Contracting Business: The onsite propogation and growing of plants, shrubs, trees, or vines for retail sales. Products raised onsite may be sold onsite. Retail sales of any other products are not allowed. Garden centers are not included. Includes any plant nursery or tree nursery.

Laundry: An establishment primarily engaged in operating coin-operated or similar self-service laundries and drycleaners; providing drycleaning and laundry services and supplying, on a rental or contract basis, laundered items. Does not include industrial launderers, which are classified as Light Industrial.

IBC reference: Dry cleaning and laundries (pick-up and delivery stations and self-service).

Library: An establishment primarily engaged in providing library or archive services. "Library or archive services" refers to maintaining collections of documents and facilitating their use as required to meet the informational, research, educational, or recreational needs of the general public or customers. Libraries may also acquire, research, store, preserve, and generally make accessible to the public historical documents, photographs, maps, audio material, audiovisual material, and other archival material of historical interest.

IBC reference: Libraries.

Life Care or Continuing Care Service: Church or social welfare organization run retirement centers. Residents turn over some or all of their assets in exchange for housing, personal care, convenience care, and some health care.

Lift: A mechanical device, either temporary or permanent, containing a mobile open top car including hand or guard rails, a track upon which the open top car moves, and a mechanical device to provide power to the open top car.

Limited Commercial Recreational Activities: Activities that are subordinate to a primary agricultural use of the property, compatible with the agricultural use on that and surrounding properties, and not likely to attract related commercial uses.

Liquor Store: Establishments primarily engaged in selling, or offering for sale, alcohol beverages to persons not holding a permit or a license under Wis. Stat. Chapter 125.

Livestock: Bovine animals, equine animals, goats, poultry, sheep, swine, farm-raised deer, farm-raised game birds, camelids, ratites and farm-raised fish.

Livestock Auction Facility: a Stock Yard where livestock are held for sale or transfer by auction, consignment, or other means.

IBC reference: Livestock shelters.

Livestock Facility: A feedlot, dairy farm or other operation where livestock are or will be fed, confined, maintained or stabled for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period. It includes all of the tax parcels of land on which the facility is located, but does not include a pasture or winter grazing area. Related livestock facilities are collectively treated as a single livestock facility for purposes of this Chapter, except that an operator may elect to treat a separate species facility as a separate livestock facility. [Source: Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP 51.01(19)]

IBC reference: Livestock shelters.

Livestock Structure: A building or other structure used to house or feed livestock, to confine livestock for milking, to confine livestock for feeding other than grazing, to store livestock feed, or to collect or store waste generated at a livestock facility. "Livestock structure" includes a barn, milking parlor, feed storage facility, feeding facility, animal lot or waste storage facility. Livestock structure does not include a pasture or winter grazing area, a fence surrounding a pasture or winter grazing area, a livestock watering or feeding facility in a pasture or winter grazing area, or a machine shed or like facilit y that is not used for livestock. [Source: Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP 51.01(20)]
 
Loft: A floor level located more than 30 inches above the main floor, open to the main floor on one or more sides with a ceiling height of less than 6 feet 8 inches and used as a living or sleeping space.

Lot: A parcel of land occupied or designed to provide space necessary for one main building and its accessory buildings or uses, including the open spaces required by this Chapter and abutting on a public street or other officially approved means of access. A lot may be a parcel designated in a plat or described in a conveyance recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds, or any part of a large parcel when that part complies with this Chapter as to width and area for the District where it is located.

Lot, Corner: A lot that:

•	is located at the intersection of 2 streets, where any 2 corners have an angle of 120º or less, or
•	is bounded by a curved street, and the chord within the limits of the lot line forms an angle of 120º or less.

Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot.


Lot Line: A line bounding a lot.

Lot, Reverse Corner: A corner lot where the rear lot line abuts the side lot line of another lot.

Lot Width: The shortest distance between the side lot lines and the setback lines.

Low Flood Damage Potential: Structures that are not designed for human habitation, have a small footprint (about 500 square feet or less) and are designed to minimize damages resulting from floods. Examples include open sided park shelters, parking areas, camping sites, picnic areas and playground equipment.

Lower St. Croix Riverway or Lower St. Croix National Scenic Riverway: The area described in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 118.02 (1).

Major Subdivision: As defined in § 13.13 of the County Code of Ordinances.

Management Zones: The Lower St. Croix Riverway management zones established in Wisconsin Administrative Code § NR 118.04.

Manufactured Home: A dwelling that is designed to be used as a dwelling and that is certified by HUD as complying with the HUD Code. (Source: Wis. Stat. § 101.91)

Manure: Excreta from livestock kept at a livestock facility. “Manure" includes livestock bedding, water, soil, hair, feathers, and other debris that becomes intermingled with livestock excreta in normal manure handling operations. [Source: Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP 51.01(23)]]

Manure Processing Facility: A facility that specializes in the processing of livestock manure into fertilizer and other byproducts.

Manure Storage: An impoundment made by constructing an embankment or excavating a pit or dugout or by fabricating a structure to contain manure and other animal or agricultural wastes. [Source: Wisconsin Administrative Code NR 151.015]

Marquee: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.

Marquee Sign: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.

Medical Clinic: A use that provides ambulatory, out-patient or in-patient medical care including but not limited to health maintenance, diagnosis, therapy or treatment of disease, pain, injury, deformity, mental illness and addiction.

IBC reference: Ambulatory care facilities, clinic-outpatient, alcohol and drug centers, detoxification facilities.

Metal Extraction: An area that includes mine sites and where metallic minerals are mined, with equipment for dressing and beneficiating ore through crushing, grinding, washing, drying, sintering, concentrating, calcining, leaching, or similar activities. Beneficiating may be performed at mills operated in conjunction with the mines, or at milss operated seperately.

Military Institution: Any building or area used for state or national security and operated by a state or federal government, or a private entity under contract to a state or federal national security agency. Examples include military base or training sites and armories.
 
Miniature Golf: A theme-oriented recreational facility where a novelty version of golf is played with a putter and a golf ball, typically comprised of nine or 18 putting greens, each with a “cup” or “hole,” where patrons in groups pay a fee to move in consecutive order from the first hole to the last. Miniature golf may include artificial playing surfaces and obstacles such as bridges and tunnels.

Minor Subdivision: As defined in § 13.13 of the County Code of Ordinances.

Mitigation: Action taken to minimize the adverse impacts of development. Mitigation includes, but is not limited to, the installation of vegetative buffers, the removal of nonconforming structures from the shoreland setback area, and the implementation of best management practices for erosion control and storm water management. Mitigation should compensate for loss of shoreland vegetation when development or improvements occur.

Mobile Home: A dwelling that is built in a factory, but that does not comply with the HUD Code and is not a modular home. This includes any "mobile home" as defined by Wis. Stat. § 101.91.

Mobile Home Park: Any area or tract of land designed for the installation of Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes on spaces or lots offered for lease or rent, together with necessary accessory buildings, driveways, walks, screening and other required adjuncts.

Mobile Service Facility: The set of equipment and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and associated equipment, that is necessary to provide mobile service to a discrete geographic area, but does not include the underlying support structure.

Mobile Service Provider: A person who provides mobile service.

Mobile Service Support Structure: A freestanding structure that is designed to support a mobile service facility.

Model Home: A dwelling unit that has never been occupied for residential purposes, temporarily open for inspection by the general public in order to sell that unit or similar dwelling units that can be constructed for sale or rental in a particular subdivision or other residential development approved by the County. Model homes may also incorporate sales or rental offices for dwellings within that development.

Modification: Includes but is not limited to, any addition, alteration, rebuilding or replacement of any existing building, accessory building or accessory use.

Modular Home: A dwelling that is built in a factory, but that complies with the applicable state or local building code.

Motion Picture or Sound Recording: An establishment that produces and distributes motion pictures and sound recordings by contracting with performers, creating the film or sound content, and providing technical post production services, distributing film or recordings to exhibitors (such as theaters and broadcasters) rather than through the wholesale and retail distribution chain.

IBC reference: Motion pictures and television filming (without spectators).

Museum: An establishment that preserves and exhibits objects, sites, and natural wonders of historical, cultural, or educational value. Includes any planetarium or aquarium.

IBC reference: art galleries, museums.

Native Vegetation: Those species of vegetation that occurred naturally in pre-settlement Wisconsin. Refer to publications about native vegetation available from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, such as the Wisconsin Native Plants manual published in August 2016.

Navigable Waters: All natural inland lakes within Wisconsin and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within the territorial limits of this State, including the Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this State. [See Wis. Stat. § 281.31(2)(d)]

Under Wis. Stat. § 281.31(2m), shoreland ordinances required under Wis. Stat. § 59.692 do not apply to lands adjacent to
farm drainage ditches if:

1.	Those lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river, and
2.	Those parts of the drainage ditches adjacent to those lands were non-navigable streams before ditching.

Net Project Area: Developable land area minus slope preservation zones, floodplains, road rights-of-way, and wetlands.
 
New Construction: For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by the County and includes any subsequent improvements to those structures. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to those structures.

Noncommercial Speech: Any message that is not commercial speech, which includes messages concerning political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational topics.

Nonconforming Lot: A lot that at the time of creation conformed to the applicable existing regulations including lot size, dimensions, lot configuration, and other dimensional and design standards, but is now inconsistent with this Chapter. Typically, a nonconforming lot is smaller than the minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district.

Nonconforming Sign: Any sign which was lawful prior to July 1, 2007 but which does not comply with the terms of this Chapter (or its amendment).

Nonconforming Site Improvement: A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this Chapter or an amendment to this Chapter:

1.	an existing site improvement on a lot (including but not limited to parking areas, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks and landscaping) that no longer conforms to the applicable regulations of this Chapter, or
2.	the lot does not include site improvements required by this Chapter for any existing use, building or structure on the lot.

Nonconforming Structure: A dwelling or other building that existed lawfully before the current Chapter was enacted or amended, but that does not conform with one or more of the development regulations in the current Chapter. For purposes of this definition, “development regulations" means any part of this Chapter that applies to elements including setback, height, lot coverage, and front, rear and side yards. [Reference: Wis. Stat. § 59.69(10e) and (10m)]

Nonconforming Use: A use of land, a dwelling, or a building that existed lawfully before the current Chapter was enacted or amended, but that does not conform with the use restrictions in the current Chapter. [Reference: Wis. Stat. § 59.69(10)(ab)]

Non-Flood Disaster: A fire, ice storm, tornado, wind storm, mud slide, or other destructive act of nature, but not including a flood.



Nonmetallic Mining: Means all of the following:

(a)	Operations or activities at a nonmetallic mining site for the extraction from the earth of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals for sale or use by the operator. Nonmetallic mining includes use of mining equipment or techniques to remove materials from the in-place nonmetallic mineral deposit, including drilling and blasting, as well as associated activities such as excavation, grading and dredging. Nonmetallic mining does not include removal from the earth of products or commodities that contain only minor incidental amounts of nonmetallic minerals, such as commercial sod, agricultural crops, ornamental or garden plants, forest products, Christmas trees or plant nursery stock.

(b)	Processes carried out at a nonmetallic mining site that are related to the preparation or processing of the mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals obtained from the nonmetallic mining site. These processes include, but are not limited to stockpiling of materials, blending mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals with other mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals, blasting, grading, crushing, screening, scalping or dewatering.

Nonresidential Property: A property where dwelling units for personal residences are not allowed as the principal use.

North American Vertical Datum (NAVD): Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.

Notion, Variety, or Gift Shop: An establishment that retails books, newspapers, magazines, stationery, school and office supplies, novelty merchandise, souvenirs, greeting cards, seasonal and holiday decorations, curios, sheet music, prerecorded audio and video tapes, compact discs, and phonograph records.

Obstruction to Flow: Any development that (alone or together with any future development) blocks the conveyance of floodwaters in a manner that causes an increase in regional flood height.

Off-Site: Located outside the lot or parcel lines of the principal use.
 
Office: A building used as the place of business for recognized professional (such as a doctor of medicine or dentistry, practitioner, minister, architect, landscape architect, professional engineer, lawyer, author, musician), or to conduct the affairs of a business, profession, service industry, or government where goods are not sold at retail from the premises.

IBC reference: Electronic data processing, Professional services (architects, attorneys, dentists, physicians, engineers, etc.).

Official Floodplain Zoning Map: That map, adopted and made part of this Chapter, as described in § 15.270.2.

Open Space: An open space with natural vegetation and landscaping, and that is designed and reserved for passive recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic uses such as picnic areas, garden plots, or walking and jogging trails.

Open Space Use: For purposes of § 15.270, those uses having relatively low flood damage potential and not involving structures.


Operation Permit: A signed document issued by the Code Administrator authorizing operation, closure or use conversion of an animal waste storage facility or part thereof.

Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.

Ordinary Maintenance and Repair: Any work done on a nonconforming structure that does not constitute expansion, structural alteration or reconstruction and does not involve the replacement, alteration or improvement of any portion of the structure’s foundation.

Outdoor Entertainment Facility: A facility with recreation or entertainment activities that host 10 or more people at one time and that generate noise and/or light. This includes activities such as:

•	Amphitheaters;
•	Batting cages;
•	Driving ranges;
•	Go-kart tracks;
•	Lighted athletic fields;
•	Shooting ranges;
•	Marinas.

Outdoor Recreation Facility: A facility with recreation activities that host 10 or more people at one time and that do not typically generate noise and/or light. This includes activities such as:

•	Arboretums, wildlife sanctuaries, forests, and other natural areas which may be used for walking or hiking;
•	Archery ranges;
•	Athletic fields without lighting
•	Jogging, cycling, tot-lots, fitness trails, playing fields, playgrounds, outdoor swimming or wave pools, and tennis courts;
•	Outdoor roller or ice-skating rinks,
•	Paint ball;
•	Riding stables;
•	Ski slopes; and
•	Zip lines.

Outlot: A lot remnant or parcel of land within a plat remaining after platting, which is intended for open space use, for which no development is intended other than that which is accessory to the open space use.
 
Overstory: The upper forest canopy layer.

Parcel: Contiguous land under single ownership.

Park: Any land reserved for recreational, cultural, or aesthetic use (such as a picnic area) by a public agency, conservation easement, or a legally enforceable covenant or restriction. This includes any mini-park, neighborhood park, community park, special use park, school park, county park, state forest, state park, as defined by Appendix E of the 2011–2016 Wisconsin Statewide Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan (Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources)

Parking Facility: A tract or building building where automobiles are parked or stored temporarily, but not including wrecked automobiles or other vehicles or stored during repair.

Parking Lot: A lot where automobiles are parked or stored temporarily but not including the wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or storage for the purpose of repair or wrecking.

Pennant: Any flag.

Person: An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, municipality or state agency.

Personal Instruction Services: Establishments that primarily instruct individuals, one on one or in small group settings. Examples include exam preparation and tutoring, or personal instruction in a variety of skills such as art, music, and dancing.

IBC reference: Training and skill development not within a school or academic program (including, but not limited to, tutoring centers, martial arts studios, gymnastics and similar uses regardless of the ages served, not classified as Group A).

Pick-Your-Own Operation: An agricultural use wherein fruits or vegetables grown on-site are sold directly to consumers who pick the farm products themselves.

Plan Revision: A modification to an approved application where a valid permit is in effect.

Plant or Livestock Genetic Laboratory: An establishment primarily engaged in performing physical, chemical and other analytical testing services directly relating to genotyping, selective breeding, hybridization, grafting, or mutation of plants or livestock.

IBC Reference: Laboratories: testing and research.

Pollution: Contaminating or rendering unclean or impure the land and/or Waters of the State, or making those features injurious to public health, harmful for commercial or recreation use or deleterious to fish, bird, animal or plant life.

Porch: A building walkway with a roof over it, providing access to a building entrance.

Portable Storage Unit: A transportable, standardized, reusable vessel or container, or receptacle that is originally and specifically designed for or is used in stowing, packing, shipping, moving, or transporting freight, articles, goods or commodities, is designed for or is capable of being mounted or moved on a truck, and is located at site for temporary storage of personal property, or any similar device. Examples include "Pack-Rat", "PODS®," or shipping container ("CONEX").

Postal Service: An establishment that sorts, routes, and delivers mail.

IBC reference: Post offices.

Power Plant: A facility that converts one or more energy sources, including but not limited to water, natural gas, geothermal, fossil fuels, wind or solar, into electrical energy or steam. A power generation plant may also perform either or both of the following: (a) operation of a transmission system that conveys the energy or steam from the generation facility to a power distribution system; or (b) operation of a distribution system that conveys energy or steam from the generation facility or the transmission system to final consumers. This does not include an oil refinery.

IBC reference: Electric generation plants.

Principal Dwelling: The main dwelling on a lot where the property’s principal use is located. Principal dwelling includes
attached garages and porches.

Principal Structure: The main building or other structure on a lot where the property’s principal use is located. Principal structure includes attached garages and porches.

Principal Use: The primary purpose for which a lot or parcel is used.

Private One-Room Schoolhouse: A one-room structure used for education and / or religious instruction. See § 15.371
 
Professional Engineer: One who is trained, registered and professionally engaged in a specific branch of engineering pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 443.04.

Propane Storage and Distribution: An establishment that maintains a propane gas system for storage, wholesale or retail distribution. A “Propane gas system” means an assembly consisting of one or more containers that has a total water capacity of at least 100 gallons and a means of conveying propane gas from the container or containers to a point of connection with devices used to consume the propane gas. A “propane gas system” includes all piping and other components associated with the assembly that are used to control the quantity, flow, pressure, and physical state of the propane gas. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 101.16]

Public Safety: Government establishments primarily engaged in criminal and civil law enforcement, police, traffic safety, firefighting, related fire protection activities, and other activities related to the enforcement of the law and preservation of order.

Public Utilities: Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.

Quarrying: The removal of mineral aggregates, topsoil or other natural materials from the earth by excavating, stripping or any other mining process.

Quarter-Quarter (¼-¼): A federal subdivision of a Public Land Survey System Section, commonly known as a “forty.” A
Quarter-Quarter (¼-¼) is nominally 40 acres.

 

Racetrack: A measured course where animals or machines are entered in competition against one another or against time, such as auto, dog, and horse races, and tracks used only to train animals. A racetrack may include seating, concession areas, suites, and parking facilities, but does not include accessory offices, residences, or retail facilities. This definition shall also include any facility used for driving automobiles under simulated racing or driving conditions (test tracks, “shakedown” tracks, or other similar facilities), but which does not include seating, concession areas, or retail facilities for the general public.

Radio and Television Broadcasting Studio: A building or structure that provides over the air or satellite delivery of radio and television programs of entertainment, news, talk, and similar media, or studios for the audio or video recording or filming of musical performances, radio or television programs, or motion pictures. This does not include uses classified as "Mobile Support Structures and Facilities."

IBC reference: Television and radio studios admitting an audience, radio and television stations.
 
Raising of Chickens and Ducks: Buildings primarily used for breeding, hatching, and raising chickens and ducks, and that are not used for residential purposes.

Raising of Waterfowl, Fowl, and Fish: Buildings primarily used for breeding, hatching, and raising waterfowl, minnows and other similar lowland animals, fowl, and fish, and that are not occupied for residential purposes.

Reasonable Accommodation: Allowing a disabled person to deviate from the strict requirements of this Chapter if an accommodation is necessary and reasonable, in order not to unlawfully discriminate against the disabled person and to allow them equal housing opportunity.

Reasonably Safe from Flooding: Base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.

Reconstruction: The replacement of all or substantially all of the components of a structure other than the foundation.

Recreation: The pursuit of leisure-time activities. Includes “recreational.”

Recycling Facility: A facility that accepts recyclable materials and may perform some processing activities. The principal function is to separate and store materials that are ready for shipment to end-use markets, such as paper mills, aluminum smelters, or plastic remanufacturing plants. The facility may include power-driven processing equipment to process recyclable materials. The facility receives and processes only residential and commercial recyclables such as food and beverage containers and paper.

Regional Flood: A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.

Religious Institution: A place of religious worship and instruction. Accessory uses requiring independent approval include
(1) an associated private school, and (2) a child care in the main building or the same lot as the Religious Institution that accepts customers not attending the Religious Institution, recreational facilities, dormitories or other facilities for temporary or permanent residences. Child care facilities located in the main building that are used only during worship services, for
persons attending the service, are considered accessory to the church and do not require independent approval. For
purposes of this section, "religious worship" includes any "religious exercise" as defined by the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA), 42 U.S.C. § 2000cc-5.

IBC reference: Places of religious worship.

Removal of Topsoil and Peat: The grading or removal of topsoil or peat for compensation by excavating, stripping or any other process. “Topsoil” means the surface layer of soil which is generally more fertile than the underlying soil layers, which is the natural medium for plant growth. "Peat" means organic matter, excluding coal, formed by the partial decomposition of plant material under saturated conditions.

Renewable Fuel Manufacturing: Establishments that manufacture, store, and distribute renewable fuel. "Renewable Fuel" means biodiesel, biogas, ethanol fuel, or renewable fuel, as defined by the federal Renewable Fuel Standard (40 CFR
§ 80.1101).

Replat: A plat which changes the boundaries of a recorded plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot or
outlot within a recorded plat without changing the exterior boundaries of such block, lot or outlot is not a replat. [See §
13.6	of the County Code of Ordinances]

Residential: A property where dwelling units for personal residences are allowed as the principal use including accessory structures and uses.

Restaurant: An establishment primarily engaged in (1) providing food services to patrons who order and are served while seated and pay after eating ("Sit-down Restaurant"), or (2) providing food through a drive-through window in inside the building for consumption off the premises ("Carryout Restaurant" or "Drive-through Restaurant"). Sit-down Restaurants may provide this type of food service to patrons in combination with selling alcoholic beverages (compare definition of "Bar or Tavern"), or presenting live entertainment (such as a "Dinner Club"). This includes any "Brewpub" as defined by Wis. Stat. Chapter 125.

IBC reference: restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities (including associated commercial kitchens).
 
Retail Sales and Service: The sale of goods, wares, or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer. Examples include the sale or service of goods and/or services such as general merchandise (such as clothing, luggage, jewelry, and shoes), electronics, furniture, lumber or building supplies, hardware, flowers, art, antiques, pets and pet supplies, health supplies, cosmetics, optical goods, and music or sports equipment. Includes personal services not otherwise listed, such as non- veterinary pet care (such as boarding, grooming, sitting, and training pets), photofinishing, and fitness training.

IBC reference: department stores, markets, retail or wholesale stores, sales rooms.

Retirement Housing Service: Housing intended and operated for persons 55 years of age or older, consistent with 24 C.F.R. §§ 100.304—100.307.

Rezoning: an amendment to this Chapter that changes district boundary lines, including any change to the zoning map that reclassifies an area from one zoning district to another.

Riding Supply: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales of equestrian supplies such as grooming supplies, bridles, and saddles.

Road: A public way for vehicular traffic. Includes any highway, or any collector, subcollector, or access road as defined by
§ 15.405.

Road Classification System: See § 15.405.

Roadside Stand: A structure in a street yard used for the sale of farm products. See § 15.373.

Routine Vegetation Maintenance: Normally accepted horticultural practices that do not result in the loss of any layer of existing vegetation and do not require a land disturbing activity.

Sale or Storage of Agricultural Byproducts: An establishment that primarily engages in the storage and wholesale sale of secondary organic materials produced from the raising of animals and crops as part of agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural, or livestock operations. This includes, but is not limited to, animal manure, liquid manure, bedding materials, plant stalks, leaves, and other vegetative matter and byproducts from the on-farm processing of fruits, vegetables, dairy and other food products.

Sales - Processed or Preserved Agricultural Products and Produce: The sale of food or dairy products grown on the premises that are processed, packaged, canned, or otherwise preserved for retail sales.

Salvage Operation:

A commercial use with outdoor junk storage and on-site sales. See § 15.352.

School: A public, parochial, or private institution which provides an educational program for:

•	one or more grades between kindergarten and grade twelve (12) and (such as elementary schools, grade schools, middle schools, junior high schools, or high schools); or
•	post-secondary education, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education, in buildings owned or leased by the institution for administrative and faculty offices, classrooms, laboratories, chapels, auditoriums, lecture halls, libraries, student and faculty centers, athletic facilities, dormitories, fraternities, and sororities.

Includes any Charter School or Private School.

IBC reference: Lecture halls, educational occupancies for students above the 12th grade, educational.

School, Charter: A school under contract with a school board under Wis. Stat. § 118.40 or with one of the entities under Wis. Stat. § 118.40 (2r) (b), or a school established and operated by one of the entities under Wis. Stat. § 118.40 (2r) (b).

School, Private: An institution with a private educational program that meets all of the criteria under Wisconsin Statute §
118.165	(1) or is determined to be a private school by the state superintendent under § 118.167.

IBC reference: Lecture halls, educational occupancies for students above the 12th grade, educational.

Search Ring: A shape drawn on a map to indicate the general area within which a mobile service support structure should be located to meet radio frequency engineering requirements, taking into account other factors including topography and the demographics of the service area.
 
Seasonal Rustic Shelter/Primitive Rural Hunting Cabin: A structure that is not used as a dwelling, is used principally for recreational hunting activity, does not exceed 2 stories in height, and is not provided with water or sewage facilities. [Wis. Stat. § 101.61]

Seasonal Storage: Seasonal storage for compensation of recreational equipment and motor vehicles owned by persons other than those persons residing on the premises, and fully enclosed in an agricultural accessory structure and compliant with Wis Stats. 91.01 (1). This shall not include the storage of a dealer's inventory.

Selection Cut: The removal of selected trees throughout the range of merchantable sizes at regular intervals, either singly or in small groups, leaving a uniformly distributed stocking of desirable tree and shrub size classes.

Self Storage Facility: Indoor storage of customer's items within partitioned buildings with individual access to each partitioned area. A Self Storage Facility may include a Caretaker Unit as an accessory use.

Semidetached: A building that abuts or shares a wall, on a side lot line, with another building on an adjoining lot and where the remaining sides of the building are surrounded by open areas or street lines.

Septic Tank and Related Services: Establishments primarily engaged in (1) pumping (i.e., cleaning) septic tanks and cesspools and/or (2) renting and/or servicing portable toilets.

Service Contractor: Contractors engaged in providing property maintenance services including but not limited to lawn, pool and garden care; snow plowing and removal; and tree trimming and removal.

Service Station: An establishment that primarily dispenses or retails automotive fuels and that has pumps and storage tanks. A Service Station may or may not be in combination with a Convenience Store or Food Mart. A Service Station may provide incidental services such as automotive repair, automotive oils, replacement parts and accessories, or food and beverage sales. A Service Station may provide battery, tire and similar services, but does not include buildings or premises where the business is incidental to the conduct of a public garage used to repair or store motor vehicles.

IBC reference: Motor fuel-dispensing facilities.

Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between a structure (excluding roof eaves) and any of the following:

•	Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM),
•	a bluffline,
•	side and rear lot lines, or
•	streets or roads.

Setback Line: A line established parallel to a highway, lot line, lake or stream, or other place, to define limits within which any or certain buildings, structures or uses may not be constructed, maintained or carried on (except as specifically provided in this Chapter). "Within a setback line" means between the setback line and the highway, lot line, lake or stream to which the setback line is parallel.

Shelterwood Cut: A partial removal of mature trees leaving trees of desirable species and form to provide shade, seed source and a desirable seedbed for natural regeneration with the final removal of the overstory after adequate regeneration is established.

Shoreland: Lands within the following distances from the Ordinary High Water Mark of navigable waters (whichever distance is greater):

•	1,000' from a lake, pond, or flowage; and
•	300' from a river or stream or to the landward side of the floodplain.

Shoreland-Wetland District: The zoning district, created as a part of the shoreland overlay districts section, comprised of shorelands that are designated as wetlands on the wetland maps which have been adopted and made part of this chapter.

Short-Term Rental Agent: The person or firm designated by the owner of a Short-Term Rental Property who is available as the 24-hour contact during any period of rental or lease transaction.

Short-Term Rental Property: Any residential property where a principal dwelling unit or a portion of a principal dwelling unit is rented or leased by a Tourist or Transient for fewer than 29 consecutive days. This definition excludes Bed and Breakfast Establishments. [Ref. Wis. Stat. § 66.0615(1)(dk)]
 
Short-Term Rental Tenant: Any person who rents or leases a Short-Term Rental Property.

Sign: A display, illustration, structure or device that has a visual display visible from a public right-of-way and designed to identify, announce, direct or inform.

Sign, Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same Lot as the light source. Includes any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.

Sign, Building: Any single-faced sign painted on, attached to or erected against the exterior wall of a building, structure, marquee, canopy or awning. Also including any sign placed on the interior of a window or painted on a window such that it can be read from the outside of the building.

Sign Component: Any element of a sign or its source of support (excluding a building), including but not limited to support structure, accessories, wiring, framing. Paint, vinyl, paper, fabric, lightbulbs, diodes, or plastic copy panels on a sign do not constitute components.

Sign, Freestanding: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure, including, but not limited to, a ground mounted sign, detached sign, pole sign, pylon sign or monument sign.

Sign, Incidental: A sign that is not legible to a person of ordinary eyesight with vision adequate to pass a state driver’s
license exam standing at ground level at a location on the public right-of-way or on other private property.

Sign, Monument: A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is on the ground.

Sign, Off-Premise: A sign which meets any one or more of the following criteria:

1.	it is used to direct attention to a commodity, product, service, activity or any other person, place, thing or idea other than noncommercial speech, which is not located, found or sold on the premises upon which the sign is located: or
2.	the message display area, or any part thereof, is made available to message sponsors other than the owner(s) or operator(s) of the sign, typically for a fee or other consideration, i.e. it is general advertising for hire.

Sign, On-Premise: A sign which only displays a commodity, product, service, activity or any other person, place, thing or idea, which is located, found or sold on the premises upon which such sign is located, or a noncommercial speech.

Sign, Perpendicular Building: Any sign perpendicularly attached to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends no more than 18 inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.

Sign, Pornographic: Any sign that, in whole or in part, is obscene or pornographic as defined in Miller v. California and subsequent decisions, or shows specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined in § 15.310.

Sign, Portable: Any sign -

•	not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure,
•	a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
•	signs converted to A-or T-frames;
•	balloons used as signs;
•	umbrellas used for advertising; and
•	signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used for transportation in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.

Sign, Property Address: A reflective red sign with white lettering that identifies the property address at a minimum and may provide limited additional information such as town name and road name.

Sign, Protruding Building: Any sign attached flat against a building wall and not extending or protruding more than six
(6)	inches from the wall.

Sign, Roof: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.

Sign, Temporary: Any sign that is used only for a limited period of time and is not permanently mounted.
 
Silvicultural Thinning: A woodland management practice which, for the purposes of this chapter, the quality of adjacent surface water is maintained or improved through responsible cutting in shorelands and long-lived species are perpetuated, and provision is made for efficient methods of slash disposal.

Single-Family Residence: see Dwelling, Single-Family.

Skilled-Nursing Service: An establishment primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services, with a permanent core staff of registered or licensed practical nurses who provide nursing and continuous personal care services. Examples include convalescent homes, nursing homes, assisted living facilities for the elderly with nursing care, rest homes with nursing care, and inpatient care hospices.

IBC reference: Assisted living facilities, congregate care facilities, nursing homes, congregate living facilities (transient) with more than 10 occupants, congregate living facilities (transient) with more than 10 occupants, congregate living facilities (non-transient) with 16 or fewer occupants, congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants, congregate care facilities.

Slaughterhouse: A plant or premises, including retail premises, where livestock or poultry are slaughtered for human consumption, or where meat or poultry products are processed, but does not include the premises of a person who is the owner of the livestock or poultry to be slaughtered or of the meat or poultry products to be processed, if the resulting product is for exclusive use by the owner, members of the owner’s household, or the owner’s nonpaying guests and employees. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 97.42, except that this definition includes facilities that are subject to poultry inspection pursuant to 21 USC § 451 to 695]

Slope: the net vertical rise over horizontal run, expressed as a percentage, which represents a relatively homogeneous surface incline or decline over the area disturbed.

Slope Preservation Zone: The area riverward from the bluffline where the slope towards the river is 12% or more, as measured horizontally for a distance of not more than 50 feet or less than 25 feet.

Small Regeneration Cut: A harvest of not more than one-third of the contiguous forested ownership within a 10−year
period with each opening not exceeding 6 acres in size and not closer than 75 feet at their closest points.

Sod or Christmas Tree Production: Sod or Christmas Tree Production conducted for the purpose of an income or livelihood. "Sod production" means an establishment engaged in growing turf grass for harvesting and sale. "Chrismas tree production" means an establishment engaged in growing balsam fir, blue spruce, Douglas fir, Fraser fir, living Christmas tree, noble fir, scots pine, white pine, or similar species for harvesting and sale on a seasonal basis.

Soil and Water Conservation and Stream Bank Protection: Management practices that conserve or stabilize soil, water, or stream banks and provided that do not involve structures, fill, soil or peat removal, disruption of the natural flow of any water course, or alteration of the natural topography.

Solar Collector: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure a substantial purpose of which is to transform solar energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 66.0403]

Solar Energy: Radiant energy received from the sun. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 13.48 (2) (h)1.f]

Solar Energy System: Equipment which directly converts and then transfers or stores solar energy into usable forms of thermal or electrical energy. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 13.48 (2) (h) 1. g.]

Solid Waste Processing or Transfer: A facility for the collection, processing or temporary storage of solid waste prior to offsite disposal, not to exceed one year.

Solid Waste Collection, Treatment, and Disposal: A facility for solid waste treatment, solid waste storage or solid waste disposal as defined in Wis. Stat. § 289.01. This includes commercial, industrial, municipal, state and federal establishments or operations such as sanitary landfills, dumps, land disposal sites, incinerators, transfer stations, storage facilities, collection and transportation services and processing, treatment and recovery facilities. This term includes the land where the facility is located. This term does not include:

•	a facility for the processing of scrap iron, steel or nonferrous metal using large machines to produce a principal product of scrap metal for sale or use for remelting purposes,

•	a facility which uses large machines to sort, grade, compact or bale clean wastepaper, fibers or plastics, not mixed with other solid waste, for sale or use for recycling purposes, or
 
•	a salvage operation [Source: Wis. Stat. § 289.01]
IBC reference: Refuse incineration.

Specified Anatomical Areas: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anal region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.

Specified Sexual Activities: Any of the following: (1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, (2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, (3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, (4) Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, (5) Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain, (6) Erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an animal by a human being, (7) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (6) above.

Stable, Commercial: A commercial establishment that trains, rides, or boards horses, mules, donkeys, and other equines for compensation. .

IBC reference: Stables.

Stadium, Arena, or Conference Center: A structure with tiers of seats rising around a field or court, designed for viewing athletic events, entertainment and other public gathering purposes such as conventions, circuses, or concerts. Incudes a convention center or conference facility.

IBC reference: bleachers, grandstands, stadiums.

Start of Construction: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

State Subdivision: As defined in § 13.13.

Stock Yard: A building or buildings whose purpose is the temporary storage of livestock while they await sale, slaughter, or transport.

IBC reference: Livestock shelters.

Stormwater Runoff: The waters derived from rains falling or snowmelt or ice melt occurring within the drainage area, flowing over the surface of the ground and collected in channels, watercourses or conduits.

Story: The vertical distance between:

•	the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or
•	if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.

Story, Half: A story under any roof except a flat roof, the wall plats of which on at least 2 opposite exterior walls are not more than 2' above the floor of the story.

Street: A public or private thoroughfare which affords a primary means of access to abutting property. A "street" includes a road or highway.

Street Line: A dividing line between a street and the abutting lot.

Structural Alteration: The replacement or alteration of one or more of the structural components of any of a structure’s
exterior walls.
 
Structural Component: Any part of the framework of a building or other structure. The structural components of a building’s exterior walls include the vertical studs, top and bottom plates, and window and doorsills and headers. A structural component may be non- load-bearing, such as the framework of a wall at the gable end of a one-story house. Wall coverings, such as siding on the exterior and dry wall on the interior, are not included in the definition of structural component.

Structural Erosion Control Measure: A retaining wall or other man-made structure whose primary function is to control erosion.

Structure: Any man-made object with form, shape and utility that is constructed or otherwise erected, attached to or permanently or temporarily placed, either upon the ground, a river bed, stream bed or lake bed or upon another structure. Structure includes swimming pools, hot tubs, patios, decks and retaining walls, but does not include landscaping or earthwork such as graded areas, filled areas, ditches, berms or earthen terraces. Structure does not include small objects that are easily moved by hand, such as lawn chairs, portable grills, portable picnic tables, bird feeders, birdhouses and birdbaths.

For purposes of the Shoreland Overlay (SO) District (§ 15.260), "structure" means a principal structure or any accessory structure including a garage, shed, boathouse, sidewalk, stairway, walkway, patio, deck, retaining wall, porch, or fire pit.

Structure Height Measurement: The vertical distance from the average ground elevation to the highest point of a flat roof, to the deckline of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip or pitched roof, except as otherwise specified in the SO and SCR districts. This measurement shall exclude chimneys.

The average ground elevation shall be calculated with an accurate drawing of the proposed structure with finished grade contours and spot elevations at each of the four outermost corners of the structure. Add up the spot elevations and divide by four to calculate the average ground elevation.

Structure Height Measurement - Roof Types
 
Structure Height Measurement - Average Ground Elevation Calculation









































Subdivision: As defined in § 13.13.

Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, if the cost of restoring the structure to its pre- damaged condition is at least 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial Evidence: Facts and information, other than merely personal preferences or speculation, directly pertaining to the requirements and conditions an applicant must meet to obtain a conditional use permit and that reasonable persons would accept in support of a conclusion.

Substantial Modification: For purposes of § 15.365 (Telecommunications Facilities), the modification of a mobile service support structure, including the mounting of an antenna on such a structure, that does any of the following:

1.	For structures with an overall height of 200 feet or less, increases the overall height of the structure by more than 20 feet.
2.	For structures with an overall height of more than 200 feet, increases the overall height of the structure by 10 percent or more.
3.	Measured at the level of the appurtenance added to the structure as a result of the modification, increases the width of the support structure by 20 feet or more, unless a larger area is necessary for collocation.
4.	Increases the square footage of an existing equipment compound to a total area of more than 2,500 square feet.

Successional Climax Forest: Plant community dominated by native trees representing the culminating stage of natural succession for that specific locality and environment. Also referred to as old growth forest specific to the Lower St. Croix Riverway, including oak forest, maple-basswood forest, and white-pine forest.
 
Support Structure: For purposes of § 15.365 (Telecommunications Facilities), an existing or new structure that supports or can support a mobile service facility, including a mobile service support structure, utility pole, water tower, building, or other structure.

Taxi and Limousine Service: An establishment that provides passenger transportation using automobiles, vans, or specialty and luxury passenger vehicles such as limousines or luxury sedans. Services are generally provided on a reserved basis, and vehicles are stored at the site. This use does not operate over regular routes and on regular schedules.

Technical or Trade School: A school that offers vocational and technical training in a variety of technical subjects and trades.

Temporary Hot Mix Plant: A facility with equipment that mixes asphalt coatings, petroleum lubricating oils, and other related byproducts to produce blacktopping for roads and streets.

Temporary Residence: A trailer, van, mobile home, recreational vehicle, tent, bus, truck, automobile or similar apparatus for residential purposes, temporary or permanent, for temporary occupancy pending construction of a permanent dwelling.

Temporary Structure: A movable structure not designed for human occupancy which may be used for the protection of goods or chattels.

Text Amendment: an amendment to this Chapter that does not affect district boundary lines, including any amendment that is not a rezoning.

Tiny House: A one-family dwelling that is less than 720 square feet in floor area, excluding lofts.

Tiny House on Wheels (THOW): A Tiny House that is mounted on a wheeled trailer chassis.

Theater, Movie, or Performing Arts: A building that is designed and used for live presentations by actors and acresses, singers, dancers, musicians, and other performing artist, or that displays motion pictures indoors.

To Place: The putting of a building or structure in a particular situation, whether this is by original construction or erection or by moving a building or structure to the particular situation.

Tourist: A person who travels to a location away from his or her permanent address for a short period of time for vacation, pleasure, recreation, culture, business, or employment. [Reference: ATCP § 72.03 (19)]

Townhouse/Rowhouse: A type of structure that: (1) has three or more separate dwelling units divided vertically, and
(2)	where dwelling unit has separate ground floor entrances to a front and rear yard.

Transmission Services: Electric power lines, telephone and telegraph lines, communication towers, cables, sewage lift stations, sewer and water pipes, and other pipes, conduits and accessory structures that are used to transport power, convey information or transport material between 2 points, other than wireless communication service facilities.

Travel Trailer (also referred to as a "Mobile Recreational Vehicle"): A vehicle which is:

•	built on a single chassis,
•	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
•	designed to be self-propelled,
•	designed to be carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light-duty vehicle,
•	licensed for highway use if registration is required, and
•	is not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

This definition does not apply to:

•	A Manufactured Home or Mobile Home that is towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, or
•	A temporarily placed Manufactured Home or Mobile Home.

Transit System: Passenger services provided by public, private, or nonprofit entities such as the following surface transit modes: commuter rail, rail rapid transit, light rail transit, light guideway transit, school bus, express bus, special needs transportation, charter bus, and local fixed route bus.
 
IBC reference: Waiting areas in transportation terminals.

Truck Service, Repair, and Towing: Repairs, incidental body and fender work, replacement of parts and motor services, towing and steam cleaning to freight vehicles and trucks equal to or exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight.

Understory: The layer formed by the crowns of smaller trees beneath the forest canopy.

Undeveloped Natural Resources and Open Space Land Use: Land withheld from development due to future natural resource extraction or to facilitate agriculture and recreational uses that require open green spaces such as livestock grazing, parks, and conservation.

Unnecessary Hardship: Special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-created, and that have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this Chapter.

Utility, Major: Includes any:

•	Building or other structure used for water supply or wastewater treatment, or the production of steam, air conditioning, hot water or potable water for consumption by the general public.
•	Electric substation and distribution facility with a nominal capacity exceeding 115KV.
•	Water treatment and purification (WTP) facility or water pumping plant with a capacity of > 10 MGD.
•	Sewage treatment plant.
•	Transmission pipeline to transport products, such as crude oil, natural gas, refined petroleum products, or slurry.
IBC reference: Tanks, towers.

Utility, Minor: Includes any:

•	Electrical power line, telephone or telegraph line, water pump station, sewage lift station, sewer or water pipe, or other pipe, conduit or accessory structure used to transport power, or transport material between two points, other than wireless communication service facilities.
•	Electric substation and distribution facility with a nominal capacity of no more than 115KV.
•	Gas and fuel lines for local natural gas distribution.
•	Water pumping plant with a capacity of < 10 MGD.
•	Water tank,septic tank, well, or water reservoir.

This use does not include a service garage or storage yard, either as a primary use or accessory to the utility. In AG-1 and AG-2, this category includes facilities that are either (a) required by state or federal law to be located on a specific site in the AG-1 or AG-2 district, or (2) are authorized to be located in a specific site under state, federal or local laws or regulations that expressly exempt its location from the requirement for a conditional use permit.

IBC reference: Telephone exchanges, tanks, towers.

Variance: An authorization by the Board of Adjustment for the construction, modification or maintenance of a building or
structure in a manner that deviates from dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this Chapter.

Vehicle: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a road or highway, including any car, truck, trailer, semi-trailer, watercraft, mobile home or other motorcraft, whether or not it is self-powered or remains capable of travel in its present state.

Veterinary Clinic: An establishment that provides medical care and treatment, observation, dentistry, or surgery for domestic animals.

IBC reference: kennels and pounds.

Vertical Mixed Use: A multi-story building whose ground floor is comprised of retail spaces and contains single family dwelling units on the floors above.

IBC reference: Live/work unit.
 
Vision Clearance: An unoccupied triangular space at the intersection of highways or streets with railroads. Such vision clearance triangles shall be bounded by the intersecting highway, street or railroad right-of-way lines and a setback line connecting points located on such right-of-way lines by measurement from their intersection as specified in § 15.405.

Visually Inconspicuous: Difficult to see, or not readily noticeable, in summer months as viewed from at or near the mid- line of the Lower St. Croix River.

Warehouse: A facility that stores and distributes products, supplies, and equipment, and that is characterized by trucking activity and storage of material in open areas or enclosed buildings for distribution to freight vehicles.

IBC reference: Any building, structure or use classified as Storage Group S.

Wastewater Treatment System: A wastewater treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative wastewater treatment system approved by the Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on a different parcel than the structure.

Watershed: An entire land area contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body of water.

Waters of the State: Those portions of Lake Michigan and Lake Superior within the boundaries of Wisconsin, all lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells, impounding reservoirs, marshes, water courses, drainage systems and other surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private within the state or under its jurisdiction, except those waters which are entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a person. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 281.01(18)]

Water Surface Profile (or Flood Profile): A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain flood flow.

Well: An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain
groundwater regardless of its intended use.

Wetland: An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions. [Source: Wis. Stat. § 23.32]

Wholesaler: An establishment that provides goods and services to other businesses, and that is not otherwise defined in this Chapter.

Wholesale Nursery: The onsite propagation and growing of plants, shrubs, trees, or vines. Products raised onsite may be sold onsite. Retail sales of any other products are not allowed. Garden centers are not included.

Wind Energy System: As defined in Wis. Stat. § 66.0403.

Winery: A facility for the manufacture of wine, as defined in Wis. Stat. § 125.02, and associated authorized activities, as described in Wis. Stat. § 125.53.

Wired Communication/Cable Facility: A transmission facility and infrastructure used to transmit voice, data, text, sound, and video over a wired telecommunications network. Examples of services include telephone services, including VoIP services; wired (cable) audio and video programming distribution; and wired broadband Internet services.

Wireless Communication Service: Any “mobile service facility," “mobile service provider” or “mobile service support structure” as defined by Wis. Stat. § 66.0404 and that is subject to § 15.355 of this Chapter.

Wrecking and Demolition Service: An establishment that provides wrecking and demolition of buildings and structures, including underground tank removal and the dismantling of non-hazardous steel oil tanks. The establishment may sell materials derived from demolition operations.

Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward (except as otherwise provided in this Chapter).

Yard, Rear: The open space on a parcel between the primary building and the rear parcel boundary (the boundary typically opposite from and parallel to the street right-of-way).

Yard, Side: The open space on a parcel between the primary building and a side parcel boundary (typically a boundary perpendicular to the street).

Yard, Street: The open space on a parcel between the primary building and the street right-of-way
 
Zoos, Botanical Gardens, Arboreta, and similar uses: Establishments that preserve and exhibit living plant and animal life displays, including those in natural areas or settings.

15.807 Acronyms 	

Abbreviations and acronyms used in this Chapter have the following meanings:

Table 15.807 Acronyms
¼-¼	Quarter-Quarter or "forty"
ac	acre(s)
ATCP	Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
BMP	Best Management Practice
BFE	Base Flood Elevation
CDC	Community Development Committee
CFR	Code of Federal Regulations
ft or ' (e.g., 3')	foot or feet
DATCP	Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection
DBH	Diameter at Breast Height
DNR or WDNR	Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
du	dwelling unit(s)
EPA	United States Department of Environmental Regulation
FEMA	Federal Emergency Management Agency
FIRM	Flood Insurance Rate Map
HUD	United States Department of Housing and Urban Development

IBC	
The International Building Code, as adopted under Wisconsin Administrative Code SPS 361.05.
max	Maximum
min	Minimum
NAVD	North American Vertical Datum
OHWM	Ordinary High Water Mark
RFE	Regional Flood Elevation
sf	Square feet
THOW	Tiny House on Wheels
USC	United States Code

USDA	
United States Department of Agriculture
Wis. Stat.	Wisconsin Statutes

15.810 Interpretation of Zoning Map 	
1.	Generally
a.	The boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Chapter are shown on the Zoning Map.
b.	The Zoning Map, including all notations and references shown on the Zoning Map, is incorporated by reference and made a part of this Chapter. It is as much a part of this Chapter as if actually depicted within its pages.

2.	Official Version
a.	The Zoning Map is a geographic coverage layer entitled "County Zoning" that is maintained under the direction of the Zoning Administrator as part of the County's geographic information system (GIS) . This "County Zoning" geographic coverage layer constitutes the County's Zoning Map.
b.	The Zoning Map filed as provided in subsection 2.a above is the official version, and controls if differences occur between it and other copies.
c.	The Zoning Administrator will have up to 10 business days following a decision resulting in a change to the Zoning Map to revise the County Zoning GIS layer to reflect that change. Until the map is revised, staff can issue a copy of the amendment ordinance in response to any request for the official version of the zoning map.
d.	The County may maintain printed copies of the Zoning Map, attested by the Zoning Administrator, which become the Zoning Map if the Zoning Administrator certifies that the County's GIS is destroyed or corrupted.
 
3.	Maintenance and Updates
a.	The Zoning Administrator shall direct revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments (rezonings).
b.	No unauthorized person may alter or modify the Zoning Map. The Zoning Administrator may authorize printed copies of the Zoning Map to be produced and maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the Zoning Map for historical reference.

4.	Boundaries
a.	When the district boundaries are either roads or streets, unless otherwise shown, and where the designation on the district map indicates that the various districts are bounded by a road or street line, the centerline of such road or street shall be the district boundary line.
b.	Except where otherwise indicated on the map, the district boundary line is measured at right angles to the nearest
highway right-of-way line and shall be at least 300' in depth.
c.	If a commercial district is indicated on the district map as a strip paralleling the highway, the depth of that strip, unless otherwise indicated, is 200' measured at right angles to the right-of-way line of the street or highway to which it is adjacent. The length of each strip shall be as shown on the map. When the commercial district is located at the intersection of streets or highways, the length is measured from the intersection of each street or highway right-of-way line included in the district.
d.	For subdivided property, where not otherwise indicated and where the designations on the district map are approximately bounded by lot lines, the lot lines are the district boundary.
e.	Where district boundary lines are indicated as adjacent and parallel or approximately parallel to street lines, the district boundary lines are the rear line of the lots abutting those streets.
f.	For subdivided property, where not otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are property lines, section lines, quarter section lines, or quarter-quarter section lines.
g.	In unplatted areas of 10 acres or less, the district boundary lines, where not otherwise indicated, are determined by use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
h.	For floodplains, the regional flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the
floodplain boundary on the land.

5.	Disputes
a.	Whenever there is a dispute over the exact boundary of a district, the Board of Adjustment shall decide the matter as an appeal (§ 15.560).
b.	The person contesting the matter shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit their own technical evidence.

15.815 Conflicting Rules 	

1.	Generally. This chapter supersedes all inconsistent provisions of any County Zoning Ordinance enacted under Wis.
Stat. § 59.97. However, when an ordinance adopted under a statute other than Wis. Stat. § 59.97 is more restrictive than this Chapter, that ordinance continues in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restriction, but not otherwise.
2.	Deeds or Permits. This Chapter does not repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed restrictions, easements, covenants or permits already issued. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.

15.816 To 15.899 Reserved. 	

15.900 LEGAL PROVISIONS

Contents:
15.900 Relationship to Other Provisions of the County Code 15.905 Zoning of Towns
15.910 Private Restrictions
 
15.915 Severability
15.920 Repeal of existing ordinance 15.925 Effective Date
15.926 to 15.999 Reserved.

15.900 Relationship to Other Provisions of the County Code 	
1.	Stricter Standards in this Chapter. If this Chapter requires a greater width or size of yards or other open spaces, a lower height of buildings, a greater percentage of lot be left unoccupied, or other higher standards than are required in any other applicable statute, chapter or regulation, the provisions of this Chapter govern. This section does not apply to the extent that a Wisconsin or federal statute preempts local regulation.
2.	Stricter Standards in Other Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations. If another applicable statute, ordinance, or regulation requires a higher standard than a provision of this Chapter, the other applicable statute, chapter or regulation governs.

15.905 Zoning of Towns 	
1.	Town Board Approval and Existing Ordinance. Except for §17.30, §17.36 and §17.40 all provisions of Chapter 17 in effect prior to the effective date of Chapter 15 (Comprehensive Revision) shall remain in effect in a town for a period up to one year or until the newly enacted Chapter 15 is approved by the town board, whichever period is shorter.
2.	Administration and Enforcement. Chapter 17 shall also remain in effect for the limited purpose of administration and enforcement of the Shoreland Overlay District (§17.30), Lower St. Croix Riverway Overlay District (§17.36) and Floodplain Overlay District (§17.40), until such time as they are repealed and/or reenacted.

15.910 Private Restrictions 	
1.	Stricter Provisions Apply. This Chapter does not abrogate any deed restriction, covenant, easement or any other private agreement or restriction on the use of land. However, where this Chapter is more restrictive or imposes higher standards than a private restriction, this Chapter controls. Where a private restriction is more restrictive or imposes higher standards than this Chapter, the private restriction controls if properly enforced by a person having the legal right to enforce the restrictions.
2.	Enforcement. The County does not enforce private restrictions.

15.915 Severability 	

If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected.

15.920 Repeal of existing ordinance 	

All provisions of Chapter 17 in effect prior to the effective date (§ 15.925) are repealed effective December 1, 2019, except as provided in § 15.905 (1) and (2). Those provisions of the existing ordinance which are subject to town approval shall be repealed in a town upon expiration of one year from the effective date of this ordinance or when the comprehensive revision is approved in a town, whichever occurs first.

15.925 Effective Date 	
1.   Generally. This Chapter takes effect on the 1st day of December, 2019.

15.926 to 15.999 Reserved. 	
 

 

AN ORDINANCE  REGARDING LICENSING OF USE OF EXPLOSIVES AND  BLASTING ACTIVITIES




The Town Board of Supervisors of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, do ordain as follows:



SECTION I.	CREATION OF PROVISIONS.

Title 7, Chapter 4 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances is created to read as follows:




Title 7	Chapter 4

Blasting and Use of Explosives





 
7-4-1
7-4-2
7-4-3
7-4-4
7-4-5
7-4-6
7-4-7
7-4-8
7-4-9
7-4-10
 
Authority and Purpose Definitions
Applicability of Chapter
Blasting Permit Application and Review Pre-Blasting Site Inspection
Required Blasting Operational  Standards Temporary Permits
Regulation of Blasting Resultants Applicability of Regulatory Standards Violations and Penalties

Appendix A:  Notice of Blasting in Community
Appendix  B:   Blasting  Vibration  Chart
 
Sec. 7-4-1	Authority and Purpose.

(a)	Authority.
(1)	This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the police powers granted to the Town of Cady under Section 60.10, Wis. Stats., and is in accord with Section 61.34, Wis. Stats. This Chapter is  adopted  to  protect  the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin.
(2)	The Town of Cady ("Town") adopts and incorporates by reference the following regulations contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code. Any amendment, repeal or re-creation of the Wisconsin Statutes and/or Wisconsin Administrative Code relating to this Chapter made after the effective date of this Chapter is incorporated herein into this Chapter by reference on the effective date of the amendment, repeal or re­ creation.	However, the Town may have more restrictive  regulations provided	by this Chapter than those found in the Wisconsin Administrative Code; in the event of a conflict between regulatory provisions, the more restrictive provision  shall be applicable:
a.	SPS 305, Wis. Adm. Code - Licensing of Blasters.
b.	SPS 307, Wis. Adm. Code - Explosives and Fireworks.
c.	SPS 314, Wis. Adm. Code - Fire Prevention Code (contains rules pertaining to general safety and fire prevention related to the storage and handling of explosive materials).
d.	SPS 361-366, Wis. Adm. Code - Commercial Building  Code (rules pertaining to the design and construction of buildings related to the storage of explosive materials).
(b)	Purpose.  The purpose of this Chapter is to:
(1)	Safeguard the health, welfare and safety of Town residents;
(2)	Protect public and private property located within the Town;
(3)	Provide reasonable minimum and uniform standards for all blasting and associated operations in the Town of Cady;
(4)	Regulate the use of explosive materials, particularly when used with nonmetallic mining activity, and establish uniform limits on the permissible levels of blasting resultants to reasonably  assure that blasting resultants do not cause injury, damage or nuisance to persons or property; and
(5)	Limit the adverse effects of blasting on persons or property outside any
controlled blasting site area.



Sec. 7-4-2	Definitions.

(a)	Interpretation of Definitions.  For purposes of this Chapter and any license or permit issued in accordance herewith, the following terms, phrases, words
 
and their derivations in this Section shall have the meaning given herein unless otherwise specifically provided for in this Chapter or unless the context clearly indicates otherwise or unless such meaning would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town of Cady. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include words in the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory, and not merely directory.
(b)	Chapter Definitions.  The following definitions shall apply in this Chapter.
Terms not herein defined shall be understood to have their usual and ordinary dictionary meaning:
( 1) Affected Building or Structure. A building or structure  within   a distance extending two thousand six hundred and forty (2,640) feet (one-half mile) from the outer perimeter of a controlled blasting site area.
(2)	Airblast.	An  airborne  shock wave resulting  from the  detonation  of
explosives.
(3)	Barrier. A material object that separates, keeps  apart, or demarcates in a conspicuous manner, such as cones, tape or warning sign.
(4)	Blast Area. The area of a blast subject to flying rock, the emission of gases and concussion as determined by the blaster in charge.
(5)	Blast Site. The area where explosive material is being handled during loading of blast holes, including fifty (50) feet in all directions from the perimeter formed by the loaded holes. A minimum of thirty (30) feet may replace the fifty (50) foot requirement if the perimeter of loaded holes is marked and separated from the non-blast site areas by a protective barrier. The fifty (50) foot or thirty (30) foot distance requirements, as applicable, apply in all directions along the full depth of the blast hole.
(6)	Blaster.   Any  individual  holding  a valid blaster's  license  under  SPS
305, Wis. Adm. Code, issued by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services or other appropriate state agencies.
(7)	Blaster in Charge.  The qualified person in charge of, and responsible
for, the loading and firing of a blast.
(8)	Blasting. Any method of loosening, moving or shattering masses of solid matter by use of an explosive.
(9)	Blasting Operation.  Any operation, enterprise or activity involving the
use of blasting.
( 10)  Blasting Resultants.  The physical  manifestations  of forces  released by blasting, including, but not limited to, projectile matter, vibration and concussion, which might cause injury, damage or unreasonable nuisance to persons or property located outside the controlled blasting site area.
 
( 11)  Community.  A built-up inhabited  area.
(12)	Controlled Blasting Site Area. The area that  surrounds  a  blast  site and that meets one (1) of the following conditions:
a.	Is owned by the operator; or
b.	With respect to which, because of property ownership, an employment relationship or an agreement with the property owner, the operator can take reasonably adequate measures to exclude or to assure the safety of persons and property.
( 13) Detonator. Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for initiating detonation in an explosive. The term includes, but is not limited to, electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps for use with safety fuses, detonating cord  delay connectors, and non-electric instantaneous  and delay blasting caps.
( 14) Explosive. Any chemical compound, mixture  or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion unless  the compound, mixture or device is otherwise classified by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services.
(15)   Explosive Materials.  Explosives, blasting  agents and detonators.  The
term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite and  other  high explosives, slurries, emulsions, water gels, blasting agents, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord and igniters.
( 16)  Flyrock.  Rock or karst that is propelled through the air from a blast. ( 17)  Ground Vibration. A shaking of the ground caused by the elastic wave
emanating from a blast.
(18)	Highway.  Any public street, public alley or public road.
(19)	Inhabited Building. A building regularly occupied in whole or in part as a habitation for human beings, or any church, schoolhouse, railroad station, store or other structure where people are accustomed to assemble, except any building or structure occupied in connection with the manufacture, transportation, storage or use of explosive materials.
(20)	Karst.	An  area  or  surficial  geological  features  subject  to  bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may include areas with soils less the sixty (60) inches thick over bedrock, caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps, swallets, and depressions with no surface drainage.
(21)	Operator.  The person who is responsible for the operation at a mine,
pit, quarry, or construction site where blasting activity occurs.
(22)	Particle Velocity. Any measure of ground vibration describing the velocity at which a particle of ground vibrates when excited by a seismic wave.
 
(23)	Person. Any individual, corporation, limited liability company, association, company, firm, partnership, society or joint stock company.
(24)	Powder Factor. Any ratio between the amount of powder loaded and the amount of rock broken.
(25)	Primer. A capped fuse, electric detonator or any other  detonating device inserted in or attached to a cartridge of explosive.
(26)	Stemming. The inert material, such as drill cutting, used in the collar portion or elsewhere of a blast hole to confine the gaseous products of detonation.
(27)	Unreasonable Annoyance. An excessive, repeated noise, action or other disturbance that is not justified  by reason.



Sec. 7-4-3 Applicability of Chapter.

This Chapter shall apply to:
(a)	Any person who conducts blasting activity in the Town of Cady in order to establish a footing, foundation, or other method of support for the construction, placement or erection of structures greater than fifteen ( 15) feet high above the ground surface.
(b)	To any person who is engaged in blasting activity in the Town of Cady as
part of a nonmetallic mining operation.
(c)	To any person who blasts in the Town of Cady in order to demolish buildings or other structures when these require a Level 3 license, or higher, from the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services.



Sec. 7-4-4  Blasting Permit Applications  and Review.

(a)	Application Information Requirements; Fees.  An  applicant  shall submit to the Town Clerk an application for a blasting permit containing the following	information, together with any supporting documentation. Applications shall be accompanied by the required permit fee as prescribed in Section 1-3-1.  This permit fee shall represent payment for anticipated administrative and review costs incurred by the Town of Cady, including, but not limited to, Town monitoring of the operation, legal fees, engineering costs, inspection expenditures and other administrative expenses. This fee may be increased from time to time by a separate resolution or ordinance of the Town Board in the event the actual expenses exceed the established administrative fee. Permits shall be issued on an annual basis commencing January 1 and ending  on December 31. All blasting permits applied for after January 1 shall be prorated from the date of issuance of the permit through the end of the year:
 
(1)	Applicant Information. Name, blaster license number and classification, address, land and cell telephone numbers, fax number, and email address of the applicant.
(2)	Blaster Information. Name, blaster license number and classification, address, land and cell telephone numbers, fax number, and email address of the blaster in charge of blasting activities, if other than the applicant.
(3)	Operations Supervisor Information. Name, address, land and cell telephone numbers, fax number, and email address of the person who will be in charge of the operation that blasting activity will support.
(4)	Map.  A map or aerial map showing the location  of the blasting  site
and a sufficiently detailed description of the operations at the site. The map shall accurately depict the location of all dwellings and other structures located within two thousand six hundred and forty (2,640) feet of the controlled blasting site, with the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners or residents of such buildings provided with such map. Such map or aerial photograph shall have a scale of no less than one (1) inch equals one hundred ( 100) feet and having an overlaying grid of fifty (50) feet by fifty (50) feet.
(5)	Permits and Licenses. Copies of all state, county and local permits and licenses that have been granted to the blaster and the operator for whose operation blasting activity would occur.
(6)	Proof of Insurance. Proof of liability insurance per Subsection (b) below.
(7)	Blasting Procedures Description.  A written  description  of  the types of explosives and blasting procedures proposed to be employed, including initiating systems.
(8)	Pre-Blasting Site Inspection Report.  A pre-blasting  site inspection
report as prescribed in Section 7-4-5.
(9)	Pre-Blasting Survey and Well Testing Information. Sufficient documentation indicating compliance with the pre-blasting survey and well testing requirements of Subsection (c) below.
(b)	Financial Assurance. Each application for a  blasting permit as  herein stated, or a renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Insurance for a Commercial General Liability Policy and said Policy of Insurance shall have, at a minimum, limits of coverage of not less than Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) in the aggregate and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. The certificate of insurance shall name the Town of Cady and its residents as additional named insureds under the relevant policy. Any insurance which the blaster is obligated to carry under the terms of this Chapter may be carried under so-called "blanket" policies covering other properties or liabilities of the blaster, provided, that such blanket  policies  otherwise comply with the provisions  of this Subsection.
 
Each insurance policy shall provide that it shall not be cancelled by the insurance company, except after not less than ninety (90) days' notice to the Town Clerk, in writing, by registered or certified mail.  Not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration of the ninety (90) day notice of cancella­ tion, the blaster must deliver to the Town of Cady a replacement insurance policy in absence of which all blasting shall cease. The liability insurance must be issued by a company licensed by the State of Wisconsin to issue the policy. The Town Board reserves the right to increase the amount of the insurance policy depending on the circumstances  of the blasting activity.
(c)	Pre-blasting Surveys and Water Quality Testing.
(1)	Where Required.
a.	Pre-blasting surveys, which shall include water quality testing for existing wells,  shall be conducted  as part of the blasting permit application process when requested, and thereafter as provided for by this Chapter, to determine the condition of all buildings or structures within the affected area of two thousand six hundred and forty (2,640) feet of the blast site(s) and the quality of water in all existing wells in the area to be tested prior to the proposed commencement of blasting.
b.	Residents outside of the boundaries of the affected area may petition the Town Board for a pre-blasting survey, with such survey to be at the applicant's expense.
(2)	Purpose; Expense.
a.	Prior to consideration of a blasting permit application by the Plan Commission, the applicant shall have notified, in writing, all residents or owners of dwellings or other structures located within the affected area. Pre-blasting surveys and well testing shall be completed at the applicant's expense.
b.	The pre-blasting survey and water quality testing shall be promptly
conducted in a complete manner.
c.	Each survey shall include a report providing the name, address and telephone number (if it can be determined) of the owner or resident of said dwellings, structures and/or wells, and document­ ing any pre-blasting presence or absence of damage or other physical factors that could reasonably be expected to be affected by the use of explosives. The testing of wells shall determine whether the water is safe for human consumption according to established drinking water quality standards, including standards applicable to children of all ages and pregnant women.
d.	The survey reports shall be signed by the person(s) who conducted the  survey.
(3)   Exception to Well Testing Requirement.  If the blasting for which a
permit  application  is being  made  is part of  an operation  that  has been
 
already permitted and that tested the wells within a timeframe acceptable to the Town of Cady, information regarding those tests can be submitted instead of testing the wells again.
(4)	Resident/Owner Request Requirement; Applicant's Responsibility to Notify Affected Parties.
a.	As part of an application for a blasting permit, the applicant shall
notify, in writing, all owners or residents of dwellings or other structures (including, but not limited to, wells) located within two thousand six hundred and forty (2,640) feet from the blasting site that the applicant intends to apply for a blasting permit from the Town of Cady and will be completing a pre-blasting survey where requested as part of the application and review process.
b.	This written notification shall include a statement indicating that the survey provides a baseline record of the pre-existing condition of the building or structure against which the effects of blasting can be assessed and it shall include an assessment of both the interior and exterior of the building(s).
c.	The  notification  shall  state  that  no  pre-blasting  survey  will  be
conducted on a property unless the owner or resident makes a written request for a pre-blasting survey and a water quality test for existing wells. The owner or resident shall make this request in writing to the applicant, a copy of which shall be provided by the applicant to the Town Clerk. The applicant  shall conduct a pre-blasting survey only of requested dwellings or structures and conduct water quality testing for existing wells when so requested.
(5)	Copy of Reports; Objections. At the applicant's expense, copies of the survey report shall be promptly provided to the Town Clerk, the property owner and  resident, and the applicant/permittee. The owner/resident or the applicant/permittee may promptly submit to the Town, in writing, any objections to the survey report, setting forth in detail such objections.
(6)	Permit  Renewal  Situations.	In  situations  where  a  renewal  of  a
blasting permit is requested, the applicant shall not be required to conduct a new pre-blasting survey of any dwelling or structure, or conduct a well water quality test, more than once in every three (3) year period. A change of ownership of the property  would justify a request for a pre-blasting survey to be conducted before the three (3) year period.
(7)	Qualifications of Testing Firms.  The pre-blasting  survey  and  water
quality testing shall be conducted by an independent inspection company and, in the case of well water testing, by a laboratory approved by the State of Wisconsin,  or by an organization selected by the applicant and acceptable to the Town of Cady and the owner/resident.  Reasonable costs
 
of such independent survey and well testing shall be the responsibility of the applicant or permittee.
(8)	Post-Permit Surveys and Well Testing.
a.	If any new building or structure is added or a new well drilled subsequent to the effective date of the blasting permit, its owner or resident may request that a survey and water test be conducted of that building/structure and/or well. The permittee shall then conduct such survey and tests at the permittee's expense.
b.	In addition, if a building or structure is improved or modified to the extent that a building permit is required, the owner of that dwelling or structure may request that a pre-blasting survey be completed, at the permittee's expense. The permittee shall conduct such survey and testing work within a reasonable period of time, but not exceeding twice each calendar year for all such requests by an owner or resident. In addition, a change of ownership of the property would justify a request of a pre-blasting survey to be conducted regardless of other limits.
(d)	Review Procedures.
(1)	Plan Commission Review and Recommendation. Upon the submittal of a complete application and required permit fee(s), the Town Clerk shall place the application on the agenda for the next meeting of the Plan Commission. A public hearing before the Plan Commission, after a Class II notice, shall be held regarding the application. The applicant or his/her agent shall be in attendance at the meeting the Plan Commission will review the application. If the Plan Commission determines that the blasting permit application is complete and the proposed blasting activity will fully comply with all applicable requirements of this Chapter and the Wisconsin Administrative Code, specifically but not limited to SPS  307, Wis. Adm. Code,  the Plan Commission may make a recommendation to the  Town  Board regarding the granting of a blasting permit. The Plan Commission may recommend conditions related to the permit, as appropriate, to protect the safety, welfare and property values of Town residents. If the Plan Commission determines that the application is incomplete or that the proposed blasting activity will not be conducted in conformity with the requirements of this Chapter or the Wisconsin Administrative Code, the Plan Commission shall recommend to the Town Board denial of the permit application.
(2)	Town Board Review and Determination.  The Town Clerk shall place
the blasting permit application and the Plan Commission's recommen­ dation on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Town Board meeting for review and action by  the Board. After considering the Plan	Commission's   recommendation   and   the   review   criteria   of
 
Subsection (d)(l) above, the Town Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, or hold the application in abeyance pending the submittal of additional information, as appropriate.
(e)	Renewals. All applications for renewal of a blasting permit shall be filed by the permittee with the Town Clerk. Applications shall be accompanied by the permit fee required by Section  1-3-1. Renewal applications shall be reviewed by the Town Board, and the Town Board, at its discretion, may require all or some of the information required for an original application. No permit renewal shall be granted unless the project is in full compliance with the terms of the existing permit. Permit renewals may be conditioned upon correction of any unanticipated environmental or nuisance impacts occurring during the original or renewal permits. A public hearing shall be required to be held with respect to a renewal application, after a Class II Notice, if the renewal application provides for an enlargement of the previous blasting site area or otherwise provides for an alteration or change in the method of operations previously approved which might  adversely affect the use or enjoyment of nearby properties.
(f)	Appeals. Any appeal from the Town Board's decision to grant or not grant an original or renewal blasting license shall be initiated as an action commenced in Circuit Court not later than forty-five (45) days from the date of the Town Board action.



Sec. 7-4-5 Pre-Blasting Site Inspection.

(a)	On-Site Inspection. The blaster shall visually inspect the  controlled blasting site area to determine if there is any evidence of a sinkhole, cave or subsurface void in the karst that could be part of a sinkhole or cave. If visual inspection reveals such, no blasting shall occur nor shall any structure support be placed therein.
(b)	Use of Probes and Borings. In addition to the required visual on-site inspection or when such inspection is inconclusive,  it is recommended that the blaster use probes (such as borings) or geophysical methods, such as resistivity tomography, seismic refraction, microgravity or ground penetrating radar, to ascertain the presence of sinkholes or caves.
(c)	Report Submission to Plan Commission. The blaster shall submit a pre­ blasting site inspection report regarding his/her findings and methods employed to the Plan Commission at the time an application for a blasting permit is made.



Sec. 7-4-6 Required Blasting Operational Standards.

(a)	Notification of Blasting. Notification shall be provided to the following persons and by the required methods specified in this Section a minimum of
 
seventy-two (72) hours prior to the initial blasting activity at a blast site as well as prior to all subsequent blasting events at the blast site:
(1)	Pre-Blasting Notification Procedures; Additional Pre-Blasting Surveys.
a.	A minimum  of seventy-two  (72) hours prior to the blasting  at a
blast site, the blaster in charge shall make a reasonable effort to notify all owners or residents of affected buildings. The blaster shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure timely and effective notice that a blasting operation is to begin, using such means as a written notice, a telephone call, email or in-person notification. The blaster shall keep a record of all such notifications,  or attempted notifications, by party, and any pertinent  remarks,  a copy of which shall be provided to the Town upon request.
b.	As part of this notice, the blaster in charge shall offer to perform
a pre-blasting survey for the owners or residents; this notification and survey  availability is in addition to the pre-blasting survey required in Section 7-4-4(c) as part of the blasting permit application process. A pre-blasting survey provides a baseline record of the pre-existing condition of a structure(s) against which the effects of blasting can be assessed, and it should include the interior and exterior of the building. If an owner or resident requests a copy of the pre-blasting survey, the blaster in charge shall provide a copy for not more than the actual cost of the copy within forty-eight (48) hours of the request.
(2)	Resident Call List. A resident call list shall be maintained by the permittee for the purpose of notifying persons living within the vicinity of the blast site at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to blasting activity. A resident shall be placed on th.e call list upon the a request to be included and receive notifications. The call list shall be used prior to any blast.
(3)	Public  Blasting Signage.   Before  any  blasting  operation  or blasting
event, the blaster in charge shall give notice thereof to the general public by the conspicuous display of a fluorescent flag and legible sign displayed within one hundred ( 100) feet of all public roads bordering the blast site or on the nearest public road bordering the blast  site. Said sign should also warn against the use of all mobile wireless communications equipment on all roads within one thousand ( 1,000) feet of the blasting operations in order to minimize interference with such operations. The flag and sign shall be displayed prior to  and during all blasting operations and events.
(4)	Warning Signal.  A distinctive warning  signal of sufficient volume to
be  heard  by  all residents  in  the  area  adjacent  to the  site where  the
 
blasting  will  occur  shall  be  sounded  prior  to  commencing  blasting. Automotive or truck horns shall not be used as a warning signal.
(5)	Utilities Notifications. Whenever blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of natural gas, electric, water, fire alarm, telephone or cable television utilities infrastructure, these utilities shall be notified by the permittee not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to commencing blasting.
(6)	Town Notification. Written (hard copy or email) or verbal  (in person or by telephone) notice shall be given by the permittee to the Town Chairperson, Town Clerk and Chairperson of the Plan Commission a minimum of one ( 1) full working day prior to the commencement of any blasting event. If a schedule including dates and times of blasting events is known at the time of application, the applicant shall include such schedule in his/her permit application and such information shall serve as the notification to Town officials. If such information is included with the permit application, further notice to Town officials shall be required only if there is a deviation from the schedule.
(7)	Additional Notifications. Any person conducting blasting  operations shall notify the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services, the local fire department, and the Sheriffs Department of the date and location of the blasting  operation. Notification to the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services shall  be made on Form SBD-7336 provided by the Department  (Appendix A).
(b)	Blasting Hours. Blasting shall only be conducted between l 0:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, holidays excluded, provided, however, that in the event that an emergency has delayed a blast beyond  3:00 p.m., a loaded hole may be blown within a reasonable time thereafter. Blasting shall not be conducted at other times or on Sundays or  legal  holidays without written permission from the Town Board or its designee, which shall only be granted upon a showing of exceptional need.
(c)	Blasting Log.
(1)	Duty to Maintain Blasting Log. An accurate blasting log shall be prepared and maintained for each blast fired, and a true and complete copy of said log shall be supplied to the Town Clerk within three (3) working days of the initiation of the blast. An accurate copy of such blasting log shall be kept by the permittee for a period of not less than five (5) years, and shall be made available to  the  Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services and the Town of Cady upon request. The Town may require that the permittee furnish to the Town an analysis of any particular blasting log to be prepared by the permittee.	In the event the permittee cannot or  will not prepare a reliable analysis, the Town may obtain such analysis from an independent expert. The permittee shall be liable for the reasonable cost of such analysis if it is determined  after  an  opportunity  to  be heard that this requirement was violated by the permittee.
 
(2)	Required  Blasting Log Information.   Each  blasting  log  shall  include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a.	Name, signature and license number of blaster in charge of blast.
b.	Specific  blast  location  with  grid  coordinate  references  to  the supplied aerial photograph or map of the explosives use area;
c.	Type of blasting operation;
d.	Date and time of blast;
e.	Weather conditions at time of the  blast;
f.		Diagram and cross-section of the blast hole layout and the delay pattern;
g.	Number of blast holes;
h.	Blast hole depth and diameter;
L	Spacing and burden of blast holes;
J.	Maximum holes per delay;
k.	Maximum pounds of explosives per delay;
l.	Depth of top stemming used;
m.	Number, type and length of stemming used between decks;
n.	Total pounds of explosives and type(s) used;
o.	Distance to nearest inhabited building not owned by permittee;
p.	Type of initiation system used;
q.	Seismographic  and  airblast  information,  which  shall  include  the following:
1.	Type of instrument and last laboratory calibration date;
2.	Exact location of instrument and date, time and distance from the  blast;
3.	Name and company affiliation of person taking reading;
4.	Name of the person and firm analyzing the seismographic and airblast date when required;
5.	Trigger levels for ground and air vibrations;
6.	Vibrations and airblast levels recorded; and
7.	Copy of the seismograph printout.



Sec. 7-4-7	Temporary Permits.

(a)	Temporary  Permit Requirements.  The Town  Chairperson,  upon  receipt of a completed temporary permit application, may issue a temporary permit to allow for special construction or demolition activities requiring the use of explosives and not involving nonmetallic mining activities. Temporary permits shall be issued for a duration of ten ( l 0) consecutive working days. The Town Board, in its discretion, may grant one (1) ten (10) day extension. Only one (1) temporary permit [and one (1) renewal] can be issued for any given  site within  the  year  of  permit  issuance.    Applicants  for temporary
 
permits are required to provide financial assurance as specified in Section 7-4-4(b) and provide notice to all neighbors within five hundred (500) feet of the special construction or demolition activity.
(b) Temporary Permit Categories. Permits shall  be  in  the  following categories:
( 1) Road, Sewer, Heavy Construction. The fee shall be as prescribed in Section 1-3-1, determined by the Town Board based on the explosive use plan submitted by contractor or blaster.
(2)	Construction Authorized by Town Board. Construction authorized by the Town Board for Town use is exempt from the fee. Applicants for these permits are required to file financial assurances as specified in Section 7-4-4(b) and provide notice to all neighbors within five hundred (500) feet.
(3)	Construction. This category includes home building, septic systems, swimming pools, etc. The fee is included in the building permit. If blasting becomes necessary after the issuance of a building permit, a fee in accordance with the Town Board's current fee schedule will be assessed for the blasting permit. No bond is required.  However, proof of insurance and notice to all neighbors within five hundred (500) feet is required.
(4)	Agricultural. This category includes stump removal, silo demolition, manure pits, etc. The fee shall be a fee in accordance with the Town Board's current fee schedule for the permit. No bond is required. However, proof of insurance  and notice to all neighbors within five hundred (500) feet is required.



Sec. 7-4-8	Regulation of Blasting Resultants.

(a)	Purpose of Section. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the establishment of uniform limits on permissible levels of blasting resultants to reasonably assure that blasting within the Town of Cady does not cause injury, damage or a nuisance to persons or property outside and beyond the permitted explosives use area.
(b)	Blast Monitoring Instruments. All blast-monitoring seismograph instruments used to produce data to support compliance with this Section shall meet the following minimum specifications:
(1)	Seismic frequency range. Two (2) to two hundred (200)  Hz  (± 3 Hz).
(2)	Acoustic  frequency  range.   Two  (2)  to  two  hundred  (200)  Hz  (±
lHz).
(3)	Velocity range.  0.02 to four (4.0) inches per second.
 
(4)	Sound range. One hundred ( 100) to one hundred forty ( 140) dB linear.
(5)	Transducers.  Three (3) mutually perpendicular  axes.
(6)	Recording.  Provide time-history of wave form.
(7)	Printout. Direct printout showing time, date, peak air pressure, peak particle velocity and frequency in three (3) directions and a printed waveform graph of the event depicting measured air blast and particle velocity in the three (3) directions.
(8)	Calibration. Be laboratory calibrated as often as necessary, but at least once every twelve (12) months according to manufacturer's recommen­ dations
(c)	Control of Adverse Effects Generally. The permittee shall take necessary steps prescribed by the Town to control adverse effects from his/her activity.
(d) General Requirements.  Blasting shall be conducted so as to prevent injury and unreasonable annoyance to persons and damage to public or private property outside the permitted explosives use area.
(e)	Airblast.
(1)	Limits. Airblast shall not exceed 133 peak dB at the location of any dwelling, public building, place of employment, school, church or community or institutional building outside the controlled blasting site area.
(2)	Monitoring.
a.	The blaster shall conduct monitoring of every blast to determine compliance with the airblast limit, shall monitor all blasts at the closest location to the blast of any dwelling, public building, place of employment, school, church or community or institutional building outside and beyond the permited explosives use area, provided, however, that the permittee may monitor, at another location, approximately the  same distance from the blast site, if the permittee is unable to obtain permission to conduct the monitoring from the owner of the preferred location.
b.	The Town Board or its designee may, at its discretion, require the
relocation of monitoring equipment to a more suitable site and/or may conduct independent air-blast monitoring to spot-check data supplied by the permittee. If independent monitoring by the Town after hearing discloses that this Chapter was violated by the permittee, then in that event, the permittee shall pay the reasonable costs incurred by the Town for the independent monitoring. Upon receiving and approving billings for such expenses, the Town shall cause notice of the expenses to be mailed to the permittee, who shall reimburse the Town for such expenses within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice.
 
c.	The measuring equipment used shall have a lower-end flat frequency response of not more than two (2) Hz and an upper end flat frequency response of at least two hundred (200) Hz.
(f)	Flyrock. The permittee and his/her agents shall take all reasonable actions to assure that flyrock traveling in the air or along the ground meets all of the following  conditions:
(1)	Remain within the controlled blasting site area.
(2)		Not be cast more than one-half  the distance to the nearest inhabited building within or outside the controlled blasting site area.
(g)	Ground Vibration.
(1)	General.
a.	The maximum ground vibration at the location of any dwelling, public	building, place of employment, school, church or community or institutional building outside the controlled blasting site area shall be established in accordance with the blasting level chart provided by the Wisconsin Department of Safety and Professional Services, incorporated herein as Appendix B. Ground vibration shall be measured as the particle velocity. Particle velocity shall be recorded in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions.
b.	The blaster shall make and keep a seismograph record including
both particle velocity and vibration frequency levels for each blast. The method of analysis shall be subject to discretionary review by the Town Board.
c.	For quarry operations, the blaster shall report any ground vibration
levels to the Town Board that are 0.75 inch per second with frequencies less than 40 Hz.
d.	All structures in the vicinity of the controlled blasting  site area,
not listed in Subsection (g)(l), such as water towers, pipelines and other utilities, tunnels, dams, impoundments and underground mines shall be protected from damage by establishment by the permittee of a maximum allowable limit on the ground vibration. The blaster shall establish the limit after consulting with the owner of the structure.
(2)	Independent Seismic Monitoring.
a.	The Town Board, in its discretion, may conduct independent seismic blast monitoring to spot-check data supplied by the permit holder. If the independent monitoring was done after good cause was shown therefor and after the permittee was given notice and an opportunity to be heard on the matter, the permittee shall be liable to the Town for all expenses incurred by the Town as a result of such independent  monitoring. Upon receiving and approving billings for such expenses, the Town shall cause notice of the expenses to be mailed to the permittee, who shall reimburse
 
the Town for such expenses within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice.
b.	The Town Board, upon good cause shown and after giving the permittee notice and an opportunity to be heard, may request analysis of records and data for any or all blasts which occurred within the permitted explosives use area.
(h) Explosives Storage. No explosives shall be stored at the permitted explosives use area.
(i) Limits on Depth and Number of Charges.  The permittee shall not charge any drill hole closer than six (6) feet to the surface, to lower the intensity of noise and shock. No drill hole shall be larger than three  and one-half (3.5) inches in diameter and no more than sixty (60) holes are to be included in a blast. The maximum number of holes included in the blast may be decreased as ordered by the Town Engineer if particle velocities and/or air blasts using sixty (60) holes are considered to be too great by the Town Engineer.



Sec.  7-4-9	Applicability  of Regulatory Standards.

(a)	Effective Date. All use of explosives and blasting activity conducted in the Town of Cady shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Existing operations of whatever nature, including without limitation nonmetallic mining operations, shall comply with the terms of this Chapter.
(b)	Other Town Ordinances. Where the provisions of this Chapter conflict with any provisions of any other Town Ordinance, the provisions of this Chapter, if more restrictive than those of the other ordinances, shall control and shall supersede the provisions of the other ordinances.
(c)	State and Federal Regulations. Where the provisions of this Chapter conflict with the provisions of any applicable State or Federal law or regulation, the provisions of the most restrictive Ordinance, Statute or Regulation  shall control, to the extent permitted by State and Federal law.
(d)	No liability for Damages. This Chapter shall not be construed as an assumption of liability by the Town of Cady for damages due to injuries sustained or property destroyed or damaged by an person's failure to comply with the requirements  of this Chapter.



Sec.  7-4-10	Violations and Penalties.

(a)	Enforcement  Provisions.
(1)	Enforcement. The following are criteria that the  Town Board may consider for issuance, re-issuance, suspension or revocation of a blasting permit:
 
a.	Compliance with the blasting and pre-blasting survey standards established by the Town of Cady as noted herein by this Chapter.
b.	Development and submittal to the Town Board the explosives use plan and fails upon operation to comply with the plan.
c.	Development and submittal to the Town the blasting log and fails upon operation to comply with the information called for by the blasting log.
d.	Maintaining the financial assurance required by the Town Board.
e.	Compliance with the operational hours for blasting as noted herein by this Chapter.
f.	Compliance with airblast and ground vibration standards established by the Town as noted herein by this Chapter.
g.	Compliance with the pre-blasting notification requirements to residents and the Town Board as noted herein by this Chapter.
h.	Attempts made by the permittee or party in interest to comply with
the provisions of this Chapter.
L		Consideration of atmospheric, unknown conditions including geophysical conditions, and other matters beyond the control of the permittee or party in interest.
(2)	Suspension/Revocation.
a.	The Town Board, on its own motion or following a due review and investigation of a written complaint, may suspend or revoke a blasting permit for any violation of the provisions or require­ ments of this Chapter or other applicable federal or state regulations. The following persons may file a verified complaint with the Town Board:
1.	Town Chairperson.
2.	Town Clerk.
3.	Town Board.
4.	Town Engineer
5.	Building Inspector.
6.	Any law enforcement officer.
7.	Any Town of Cady resident.
8.	A  landowner  within  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  forty (2,640) feet of the blasting site.
b.	The Town Board will make a determination if the allegations of the complaint are of sufficient magnitude, importance, or otherwise of such a nature as to required a formal evidentiary hearing.
c.	The person subject to charges for violation of any Town of Cady ordinance or any violation of a condition of the explosives use permit shall be provided a copy of the verified complaint and notice of hearing before the Town Board. The hearing shall be required to be not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty
(30) days after the receipt of notice, unless stipulated in writing by
 
the Town Board and the permittee subject to charges. The permittee's failure to appear at such hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the opportunity to be heard prior to final action of the Town Board.
d.	The person subject to charges for violation of any Town ordinance or any violation of a condition of the explosive use permit shall be entitled to the following:
1.	Representation by legal counsel.
2.	Right to present and cross examine witnesses.
3.	Right to subpoena witnesses by the Town Chairperson issuing subpoenas to compel attendance of witnesses.
e.	The Town Board may, after the hearing for any person previously issued an explosive use permit by the Town Board, act as follows:
1.	Revoke the permit as a final decision.
2.	Suspend the permit for a date certain as a final decision.
3.	Request additional information as an interim decision prior to taking future action.
4.	Take no action on the permit as a final decision.
f.	The final decision of the Town Board to revoke or suspend the explosives use permit shall be subject to appeal to the Circuit Court.
(3) Emergency Temporary Suspensions. Where warranted by emergency conditions, as determined in the reasonable discretion of the Town Board, a blasting permit may be temporarily suspended without notice or hearing to the permittee by the Town Board or its authorized designee.	Written notice of a temporary suspension, and of the conditions that shall be met to reinstate the blasting permit, shall be promptly given to the permittee at the address contained in the application.
(b)	Penalties for Violations. In addition to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit issued under this Chapter, any person who  shall violate any provision of this Chapter or who shall fail to obtain a permit as required hereunder shall upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a penalty of a civil forfeiture as prescribed in Section 1-1-6 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances, together with the costs of prosecution. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the Town from maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this Chapter. Any default of such forfeiture determined by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to any penalties as provided by Sections 66.0109, 66.0113, 66.0115 and 66.0114, Wis. Stats., as may be amended.
 
Appendix A


 
Notice of Blasting In Community
-	Complete and send original to Safety and Buildings.
-	Send one copy to local fire department.
-	Send one copy to local law enforcement office.
-	Retain one copy for your files.
 

Safety and Buildings Division 201 W. Washington Ave.
P.O. Box 7302
Madison, WI  53707-7302
Phone: (608) 266-7529
TTY:  Use relay http:/Idsps.wi.gov/sb
 

Personal information you provide may be used for secondary purposes. [Privacy Law. s. 15.04 (l)(m)].


Date Submitted:	I Cocoty

Prime Contractor Name:	I  Blasting Contractor Name:
I

Street Address:	[    Street Address:

	
City, State, Zip	I City, St•to' Zip
Phone (include area code);	Phone (include area code):
Fire Department Contractor Name:	Name of Blaster in Charge on Job Site:
City:	Phone:	WI Blaster's License No.:	I Class:
Estimated Blasting Start Date:	I  Estimated  Blasting  Finish  Date:

Name and Address of Insurance Carrier Providing Blasting Coverage on this job:


Type of Project:	Location where Explosive Used:
Estimated Distance To:	1.	Nearest Inhabited Building:
Type of Building:	2. Nearest Public Highway:
Typical Overburden Tyi:ie:	Estimated Depth of Overburden:
Type of Matting Used:


Typical Drilling Pattern:	Typical Hole Diameter:	Estimated Hole Depth
Proposed Delay System:	Estimated Max lbs. per Delay:	Estimated lbs. And Type of Explosives on Job Site at Given Time:
	

I will comply with Wis. Admin. Code SPS 307, Explosive Materials. (Code available at DSPS WebSite)

 

Blaster's     Signature:-----------------­ or Authorized Representative
 
Date  Signed:-----------
 

Failure to Adhere to Administrative Rules May B Cause for Revocation of Blaster's License


SBD-7336 (R11/11)
 




Appendix B










SPS 307.44


















 

 





 



;: 1



Figure 7.44     Blasting Level Chart
 
C:ry '1di
1 ::j l) rnr-'-',ssc ,:,::: 73 in, ss:·,



;'12:.st r
1 ? --; mr;.. sec ·:C1  (! n  :;e-:: ',
 
SECTION II.	SEVERABILITY.


(a)	If any provision  of this Ordinance is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of this Ordinance to any person or circumstance is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional  provisions or applications.
(b)	If the application of this Ordinance to a particular parcel of land, building, structure, water
or air is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not be applicable to any other land, building, structure, water or air not specifically included in said judgment.



SECTION Ill. CONFLICTING PROVISIONS REPEALED.

All Ordinances in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.



SECTION  IV.   EFFECTIVE DATE.

This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by law.






ADOPTED this	day of	.		'201] TOWN OF CADY, WISCONSIN
 

INTRODUCED: PUBLISHED/POSTED: PASSED:
State of Wisconsin: County of St. Croix:

I hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance is a true, correct, and complete cop "an ordinar:ice
duly and regularly passed by the Town of Cady Board of Supervisors on the _,_-day of _J!L }-.
20l and that said ordinance has not been repealed or amended and is now in full force	and U
effect.

 
Town Clerk
 


FORM A  - TOWN OF CADY NONMETALLIC MINING SITES AND OPERATIONS ORDINANCE APPLICATION CHECKLIST




The Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, has enacted a comprehensive  Nonmetallic Mining Sites and Operations Ordinance ("Ordinance"). The Ordinance is codified as Title 7, Chapter 3 of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances. The complete text of the Ordinance is available by contacting the Town of Cady Clerk.

This Checklist has been prepared to assist applicants in the proper preparation of application materials for licenses and permits under the Ordinance and to assist in the review of such applications by Town officials and their agents. Completion of this Checklist confers no rights or approvals to any applicants, and all applicants remain subject to the specific application, review and operational standards of the Ordinance. Checklist completion and submittal does not constitute a complete application - the Ordinance contains multiple requirements where detailed and technical information must be provided by an applicant. The Checklist is not a complete and comprehensive list of all application requirements. In all instances, it is important that the applicant closely consult with and comply with the specific Ordinance requirements.




TOWN  OF CADY







Applicant's Name, Address, Email Address, Cellphone/Landline/Fax  Telephone  Numbers:




Landowner's Name, Address, Email Address, Cellphone/Landline/Fax Telephone Numbers (if different than Applicant):




Parcel Location  and Legal Description:
 


SECTION 7-3-2(b) - EXEMPT ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS:


If the answer is "YES" to any of the following, the Ordinance may not be applicable to the following types of nonmetallic mining-related activities (to be determined by the Town).

Will the primary activity on the parcel be any one of the following?  Answer "YES" or "NO": Building construction site excavation.
Grading work not related to a nonmetallic mining or operations site. Restoration of a natural disaster or flood site.
Excavating/grading  solely for personal non-commercial  personal or farm use. Highway repair or construction (public highway or private road in an approved plat). Public transportation-related  limited use borrow pit.
Nonmetallic mining site of less than one (1) acre over life of site.


Activity involving only incidental removal of non-metallic material (i.e. nursery stock). Solid waste disposal site governed by Chs. 289 and 291, Wis. Stats.
Limited nonmetallic mining site due to a Wis. Dept. of Transportation project contract. Dredging for navigation purposes.
Environmental  contamination remediation  site.
 

SECTiON 7-3-2(c) - EXiSTiNG NONMETALUC MiNiNG OPERATIONS:

Nonmetallic mining sites and operations in existence on the date of enactment of the Ordinance may be exempt from the licensing requirements of the Ordinance, although operational regulatory standards are applicable.  Ansv1er "YES" or "NO" to the following:

Is the site currently under a County-approved reclamation plan?
Have operations changed since reclamation plan approval? If "YES", please explain: Is the site in any way involved in the mining and/or processing of industrial-grade
sand?   Tf  "YES", please  explain:


Has the owner and/or operator complied with all site registration requirements of Sec. 7-3-2(c)?







SECTION 7-3-4 - TEMPORARY OPERATIONS LICENSE:

Temporary and limited nonmetallic mining activities may be eligible for a Temporary Operations License instead of a standard Operations License.  Answer  "YES" or "NO" to the following:

Has  the  applicant  submitted  a  complete  application  and  provided  all  information required by Secs. 7-3-4, 7-3-5 and 7-3-6?

Has the applicant provided the Town with written guarantees that the operation will in all respects meet the required operational standards of Sec. 7-3-8?
 

SECTIOt S 7..3..5 and 7-3-6 OPERATIONS LICENSE APPliCATiON REQUiREiV1Ei'1TS:

Answer  "YES" or "NO" to the following:


Filing of 15 copies (minimum) of all required application materials with Town Clerk. [Secs. 7-3-5(a) and 7-3-6].

Payment to Town of application fee.   [Sec. 7-3-5(a)].


Payment to Town of Base Administrative Escrow Account deposit. [Sec. 7-3-5(b)(3)]. Payment to Town of estimated public hearing costs.   [Sec. 7-3-5(c )(2)d].
Submission of all license application required information, maps and reports per Sec. 7-3-6. Section 7-3-6 of the Ordinance contains numerous important application requirements and must be followed closely:
Operator/applicant  information. Property owner/lessor information.
Agent and consultant information for applicant.
Property lease information.
Local contact representative  information.
Business record information regarding  applicant operation(s) elsewhere. Site map.
Site aerial photograph. Location of existing buildings.
Location of proposed buildings, facilities and structures.
Visual impact statement.
Location of nearby buiidings and structures. Topographic map.
Location of water wells within two (2) miles of site.
Zoning compliance  statement.
Statement on constency of proposal with Town Comprehensive Plan. Floodplain, shoreland and wetland information.
High water elevations.
Surface waters and drainage information.
 		Proposed lake/stream improvements or relocations.
Soil tests.
Erosion control plan. Stormwater management  plan.
Information on transfer, drying, manufacturing, transloading and processing
facilities.
County-approved  site reclamation plan. Project/site name.
Map of non-contiguous sites contributing materials to site. Endangered or threatened species assessment.
 
Operations timeline.
Description of machinery, processing and mining proposed for site. Material volume estimates.
Proposed structures, access points, and stockpile area locations.
 		Transportation report addressing off-site trucking and rail routes.
Estimated water useage.
 		Information on hazardous materials, fuel storage and chemicals at site.
Site security  arrangements. Landscaping  plan.
Lighting plan.

Documentation that applicant can meet operational standards of the Ordinance. Water baseline conditions report.
Description of any special exceptions to Ordinance requested by applicant.






NOTICE: The Ordinance contains numerous technical requirements governing both license applications and operational requirements that shall be complied with as a condition of any approval or license issued under the Ordinance.
 














TITLE	14




Subdivision and Platting



 
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code Subdivision Plat Moratorium
 





































14- J
 
Title  14 ...-	Chapter	1

Land Division and Subdivision Code
.	.
/.



 
Article A

14·1·1
14-1-2
14-1-3
14-1-4
14-1-5
14-1-6
 
Adoption; Introduction

Introduction  and Purpose
Abrogation  and Greater Restrictions Interpretation
Severability Repeal
Title
 
14-1-7
14-1-9
 
through
 


Reserved  for Future Use
 



 
Article  B
 
Definitions
 

14-1-10	Definitions
14-1-11	through
14-1-19	Reserved for Future Use



 
Article C

14-1-20
14-1-21
14 1-22
14-1-23


14-1-24  through
14;.1-29
 
General Provisions

General  Provisions Land  Suitability
Condominium Developments
Homeowner, Property  Owner or Condominium Associations; Common Areas and Facilities

Reserved for Future Use
 



 
Article D

14-1-30
14-1-31
 
Plat Review and Approval

Preliminary  Consultation Submission of Preliminary Plat
 









 
 
14-1-32
14·1·33
14·1·34
14-1-35
14-1-36
14-1-39
 






through
 
Preliminary Plat Review and Approval Final Plat Review and Approval Administrative Fees
Replat


Reserved for Future Use
 



 
Article  E



14-1-40
14·1·41
14-1-42


14-1-43  through
 
Technical Requirements for Plats and Certified Surveys

Technical Requirements for Preliminary Plats Technical Requirements for Final Plats
Technical Requirements for Certified Survey Land Divisions; Review and Approval
 
14-1-49	Reserved for Future Use



Article  F	Required   Improvements    .

 
14-1-50
14-1-51
 
Improvements Required
Required Agreement Providing for Proper Installation of Improvements
 
14-1-52	Required Construction Plans; Town Review; Inspections
14-1-53	Street Improvements
14-1-54	Storm Water Drainage Facilities
14-1-55	Other Utilities
14-1-56	Street Signs
14-1-57	Erosion Control
14-1	·58	Easements
14-1-59	Maintenance of Shared Community Private Septic Systems
14-1-60	through
 
14-1-69



Article G

14-1-70
14-1-71
 
Reserved for Future Use



Design Standards

General Street Design Standards
Specifications for Preparation, Construction and Dedication of Streets and Roads
 










 
 
14-1-72
14-1-73
14-1-74
14-1-75
14-1-76
14-1-79
 






through
 
Block Design  Standards Lot Design Standards Drainage System
Non-Residential   Subdivisions


Reserved for Future Use
 


 
Article  H

14-1-80
14-1-81
14-1-82
14-1-83
14-1-84
14-1-85
14-1-89



Article  I
 










through
 
Park and  Public land Dedication

General Park and Public Land Dedication Requirements Land Dedication
Reservation of Additional Land Development of Park Area
Fees in Lieu of Land Reserved for Future Use

Fees
 

14-1-90	Administrative and Other Fees
14-1-91	through
14-1-99	Reserved for Future Use


 
Article J

14-1-100
14-1-101
 
Variances; Penalties and Violations

Variances and Exceptions Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies
 


























tlf-S
 
Article A:	Adoption; Introduction 	




Sec.  14-1-1	Introduction and Purpose.

(a)	Introduction. In accordance with the authority granted by Sec. 236.45 of the Wisconsin Statutes and for the purposes listed in Sections 236.01 and 236.45 of the  Wisconsin Statutes, the Town Board of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, does hereby ordain as follows:
(1)	The provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted to
promote  the health,  safety, morals, comfort, prosperity  and  general  welfare  of  the Town of Cady.
(2)    This   Chapter   shall  not  repeal,   impair  or  modify   private   covenants   or  public
ordinances, except that it shall apply whenever it imposes stricter restrictions on land use.
(b)	Purpose.  The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare of the community. The regulations are. designed to lessen congestion in the highways and streets; to foster the orderly layout and use of land; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air, including access to sunlight for solar collectors and to wind for wind energy  systems; to discourage overcrowding of the land; to protect the community's agriculture base; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, public water and sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds  and other public  necessities; and to facilitate the further division of large tracts of land into smaller parcels. The regulations are made with the reasonable consideration of, but not limited to, the present character of the Town and its environs, with the objectives of conserving the value of the land and improvements placed thereon, providing the most appropriate environment for human habitation, encouraging  commerce and industry, protecting farming and open spaces, and providing for the most appropriate use of land in the Town of Cady.

State Lllw Reference:   Chapter 236, Wis. Stats.



Sec. 14-1-2     Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.

It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this Chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern.













 
 
Land Division and .Subdivision Code
14-1-3


Sec. 14-1-3    Interpretation.

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Town of Cady and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.



Sec. 14-1-4    Severability.

If any provision of this Chapter is invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this Chapter to any person or circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Chapter which  can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision  or application.



Sec. 14•1-5     Repeal.

All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town inconsistent or conflicting with this Chapter, to the extent of the inconsistency only, are hereby repealed.



Sec. 14-1-6     Title.

This Chapter shall be known as, referred to, or cited as the "Town of Cady Subdivision Ordinance" or "Town of Cady Land Division and Subdivision Ordinance."



Sec. 14-1-7 through Sec. 14-1-9      Reserved for future Use.




























 
 
Article B:	Definitions 	




Sec. 14-1-10	Definitions.

(a)	The following definitions shall be applicable in this Chapter:
(1)	Alley.  A public right-of-way which normally affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
(2)	Arterial Street. A street which provides for the movement of relatively heavy traffic to, from or within the Town. It has a secondary function of providing access to abutting land.
(3)	Block.	An   area  of  land  within   a  subdivision   that  is  entirely  bounded   by   a
combination or combinations of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision and streams or water bodies.
(4)	Collector Street. A street which collects and distributes internal traffic within an urban area such as a residential neighborhood, between arterial and local streets. It provides access to abut ing property.
(5)	Comprehensive Development Plan.  A comprehensive plan prepared  by the Town
indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the Town and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
(6)	Cul-de-sac.  A short street having but one (1) end open to traffic and the other end
being permanently  terminated in a vehicular turnaround.
(7)	Division of Land. Where the title or any part thereof is transferred by the execution of a land contract, an option to purchase, an offer to purchase and acceptance, a deed, or a certified survey.
(8)	Easement.  The area of land set aside or over or through which  a liberty, privilege
or advantage in land, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public.                                                ·
(9)	Extraterritorial Plat Approval Jurisdiction. The unincorporated area within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of a fourth-class city or a village and within three (3) miles of all other cities.
(10)	Final  Plat.   The  final  map,  drawing  or  chart  on  which  the· subdivider's  plan  of
subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Register of Deeds.
( 11)	Frontage Street.  A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial
street for control of access and for service to the abutting development.
(12). Improvement, Public. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, open channel, water main, roadway, park, parkway, public access, sidewalk, pedestrian way,  planting  strip or other facility for which the Town may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.









'    tl(-q
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-10


(13)		local Street.  A street of little or no continuity designed to provide access to abutting property and leading into collector streets.
 
(14)




(15)


(16)
(17)



(18)



(19)
(20)
(21)



(22)

(23)


(24)



(25)



(26)


(27)




(28)
 
lot. A parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other officially approved means of access, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal structure or use and sufficient in size to meet the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, yard, parking area and other open space provisions of this Chapter and any applicable zoning ordinance. lot, Area. The  area contained within the exterior boundaries of a lot excluding streets, and land under navigable bodies of water.
lot, Corner.  A lot abutting intersecting streets at their intersection.
lot, Reversed Corner. A corner lot which is oriented so that it has its rear lot line coincident with or parallel to the side lot line of the interior lot immediately to its rear.
lot, Through.  A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less
parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a "through lot," both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Lot lines.  The peripheral boundaries of a lot as defined herein.
lot Width.  The width of a parcel of land measured along the front building line. Major Thoroughfare.  A street used or intended to be used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic.  Major thoroughfares shall include freeways, expressways and other highways and parkways, as well as arterial streets.
Minor Street.  A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for access to abutting
properties; also referred to as a "local street."
Minor Subdivision. The division of land by the owner or subdivider resulting in the creation of not more than four (4) parcels or building sites.
Owner. Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean either a natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or combination of these.
Pedestrian Pathway. A public way, usually running at right angles to streets, which is intended for the convenience of pedestrians only; it may also provide public right­ of-way for utilities.
Plat.  The map, drawing  or chart  on which  the subdivider's plat  of subdivision is
presented to the Town for approval.
Preliminary Plat. The Preliminary Plat map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Town Board for their consideration as to compliance with the Comprehensive Development Plan and these regulations along with required supporting data.
Protective Covenants. Contracts entered into between private parties or between private parties and public bodies pursuant to Sec. 236.293, Wis. Stats., which constitute a restriction on the use of all private or platted property within a sub­ division for the benefit of the public or property owners and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values.
 








14-lD
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-10


(29)	Rep/at.  The process of changing, or a map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of a large block, lot or outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing exterior boundaries of said block, lot or outlot is not a replat.
(30)	Shore/ands.  Those lands within the fo11owing distances:  one thousand (1,000) feet
from the high-water elevation of navigable waters, ponds and flowages or three hundred (300) feet from the high-water elevation of navigable streams or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever is greater.
(31)	Subdivider.	Any  person,  firm  or  corporation,  or  any  agent  thereof,  dividing  or
proposing to divide land resulting in a subdivision, minor subdivision or replat.
(32)	Subdivision. The division of a lot, outlot, parcel, or tract of land by the  owner thereof or his/her agent for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development where the act of division creates five (5) or more parcels or building sites of thirty-five· (35) acres or less in area, or where the act of division creates five
(5) or more parcels or building sites by successive division within a period of five (5)
years, whether done by the original owner or a successor owner.
(33)	Town.  The Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin.
(34)	Wetlands. An area where water is at, near or above the land surface long enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which has soils indicative of wet conditions.   (Sec. 23.32(1), Wis. Stats.)
(35)	Wisconsin Administrative Code. The rules of administrative agencies having rule­ making authority in Wisconsin, published in a loose-leaf, continual revision system, as directed by Sec. 35.93 and Chapter 227 of the Wisconsin Statutes, including subsequent amendments to those rules.



Sec. 14-1-11 through Sec. 14-1-19	Reserved for future Use.





























14-11
 
Article C:	General Provisions 	




Sec.  14-1-20	General  Provisions.

(a)	Compliance. No person shall divide any land located within the jurisdictional limits of these regulations which results in a subdivision, land division or a replat as defined herein; no such subdivision, land division or replat shall be entitled to record; and no street shall be laid out or improvements made to land without compliance with all requirements of this Chapter and the following (if applicable and/or when adopted):
(1)	The provisions of Ch. 236 and Sec. 80.08, Wis. Stats.
(2)	The rules of the Division of Health, Wisconsin Department of Commerce, contained in Wis. Adm. Code Chapter H85 for subdivisions not served by public sewer.
(3)	The rules of the Division of Highways, Wisconsin Department of Transportation contained in Wis. Adm. Code Chapter HY 33 for subdivisions which abut a state trunk highway or connecting street.
(4)	The rules of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources contained in the Wis.
Adm. Code for Floodplain Management Program.
(5)	Comprehensive plans or components of such plans prepared by state, regional, county or municipal agencies duly adopted by the Town Board.
(6)	All applicable Town and county regulations, including zoning, sanitary, building and
official mapping ordinances.
(7)	The Town of Cady Master Plan, Smart Growth Plan, or components thereof, and applicable ordinances of any city or village whose extraterritorial jurisdiction extends into the Town.
(8)	Applicable provisions of the Town of Cady Zoning Code.
(9)	All applicable rules contained in the Wisconsin Administrative Code not listed in this Subsection.
(b)	Jurisdiction. Jurisdiction of these regulations shall include all lands within the corporate limits of the Town of Cady. The provisions of this Chapter, as they apply to divisions of tracts of land into less than five (5) parcels, shall not apply to:
(1)	Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order;
(2)	Leases for a term not to exceed ten (10) years, mortgages or easements;
(3)	The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by applicable zoning laws or ordinances.
(c)	Certified Survey.	Any  division  of  land  other  than  a  subdivision  as  defined  in  Sec.
236.02(8), Wis. Stats., shall be surveyed and a certified survey map prepared as provided in Sec. 236.34, Wis. Stats.
(d)	Building Permits. The Town of Cady shall not issue any building permit relating to any parcel of land forming all or any part of lands included in a subdivision, land division,











 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-20


replat or certified survey originally submitted to the Town of Cady on or after the effective date of this Chapter until the applicant has complied with all of the provisions and requirements of this Chapter.
(e)	Applicability to Condominiums. This Chapter is expressly applicable to condominium developments within the Town's jurisdiction, pursuant to Section 703.27(1), Wis. Stats. For purposes of this Chapter, a condominium unit and any associated limited common elements shall be deemed to be equivalent to a lot or parcel created by the act of subdivision.



Sec. 14-1-21	land Suitability.

(a)    Suitability.  No land shall be subdivided for residential, commercial or industrial use which is held unsuitable for such use by the Town Board for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation, unfavorable topography or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community. The Town Board, in applying the provisions of this Section, shall in writing recite the particular facts upon which it bases its conclusion that the land is not suitable for residential use  and afford the  subdivider an opportunity to present evidence regarding such unsuitability if he/she so desires. Thereafter the Town Board may affirm, modify, or withdraw its determination of unsuitability.  ·
(b)	Additional  Considerations.
(1)	Areas of archaeological and/or historical interest shall be designated by the State Historical Society.
(2)	Areas of geological interest shall be designated by the State Geological and Natural History Survey.
(3) Suitability of land for private sewerage systems shall be determined in accordance with Chapter COMM 83, Wisconsin Administrative Code.



Sec.  14-1-22	Condominium Developments.

(a)	Purpose.
(1)	The Town Board hereby finds that certain issues arise in condominium developments that require limited applicability of this Chapter to condominium developments. The State Legislature has recognized that subdivision ordinances may apply to condominiums, but that subdivision ordinances shall not impose burdens upon condominiums that are different from those imposed on other property of a similar character not subject to a declaration of condominium.
(2)	The factor that makes this Chapter applicable to a condominium development is the creation of multiple, distinct property entities at or near the ground surface, subject











 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-22


to property taxation as separate "parcels", with each property entity having different ownership and management. The Town determines that this factor makes a condominium development dissimilar, both  physically and in ownership, from developments in which the land and improvements are under unitary ownership, management  and control.
(3)	Thus, the Town Board hereby finds that new condominium  developments can place
impacts on community resources in the same manner as  other new developments which are characterized by division of land into lots.  These impacts include:
a.	Additional population density;
b.	Possibility   of  use  of  particular  land  in  a  manner  unsuitable   to  the  land's characteristics;
c.	Additional demands upon Town area parks, recreation areas, utility facilities and schools;
d.	Additional traffic and street use.
(b)	Portions  of  Chapter  Applicable  to  Condominium  Developments.	The   following sections of this Chapter shall apply to condominium developments:
(1)	Sections 14-1-21, relating to land suitability and construction practices;
(2)	Sections 14-1-30 through  14-1-32, relating to preliminary  plat approval.  This stage of approval shall be the only approval required for a condominium development. The technical requirements for preliminary plats set forth in Section 14-1-40 shall not apply, since condominiums have separate technical standards set forth in Chapter 703, Wis.  Stats.
(3)	Section  14-1-34, relating to fees for review;
(4)	Article F, relating to required improvements;
(5)	Article G, relating to design standards for improvements;
(6)	Article H, relating to dedication requirements.
(c)	This Section shall not apply to the following condominiums:
(1)	Any condominium plat recorded prior to the effective date of this Chapter;
(2)	Any conversion of a structure or structures in existence on the effective date of this Chapter to a condominium after the effective date of this Chapter.



Sec.  14-1-23		Homeowner, Property Owner or Condominium Associations; Common Areas and facilities.

Common areas or facilities within a land division, subdivision or condominium shall be held in common ownership as undivided proportionate interests by the members of a homeowners, property owners or condominium association, subject to the provisions set forth herein and applicable provisions contained in any pertinent development agreement and deed restriction In.eluded within the definition of, but not limited to, "common areas or facilties" are:  common











fi.J-lb
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-23


area open space, conservancy and recreation areas; stormwater detention/retention facilities; and shared community private septic systems. The homeowners, property owners or condominium association shall be governed by the following:
(a)	Documents To Be Submitted. The subdivider shall provide the Town with a description of the homeowners, property owners or condominium association, including its bylaws, and all documents and resfrictive covenants governing maintenance requirements and use restrictions for common areas and facilities. These documents shall be subject to review as to form by the Town Attorney at the subdivider's expense. The documents required by this Section shall be filed with the Town at the time of preliminary plat submittal.
(b)	Timetable For Creation. The association shall be established by the owner or applicant of the land division/condominium, and such association shall be operating prior to the sale of any lots or units in the subdivision, land division or condominium.
(c)	Mandatory Membership. Membership in the association shall be mandatory and on-going for all purchasers of lots or units within the subdivision, land division or condominium and their successors and assigns.
(d)	Maintenance Responsibilities.
(1)	The association shall be responsible for maintenance of and insurance for common areas and facilities. Included in such responsibilities is on-going maintenance of any stormwater detention/retention system facilities or shared community private  septic system for that subdivision or condominium; pursuant to a maintenance plan approved by the Town and incorporated in the development agreement; such requirement is only inapplicable where the Town has expressly determined to have, in the alternative, the Town maintain such facilities and areas.
(2)	The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining, insuring, and operating common areas and facilities. The subdivider shall arrange with the Town a method of assessment of any common areas and facilities which will allocate to each lot, parcel or unit within the land division or condominium a share of the total assessment of costs for such common areas and facilities; the services of the Town Assessor or Town Engineer may be utilized in developing such methodology, at the subdivider's expense.
(e)	Plan For Natural Areas. A land stewardship plan for any common open space or prairies to be maintained in a natural state shall be included in the submittal of association documents.
(f) Notice Of Transfer Of Common Areas. The Town shall receive written notice of any proposed transfer of common areas or facilities by the association or the assumption of maintenance of common areas or facilities. Such notice shall be given by the association to all members of the association and the Town at least thirty (30) days prior to such transfer.
(g) Failure To Maintain. In the event that the association established to own and maintain common areas and facilities, or any successor organization thereto, fails to properly maintain all or any portion of the aforesaid common areas or facilities, the Town may serve









I l\;-t \o
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-23


written notice upon such association setting forth the manner in which the association has failed to maintain the aforesaid common areas and facilities. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections or maintenance required and the time within which the corrections shall be made. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the association, or any successor association, shall be considered in violation of this Chapter, in which case the Town shall have the right to enter the premise and take the needed corrective or maintenance actions. The costs of corrective or maintenance actions by the Town shall be assessed against the properties that have the right of enjoyment of and/or are served by the common  areas and facilities.

Cross-Reference:   Sections 14-1-31(c), 14-1-74(£) and 14-1-59.



Sec. 14-1-24 through Sec.  14-1-29	Reserved for future Use.















































l4-- J  1
 
Article D:      Plat Review and Approval




Sec. 14-1-30   Preliminary Consultation.

Before filing a Preliminary Plat or certified survey, the subdivider is encouraged to consult with the Town Board, Plan Commission and/or other professionals assisting the  Town for advice regarding general subdivision requirements. Information on meeting dates, agenda deadlines and filing requirements may be obtained from the Town Clerk. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to traffic arteries and existing community facilities. This consultation is neither formal nor mandatory but is intended to inform the subdivider of the purpose and objectives of these regulations, the comprehensive plan, com­ prehensive plan components and duly adopted plan implementation devices of the Town and to otherwise assist the subdivider in planning his/her development. In so doing, both the subdivider and planning agency may reach mutual conclusions regarding the general program and objectives of the proposed development and its possible effects on the neighborhood and community. The subdivider will gain a better understanding  of the subsequent required procedures.



Sec. 14-1-31  Submission of Preliminary Plat.

(a)	Submission.
(1)	Preliminary Plat Submission. Before submitting a Final Plat for approval, the subdivider shall prepare a Preliminary Plat and a letter of application. The subdivider shall submit twelve (12) copies of the Preliminary  Plat.  The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared in accordance with this Chapter, and the subdivider shall file copies of the Plat and the application as required by this Section with the Town Clerk at least fifteen ( 15) days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired.	The Town Clerk shall submit a copy of  the Preliminary Plat to the Plan Commission and to the Town's designated engineer (Town's option) for review and written report of his/her recommendations  and reactions to the proposed plat.
(2)	Certified Survey Maps. Certified survey maps shall be submitted and approved pursuant  to Section  14-1-42.
(b)	Public Improvements, Plans and Specifications. Simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat of map, the owner shall file with the Town Clerk twelve (12) complete sets of  engineering reports, plans and specifications for the construction of any public improvements required by this Chapter, specifically addressing sewer and water service feasibility, drainage facilities, traffic patterns,  typical street cross sections, erosion control plans, pavement design and other improvements necessary in the subdivision.














 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-31


(c)	Property Owners Association; Restrictive Covenants. A draft of the legal instruments and rules for proposed property owners associations, when the. subdivider proposes that common property within a subdivision would be either owned or maintained by such an organization of property owners or a subunit of the Town pursuant to Sec. 236.293, Wis. Stats., and proposed deed restrictions or restrictive covenants, shall be submitted at the time of filing the Preliminary Plat with the Town Clerk. (Note: Deed restrictions and restrictive covenants in subdivisions are private contractual agreements and are not enforceable by the Town.)
(d)	Affidavit. The surveyor preparing the Preliminary Plat shall certify on the face of the plat that it is a correct representation of all existing land divisions and features and that he has fully complied with the provisions of this Chapter.
(e)	Supplementary Data to be Filed with Preliminary Plat. The following shall also be filed  with the Preliminary Plat:
(1)	Use Statement.  A statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential
buildings with number of proposed dwelling units; types of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion of population; and
(2)	Zoning Changes. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas, including dimensions; and
(3)	Area Plan. Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, the Plan Commission and/or Town Board may require that the subdivider submit a Preliminary Plat of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions must be shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions.
(f)	Street Plans and Profiles. The subdivider shall provide street plans and profiles showing existing ground surface, and proposed and established street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision when requested.
(g)	Soil Testing.
(1)	Testing Purpose. It is a known fact that certain soils in the county have severe limitations that are difficult to overcome or that preclude their use for residential development either because of the inability of on-site sewerage systems to function properly and/or because of fluctuating or seasonable high water table or other reasons. The purpose of this requirement is to save the developer engineering costs should the subject areas be determined to be unsuitable for residential development. The data obtained is to assist the Town Board and Plan Commission in making determinations of land suitability. The subdivider shall provide a preliminary soils report, listing the types of soil in the proposed subdivision, their effect on the subdivision and  a proposed soil testing and investigation program. Pursuant to the public policy concerns prescribed in Section 14-1-21, the Town Board may require that borings and










\ 4- d-D
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-31


soundings be made in specified areas to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and water conditions, including depth to bedrock and depth to ground water table.
(2)	Compliance  with  State/County  Requirements.	The   applicant   shall   provide
verification that all applicable State of Wisconsin and County sanitary permit requirements  can be satisfied.
(h)	Referral to Other Agencies.
(1)	The Wisconsin Department of Administration and the Wisconsin Department of Transportation shall be hereinafter referred to as Objecting Agencies. All other agencies mentioned, excepting the utility companies, shall hereafter be referred to as Approving  Agencies.
(2)	The subdivider, within two (2) days of filing a preliminary plat with the Town, shall
have one (1) copy forwarded to each of the utility companies serving the area.  This is to inform the utility companies that there is a pending development in the area. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and the utility companies to arrange for the services needed and their focation withjn the plat.
(3) Within two (2) days of filing a preliminary plat with the Town, the subdivider or the subdivider's agent shall submit the original plat to the Wisconsin Department of Administration which shall forward two (2) copies to each of the agencies authorized to object. The Department shall have the required number of copies made at the subdivider's expense. Within forty-five (45) days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any agency having authority to object shall notify the subdivider, and all agencies having the authority to object, of any objection based upon failure of the plat to comply with the statutes or rules which its examination is authorized to cover, or if there is no objection, it shall so certify on the face of a copy of the plat and return that copy to the Town and Wisconsin Department of Administration. After each agency and the Department have certified that they have no objection or that their objections have been satisfied, the Department shall so certify on the face of the plat If an agency fails to act within forty-five (45) days from the date of the receipt of copies of the plat, it shall be deemed that there are no objections to the plat and, upon demand, it shall be so certified on the face of the plat by the Department.
(i)	Drafting Standards. The subdivider shall submit to the Town Clerk and to those agencies having the authority  to object to plats under provisions in Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin Statutes copies of a Preliminary Plat (or certified survey) based upon an accurate exterior boundary survey by a registered land surveyor which shall show clearly the  proposed subdivision at a scale of not more than one (1) inch per one hundred (100) feet having two
(2)	foot contour intervals, shall identify the improvements  (grading, tree planting, paving,
installation of facilities and dedications of land), easements which the subdivider proposes to make and shall indicate by accompanying letter when the improvements will be provided.   Any proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall be submitted.












li.l--J-1
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-32


Sec.  14-1-32	Preliminary  Plat Review and Approval.

(a)	Plan Commission Recommendation.
(1)	After review of the Preliminary Plat and negotiations with the subdivider on changes and the kind and extent of public improvements which will be required, the Plan Commission shall recommend to the Town Board disapproval, approval or conditional approval of the Preliminary Plat within forty (40) days of the filing date. [Note: Sec. 236.ll(l)(a), Wis. Stats., states that extensions of time or a decision to hold a matter in abeyance may only be made by agreement between the subdivider  and Town Board, not the Plan Commission.]
(2) The Town Clerk shall give notice of the Plan Commission's review of the Preliminary Plat or certified survey by listing it as an agenda item in the Commission's meeting notice published in the official Town newspaper. The notice shall include the name of the applicant, the address of the property in question and the requested action.
_ (3)	At its option, the Town Board may also refer proposed certified survey maps to the
Plan Commission for an advisory recommendation.
(b)	Board Review; Public Hearing. The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the Preliminary Plat before the Town Board and/or Plan Commission. The Town Clerk shall give notice of the Town's public hearing on the Preliminary Plat by listing it as an agenda item in the Town Board's and/or Plan Commission's meeting notice published in the official Town newspaper or legally posted. The notice shall include the name of the applicant, the address of the property in question and the requested action.fJ>roperty owners within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed land division shall receive written notice of the public hearing.
(c)	Board Action.  After receipt of the Plan Commission's recommendation, the Town Board
shall, within ninety (90) days of the date the plat was filed with the Town Clerk, approve, approve conditionally or reject such plat and shall state, in writing, any conditions of approval or reasons for rejection, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. Failure of the Town Board to act within ninety (90) days or extension thereof shall constitute an approval of the Preliminary Plat, unless other authorized agencies object to the plat. The Town Clerk shall communicate to the subdivider the action of the Town Board.   If the plat is approved, the Town Clerk shall endorse it for the Town Board.
(d)	Effect of Preliminary Plat Approval. Approval or conditional approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the Final Plat, except that if the Final Plat is submitted within six (6) months of Preliminary Plat approval and conforms substantially to the Preliminary Plat layout, the Final Plat shall be entitled to approval with respect to such layout. The Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plat, which will be subject to further consideration by the Plan Commission and Town Board at the time of its submission.










 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-32


(e)	Preliminary Plat Amendment. Should the subdivider desire to amend the Preliminary Plat as approved, he/she may resubmit the amended plat which shall follow the same procedure, except for the fee, unless the amendment is, in the opinion of the Town Board, of such scope as to constitute a new plat, in which such case it shall be refiled.



Sec.  14-1-33	Final Plat Review and Approval.

(a)	Filing Requirements.
(1)	The subdivider shall prepare a Final Plat and a letter of application in accordance with this Chapter and shall file twelve ( 12) copies of the Plat and the application with the Town Clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the Plan Commission at which action is desired. The Town Clerk shall give notice of the Plan Commission's meeting in the manner prescribed in Section 14-1-32(a)(2). The owner or subdivider shall file eight (8) copies of the Final Plat not later than six (6) months after the date of approval of the Preliminary Plat; otherwise, the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat will be considered void unless an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and for good cause granted by the Town. The owner or subdivider shall also submit at this time a current certified abstract of title or registered property report and such other evidence as the Town Attorney may require showing title or control in the applicant.
(2)	Following filing of a Final Plat with the Town Clerk, the subdivider shall within two
(2)	days forward copies of the plat to the Approving and Objecting authorities. The required number of copies shall be made at the subdivider's expense.  Within twenty
(20) days of the date of receiving the copies of the plat, any objecting agency shall notify the subdivider and all agencies having the authority to object, of any objection based upon failure of the  plat to comply with the statutes or rules which its examination is authorized to cover. If there are no objections, it shall so certify on the face of a copy and return that copy to the Department of Administration. After each agency and the Department of Administration have certified that they have no objection or that their objections have been satisfied, the Department of Administration shall so certify on the face of the plat. If an agency fails to act within twenty (20) days from the date of receipt of copies of the plat, and the Department of Administration fails to act within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the original plat, it shall be deemed that there are no objections to the plant and, upon demand, it shall be certified on the face of the plat by the Department.
(3)	The  Final  Plat  shall  conform  to  the  Preliminary  Plat  as  approved  and  to  the
requirements of all applicable ordinances and state laws and shall be submitted for certification of those agencies having the authority to object to the plat as provided by Sec. 236.12(2).











 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-33


(4)	Simultaneously with the filing of the Final Plat or map, the owner shall file with the Town Clerk six (6) copies of the final plans and specifications of public improve­ ments required by this Chapter.
(5)	The Town Clerk shall refer two (2) copies of the Final Plat to the Plan  Commission,
one (1) copy to the Town Engineer, and a copy each to the telephone and power and other utility companies. The abstract of title or registered property report may be referred to the Town Attorney for his/her examination and report. The Town Clerk shall also refer the final plans and specifications of public improvements to the Town Engineer for review. The recommendations of the Plan Commission and Town Engineer shall be made within thirty (30) days of the filing of the Final Plat. The Town Engineer shall examine the plat or map and final plans and specifications of public improvements for technical details and, if he/she finds them satisfactory, shall so certify in writing to the Plan Commission. If the plat or map or the plans and specifications are not satisfactory, the Town Engineer shall return them to the owner and so advise the Plan Commission.
(b)	Plan Commission Review.
(1)	The Plan Commission shall examine the Final Plat as to its conformance with the approved Preliminary Plat, any conditions of approval of the Preliminary Plat, this Chapter and all applicable ordinances, rules, regulations, comprehensive plans and comprehensive plan components which may affect it and shall recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the Plat to the Town Board.
(2)	If the Final Plat is not submitted within six (6) months of the last-required approval
of the Preliminary Plat, the Town Board may refuse to approve the Final Plat.
(3)	The Plan Commission shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of the Final Plat with the Town Clerk, recommend approval, conditional approval or rejection of the Plat and shall transmit the Final Plat and application along with its recommenda­ tions to the Town Board. Provided the time limits in Subsection (c) below are complied with, the Plan Commission may hold the matter in abeyance if there is incomplete or inadequate information.
(c)	Board Review and Approval.
(1)	The Town Board shall, within sixty (60) days of the date of filing the original Final Plat with the Town Clerk, approve or reject such Plat unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the Plat is rejected, the reasons shall be stated in the minutes of the meeting and a written statement of the reasons forwarded to the subdivider.
(2)	The Town Board shall, when it determines to approve a Final Plat, give at least ten
(10)  days'  prior  written  notice  of  its  intention  to  the  Municipal  Clerk  of  any municipality within one thousand ( 1,000) feet of the Final Plat.
(3)	Failure of the Town Board to act within sixty (60) days, the time having not  been
extended and no unsatisfied  objections having been filed, the plat shall be deemed approved.









 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-33


(4)	After the Final Plat has been approved by the Town Board and required improvements either installed or a contract and sureties insuring their installation is filed, the Town Clerk shall cause the certificate inscribed upon the Plat attesting to such approval to be duly executed and the Plat returned to the subdivider for recording with the county register of deeds. The register of deeds cannot record the Plat unless it is offered within six (6) months from the date of last approval.
(5)	The subdivider shall file eight (8) copies of the Final Plat with the Town Clerk for
distribution to the approving agencies, affected sanitary districts, and other affected agencies for their files_.
(d)	Partial Platting. The Final Plat may, if permitted by the Town Board, constitute only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposes to record at the time.



Sec. 14-1-34	Administrative  fees.

(a)	General. The subdivider shall pay the Town all fees as hereinafter required and at the times specified before being entitled to recording of a plat or certified survey map.
(b)	Engineering Fee.  Per Section 14-1-90, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual
cost to the Town for all engineering work incurred by the Town in connection with the plat or certified survey map, including inspections required by the Town. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Town for such inspection as the Town Board deems necessary to assure that the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the Town or any other governmental  authority.
(c)	Administrative Fee. Per Section 14-1-90, subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal work which may be undertaken by the Town in connection with the plat or certified survey map. Included as such administrative fees shall be the co t of publication.



Sec. 14-1-35	Replat.

(a)	Except as provided in Section 70.27(1), Wis. Stats., when it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, so as to change the boundaries of a recorded subdivision, or part thereof, the subdivider or person wishing to replat shall vacate or alter the recorded Plat as provided in Sections 236.40 through 236.44 of the Wisconsin Statutes. The subdivider or person wishing to replat shall then proceed, using the procedures for Preliminary and Final Plats.                                   ·
(b)	The Town Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Town Board when a Preliminary Plat  of a replat of lands within the Town is filed, and shall cause notices of the proposed










'     14-J...6
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-35


Replat and public hearing to be mailed to the owners of all properties within the limits of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Replat and to the owners of all properties within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed Replat.
(c)	Where lots are more than double  the minimum size required for the applicable zoning district, the Town Board may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow resubdivision of such parcels into normal lots in accordance wit the provisions  of the Chapter.



Sec. 14-1-36 through Sec. 14-1-39	Reserved for future Use.





















































 
 
Article E:	Technical Requirements for Plats 	




Sec.  14-1-40	Technical  Requirements for Preliminary Plats.

(a)	General.  A Preliminary Plat shall be required for all subdivisions and shall be based upon a survey by a registered land surveyor and the plat prepared on mylar or paper of good quality at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch and shall show correctly on its face the following information:
(1)	Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded.
(2)	Location of the proposed subdivision by government  lot, quarter section, township, range, county and state.
(3)	Date, Scale and North Point.
(4)	Names and Addresses of the owner, subdivider and land surveyor preparing the plat.
(5)	Entire Area contiguous to the proposed plat owned or controlled by the subdivider shall be included on the Preliminary Plat even though only a portion of said area is proposed for immediate development. The Town Board recommendation, may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this Chapter and undue hardship would result from strict application thereof.
(b)	Plat Data.  All Preliminary Plats shall show the following:
(1)	Exact Length and Bearing of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision referenced to a corner established in the U.S. Public Land Survey and the  total acreage encompassed thereby.
(2)	Locations of all Existing Property Boundary Lines, structures, drives, streams and water courses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, railroad tracks and other significant features within the tract being subdivided or immediately adjacent thereto.
(3)	Location, Right-of-Way  Width and Names of  all  existing  streets,  alleys  or  other
public ways, easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way and all section and quarter section lines within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto.
(4)	Location and Names of any Adjacent Subdivisions, parks and cemeteries and owners of record of abutting unplatted lands.
(5)	Type, Width and Elevation of  any  existing  street  pavements  within  the  exterior
boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto, tog ther with any legally established  centerline elevations.
(6)	Location, Size and Invert Elevation of any existing sanitary or storm sewers, culverts
and drain pipes, the location of manholes, catchbasins, hydrants, electric and communication facilities, whether overhead or underground and the location and size of any existing water and gas mains within the exterior boundaries of the plat or immediately adjacent thereto. If no sewers or water mains are located on or immediately adjacent to the tract, the nearest such sewers or water mains which might












 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-40


be extended to serve the tract shall be indicated by the direction and distance from the tract, size and invert elevations.
(7)	Corporate Limit Lines within  the exterior boundaries  of the plat  or immediately
adjacent thereto.
(8)	Existing Zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(9)	Contours within the exterior boundaries of the plat and extending to the centerline of adjacent public streets to National Map Accuracy Standards based upon Mean Sea Level Datum at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet. At least two (2) permanent bench marks shall be located in the immediate vicinity  of the plat; the location of the bench marks shall be indicated on the plat, together with their elevations referenced to Mean Sea Level Datum and the monumentation of the bench marks clearly and completely described. Where, in the judgment ·of the Town Engineer, undue hardship would result because of the remoteness of the parcel from a mean sea level reference elevation, another datum may be used.
(10)	High-Water Elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located within one hundred (100) feet therefrom.
(11)	Water Elevation of all ponds, streams, lakes, flowages and wetlands within the exterior boundaries of the plat or located within one hundred ( 100) feet therefrom at the date of the survey.
(12)	Flood/and and Shore/and Boundaries and the contour line lying a vertical distance of two (2) feet above the elevation of the one hundred ( 100) year recurrence interval flood or, where such data is not available, two (2) feet above the elevation of the maximum flood of record within the exterior boundaries of the plat or within one hundred ( 100) feet therefrom.
(13)	Soil Types and their boundaries, as shown on  the operational soil survey maps prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
(14)	Location and Results of Soil Boring Tests within the exterior boundaries of the plat conducted in accordance with Sec. H 85.06 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code and delineation of areas with three (3) foot and six (6) foot groundwater and bedrock levels where the subdivision will not be served by public sanitary sewer service.
(15)	Location and Results of Percolation Tests within the exterior boundaries of the plat
conducted in accordance with Sec. H 85.06 of the Wisconsin  Administrative  Code where the subdivision will not be served by public sanitary sewer service.
(16)	Location, Width and Names of all proposed streets and public rights-of-way such as alleys and easements.
(17)	Approximate Dimensfons of All Lots together with proposed lot and block numbers.
The area in square feet of each lot shall be provided.
(18)	Location and Approximate Dimensions of any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, drainageways or other public use or which are to be used for group housing, shopping centers, church sites or other nonpublic uses not requiring lotting.









 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-40


(19)	Approximate  Radii of all Curves.
(20)	Any Proposed Lake and Stream Access with a small drawing clearly indicating the location  of the proposed  subdivision  in relation  to  access.
(21)	Any Proposed Lake and Stream improvement or relocation, and notice of application for approval by the Division of -Environmental Protection, Department of Natural Resources,  when   applicable.
(22)	Where the Town Board or Town Engineer finds that it requires additional information relative to a particular problem presented by a proposed development in order to review the Preliminary Plat, it shall have the authority to request in writing such information from the subdivider.
(c)	Additional Information.  The Town Board may require  a proposed  subdivision  layout  of all or part of the contiguously ·owned land even though division is not planned  at the time.



Sec.   14-1-41	Technical  Requirements for  Final Plats.

(a)	General. A Final Plat prepared by a registered land surveyor shall be required for all subdivisions. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of Section 236.20, Wis. Stats., and this Chapter.
(b)	Additional Information. The Final Plat shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Section 236.20, Wis. Stats., the following:
(1)	Exact Length and Bearing of the center line of all streets.
(2)	Exact Street Width along the line of any obliquely intersecting street.
(3)	Exact Location and Description of street lighting and lighting utility easements.
(4)	Railroad Rights-of-Way within  and abutting the plat.
(5)	All Lands Reserved for future public acquisition or reserved for the common use of property owners within the Plat.
(6)	Special Restrictions required by the Town Board relating to access control along public ways or to the provision of planting strips.
(c)	Deed Restrictions. Restrictive covenants and deed registrations for the proposed subdivision shall be filed with the Final Plat.
{d) Property Owners Association. The  legal  instruments  creating  a  property  owners association for the ownership and/or maintenance  of common  lands in the  subdivision shall be filed with the Final Plat.             '
(e)	Survey Accuracy.
(1)	Examination. The Town Board shall examine all Final Plats within the Town of Cady and may check for the accuracy and closure of the survey, the proper kind and location of monuments, and legibility and completeness of the drawing.
(2)	Maximum Error of Closure.  Maximum error of closure before  adjustment of the survey of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall not exceed, in horizontal












 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-41


distance or position, the ratio of one part in ten thousand (1:10,000), nor in azimuth, four (4) seconds of arc per interior angle. If field measurements exceed this maximum, new field measurements shall be made until a satisfactory closure of the field measurements has been obtained; the survey of the exterior boundary shall be adjusted to form a closed geometric figure.
(3)	Street, Block and Lot Dimensions. All street, block and lot dimensions shall be computed as closed geometric figures based upon the control provided by the closed exterior boundary survey. If checks disclose an error for any interior line of the plat greater than the ratio of one part in five thousand (1:5,000), or an error in measured angle greater than one (1) minute of arc for any angle where the shorter side forming the angle is three hundred (300) feet or longer, necessary corrections shall be made. Where the shorter side of a measured angle is less than three hundred (300) feet in length, the error shall not exceed the value of one (1) minute multiplied  by  the quotient of three hundred (300) divided by the length of the shorter side; however, such error shall not in any case exceed five (5) minutes of arc.
(4)	Plat Location. Where the plat is located within a quarter section, the  comers  of which have been relocated, monumented and coordinated by the Town, the tie required by Section 236.20(3)(b), Wis. Stats., shall be expressed in terms of grid bearing and distance; and the material and Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking the relocated section or quarter comer to which the plat is tied shall be indicated on the plat. The grid bearing and distance of the tie shall be determined by a closed survey meeting the error of closure herein specified for the survey of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.
(f) Surveying and Monumenting. All Final Plats shall meet all the surveying and monumenting requirements of Section 236.15, Wis. Stats.
(g)	State Plane Coordinate System. Where the plat is located within a quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated, monumented and coordinated by the Town, the plat shall be tied directly to one of the section or quarter comers so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and Wisconsin state plane coordinates of the monument marking the relocated section or quarter corner to which the plat is tied shall be indicated on the plat. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the Town's control survey.
(h)	Certificates. All Final Plats shall provide all the certificates required by Section 236.21, Wis. Stats.; and in addition, the surveyor shall certify that he/she has fully complied with all the provisions of this Chapter.



Sec. 14-1-42	Technical Requirements for Certified Survey Land Divisions; Review and Approval.

(a)	Certified Survey Requirements. For any land division creating up to four (4) parcels of five (5) acres or l ss in size, such map shall not contain more than four (4) parcels which are thirty-five (35) acres each or less, or building sites within a recorded  subdivision plat





 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-42


without changing the exterior boundaries of the block, lot or outlot, the subdivider shall subdivide by use of a certified survey map, prepared in accordance with Section 236.34, Wis. Stats., and this Chapter.
(b)	Submission and Review. The subdivider shall file two (2) copies of said survey map with the Town Clerk; the subdivider is responsible for the certified survey map once the Town Board has taken action on it. The Town Board shall review, and within forty (40) days approve, approve conditionally or reject the map. The subdivider  shall  be  notified  in writing of any  onditions  of approval of the reasons for rejection.
(c)	Additional Information. The Certified Survey Map shall show correctly on its face, in addition to the information required by Section 236.34, Wis. Stats., the following:
(1)	All Existing Buildings, watercourses,  drainage  ditches  and other features pertinent  to proper  division.
(2)	Setbacks or Building Lines required by the Town ordinances and specifically the Town Zoning Code.
(3)	All Lands Reserved for future acquisition.
(4)	Date of the Map.
(5)	Graphic Scale.
(6)	Name and Address of the owner, subdivider and surveyor.
(7)	Square Footage of each parcel.
(8)	Present Zoning for the parcels.
(d)	State Plane Coordinate System. Where the map is located within a quarter section, the corners of which have been relocated, monumented and coordinated by the Town, the map shall be tied directly to one of the section or quarter corners so relocated, monumented and coordinated. The exact grid bearing and distance of such tie shall be determined by field measurements, and the material and Wisconsin state plane coordinate of the monument marking the relocated section or quarter corner to which the map is tied shall be indicated on the map. All distances and bearings shall be referenced to the Wisconsin Coordinate System, South Zone, and adjusted to the Town's control survey.
(e)	Certificates. The surveyor shall certify on the face of the certified survey map that he/she has fully complied with all the provisions of this Chapter. The Town Board, after a recommendation by the reviewing agencies, shall certify its approval on the face of the map.
(f)    Street Dedication.  Dedication  of streets and other public areas shall require, in addition, the owner's certificate and the mortgagee's certificate in substantially the same form  as required  by Section 236.21(2)(a)  of the Wisconsin  Statutes.
(g)	Recordation.
(1)	The subdivider shall record the map with the St. Croix County  Register  of  Deeds within thirty (30) days of its approval by the Town Board and any other approving agencies. Failure to do so shall necessitate  a new review and reapproval  of the map by the Town Board.
(2)	Three (3) additional copies of the final approved map shall be forwarded to the Town of Cady.   The volume  and page number  of the recording  file shall be noted  on the
final approved map copies.






 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1.-42


(h) Requirements.  To the extent reasonably  practicable,  the certified  survey  shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter relating to general requirements, design standards and required improvements. Conveyance by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where the lot(s) involved is less than one and one-half (1-1/2) acres or three hundred (300) feet in width.



Sec. 14-1-43 through Sec. 14-1-49	Reserved for Future Use.























































 
 
Article F:	Required Improvements 	




Sec.  14-1-50	Improvements Required.

(a)	Payment for Improvements. The improvements prescribed  in this Chapter are required as a condition of approval of a land division. The required improvements described in this Chapter shall be installed, furnished and financed at the sole expense of the subdivider. However, in the case of required improvements in a commercial or industrial area, the cost of such improvements may, at the sole discretion of the Town Board, be financed through special  assessments.
(b)	General Standards. The following required improvements in this Chapter shall  be installed in accordance with the engineering standards and specifications which have been adopted by the Town Board. Where standards and specifications have not been adopted, the improvements shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices, approved prior to the start of construction by the Town Engineer or Town Board.



Sec.   14-1-51		Required Agreement  Providing for Proper Installation of  Improvements.

(a)	Contract. Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to the meeting at Eich the Final Plat is approved, the subdivider shall enter into a written contract with the Town requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct said improvements at his/her sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract conditions, which shall include provision for inspection of construction details by the Town Engineer or Town Board.
 
(b)
 
Financial Guarantees.
(1)	The agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow  deposit  or  in  lieu thereof to furnish  a performance  bond  or  irrevocable  letter  of  credit,  the  amount  of the deposit and the penal amount of the bond to be equal to one and one quarter  ( 1- 1/4) times the  Town Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished  und the  contract,  including  the  (;Q_St  of  inspection.
(2)	On request of the subdivider, the contract may provide for completion of part or all
of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat, and in such event the amount of the deposit, letter of credit or .bond shall be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to acceptance of the plat only.  If the required improvements are not complete within the specified period, all amounts held under performance bond, deposit or letter of credit, shall be turned over and delivered to the Town and applied to the cost of the required improvements.  Any balance remaining after such improvements have been made shall be returned to the
 










I lfl 33
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-51


owner or subdivider. The Town Board, at its option, may extend the bond, deposit or letter of credit, period for additional periods not to exceed two (2) years each period.
(3)	The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the Town Board upon recommendation of the Town Engineer after consultation with the subdivider.  The completion date shall be a component of the contract.
(4)	The subdivider shall pay the Town for all costs incurred by the Town  for review and
inspection of the subdivision. This would include review, and preparation at the Town Board's discretion, of plans and specifications by the Town Engineer, Planner, and Attorney, as well as other costs of a similar nature.



Sec.  14-1-52		Required Construction Plans; Town Review; Inspections.

(a)	Engineering Reports, Construction Plans and Specifications. As required by Section 14-1-31, general engineering reports, plans and proposed specifications shall be submitted simultaneously with the filing of the Preliminary Plat. At the Final Plat stage, detailed construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects with the standards of the Town Engineer and the ordinances of the Town shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Wisconsin, and said plans shall contain his/her seal. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the Town Board or Town Engineer for their approval and for their estimate of the total cost of the required improvements;  upon approval they shall become a part of the contract required. Simultaneously with the filing of the Final Plat with the Town Clerk, or as soon thereafter as practicable, copies of the construction plans and specifications, where applicable, shall be furnished for the following public improvements, with a copy sent to the appropriate sanitary district, if involved:
(1)	Street Plans and Profiles showing existing and proposed grades, elevations and cross sections of required improvements.
(2)	Storm Water and Open Channel plans and profiles showing the locations, grades, sizes, cross sections, elevations and materials of required facilities.
(3)	Erosion and Sedimentation Control plans showing those structures required to retard the rate of runoff water and those grading and excavating practices that will prevent erosion and sedimentation. Such plans shall comply with the County's or Town's Erosion Control Ordinance.
(4)	Planting Plans showing the locations, age, caliper, species and time of planting of any required grasses, vines, shrubs and trees.
(5)	Additional special plans or information as required by Town officials.
(b)	Action by the Town Engineer.  The Town Engineer shall review or cause to be reviewed the plans and specifications for conformance with the requirements  of this Chapter and










 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-52


other pertinent Town ordinances and design standards recommended by the Town Engineer and approved by the Town Board.. If the Town Engineer rejects the plans and specifications, he/she shall notify the owner, who shall modify the plans or specifications or both accordingly. When the plans and specifications are corrected, the Town Engineer shall approve the plans and specifications for transmittal to the Town Board. The Town Board shall approve the plans and specifications before the improvements are installed and construction  commenced.
(Note:  Town Engineer review is optional at the discretion of the Town Board.)
(c)	Construction and Inspection.
( 1) •11 Prior to starting any of the work covered bY. the plans approved above, written authorization to start  the  work  shall be  obtained  from  the Town  Board  upon  receipt of all necessary permits and in accordance with the construction methods of this Chapter. \Building permits shall not be issued until all improvements required by this Chapter  are  satisfactorily   completed.
(2)	Construction of all improvements required by this Chapter shall be completed within
    two (2) years from the date of approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Town Board, unless good cause can be shown for the Town Board to grant an extension.
(3)	During the course of construction, the Town Engineer shall m ke such inspections as
the Town Board deems necessary to insure compliance with the plans and specifica­ tions as approved. The owner shall pay the actual cost incurred by the Town for such inspections. This fee shall be the actual cost to the Town of inspectors, engineers and other parties necessary to insure satisfactory work.
(d)   Record Plans.  After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made three (3) copies of
,.·record plans showing the actual location of all improvements and such other facilities as "the Town Engineer shall require. These plans shall be prepared on the original mylars of the construction plans and shall bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer registered in Wisconsin. The presentation of the record plans shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their completion. Two (2) copies shall be retained by the Town and one (1) copy of such record plans shall be forwarded to the appropriate  sanitary district.



Sec.  14-1-53	Street Improvements.

The subdivider shall construct streets, roads and alleys as outlined on the approved plans based on the requirements  of this Chapter:
(a)	Street Construction Standards. The design and construction of all roads, streets and alleys in the Town shall fully comply with the requirements and specifications  of Sections 6-1-1,  14-1-70 and  14-1-71.











 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-53


(b)	Grading.
(1)	With the submittal of  the Final Plat, the subdivider shall furnish drawings which indicate the existing and proposed grades of roads, streets and alleys shown on the plat.
(2)	Proposed grades will be reviewed by the Town Engineer for conformance with Town
standards and good engineering practice. Street grades require the approval of the Town Board after receipt of the Town Engineer's recommendations.
(3)	After approval of the street grades, the subdivider shall grade the full width of the
right-of-way of the streets and alleys proposed to be dedicated, including the vision clearance triangle on corner lots.
(4)	In cases where an existing street right-of-way is made a part of the plat or abuts the plat, the subdivider shall grade that portion of the right-of-way between the existing pavement and the property line.
(5)	The bed  for the roadways  in the street rights-of-way  shall be  graded  to subgrade
elevation.
(6)	The Town Engineer shall approve all grading within rights-of-way and said grading shall extend for a sufficient distance beyond the right-of-way to  insure that the established grade will be preserved.
(7)	Where  electric  and  other communications  or utilities  facilities  are to be  installed
underground, the utility easements shall be graded to within six (6) inches of the final grade by the subdivider, prior to the installation of such facilities; earth fill piles or mounds of dirt or construction materials shall not be stored on such easement areas.
(c)	Street Construction. After necessary utilities have been installed, where required by the Town, the subdivider shall construct and dedicate, as part of the subdivision, streets. Construction shall be to Town standard specifications for street improvements.
(d)	Completion of Street Construction.
(1)	Prior to any building permits being issued on lands adjacent to streets, all street construction shall be completed by the subdivider, approved by the Town Engineer and accepted by the Town Board.
(2)	The Town Board may issue a waiver of these requirements in unusual or special circumstances such as excessively severe weather conditions, heavy construction temporarily in area or construction material shortages (i.e., cement, asphalt). The issuance of a waiver shall be at the discretion of the Town Board.
(3)	The subdivider requesting a waiver shall do so in writing, presenting such information
and documentation as required by the Town Board. The waiver shall be in written form and shall detail which improvement requirements are temporarily waived and for what period of time.



Sec.  14-1-54	Storm Water Drainage Facilities.

(a) Pursuant to Section 14-1-74, the subdivider shall provide storm water drainage facilities which may include curb and gutter, catch basins and inlets, storm sewers, road ditches and open channels, as may be required.  Storm sewers are to be of adequate size and grade to





 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-54


hydraulically accommodate the ten ( 10) year storm; culverts shall be designed to accommodate the ten (10) year storm and shall be sized so that the twenty-five (25) year frequency storms do not cause flooding of the adjacent roadway. Upon the approval of the Town Engineer, storm water swales and ditches may be sized for from twenty-five (25) to one hundred ( 100) year frequency storms, depending upon the estimated amount of damage that would be incurred by adjacent properties if flooding did  occur.  Storm  drainage facilities shall be so designed as to minimize hazards to life or property, and the size, type and installation of all storm water drains and sewers proposed to be constmc!ed shall be in accordance with the plans  and specifications approved by the Town Board, upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer. Storm sewers oversized to handle runoff from offsite properties will be installed by the subdivider; however, the cost of oversizing above a twenty-four (24) inch diameter storm sewer shall be paid by other users connecting to the system.



Sec.  14-1-55	Other Utilities.

(a)	The subdivider shall cause gas (if available), electrical power and telephone facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision.
(b)	The subdivider shall cause gas, electric power  and telephone facilities to be installed in.
such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision, certified survey or land division. All new television cables and telephone lines from which lots are individually served shall be underground unless the Town Board specifically allows overhead poles for the following reasons:
(1)	Topography, soil, water table, solid rock, boulders, or other physical conditions would
make underground installation unreasonable or impractical; or
(2)	The lots to be served by said facilities can be served directly from existing overhead facilities.
(c)	Plans  indicating  the  proposed  location  of  all  gas  (if  available),  electrical  power  and
telephone distribution and transmission lines required to service the plat shall be approved by the Town Board and such map shall be filed with the Town Clerk.



Sec. 14-1-56	Street Signs.

The subdivider shall install at the intersections of all streets proposed  to be dedicated a street name sign of a design and installation specified by the Town Engineer.



Sec.  14-1-57	Erosion Control.

Pursuant to the County's or Town's Construction Site Erosion Control Ordinance, whichever is more restrictive, the subdivider shall cause all gradings, excavations, open cuts, side slopes, and






 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-57


other land surface disturbances to be mulched, seeded, sodded or otherwise protected so that erosion, siltation, sedimentation and washing are prevented. The subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan that specifies measures that will be taken to assure the minimization of erosion problems.



Sec. 14-1-58  Easements.

(a)	Utility Easements. The Town Board, on the recommendation of appropriate agencies serving the Town, shall require utility easements for poles, wire, conduits, storm sewers, gas, water and head mains or other utility lines. It is the intent of this Chapter to protect all established easements so as to assure proper grade, assure maintenance of the established grade, prohibit construction of permanent fences or retaining walls over underground installation and prevent the planting of trees in the easement area.
(b)	Drainage Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream:
(1)	There shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as may be necessary to comply with this Section; or
(2)	The watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream may be relocated in such a manner
that the maintenance of adequate drainage will be assured and the same provided with a storm· water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming to the lines of the relocated watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and may be necessary to comply with this Section.
(3)	Wherever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume flow. In all cases, such water course shall be of a minimum width established at the high-water mark or, in the absence of such specification, not less than thirty (30) feet. If, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, the easement will be for a major drainage swale, the easement shall be of sufficient width to contain a one hundred ( 100) year frequency storm. If the drainage easement is located in an established floodway or flood fringe district, the entire floodplain area shall be included within the drainage easement.
(c)	Easement locations. Such easements shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, or wider where recommended by the Town Engineer, and may run across lots or alongside of rear lot lines. Such easements should preferably be located along rear lot lines. Evidence shall be furnished the Town Board that easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated in the plat or in deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organization responsible for furnishing the services involved.












 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-59


Sec.  14-1-59		Maintenance of Shared Community Private Septic Systems.

(a)	A maintenance agreement shall be required between the Town and the subdivider when a shared community private  septic system, as permitted  by the Wisconsin  Administrative Code, is to be utilized.  The agreement shall be recorded as a property deed restriction by the subdivider with the County Register of Deeds in a form which shall be binding upon all subsequent owners of land covered by the agreement.  Such agreement shall assign on­ going responsibility  for maintenance  and repair of the shared community  private  septic system to a homeowners, property owners or condominium association per Section 14-1-23. Prior to Final Plat approval, the subdivider shall submit to the Town for its approval an on­ going maintenance plan for such facilities, which shall be incorporated by reference into all approvals and development agreements.  In the alternative, if unique circumstances or a special  benefit  to  the public  can  be  demonstrated,  such  ownership  and  maintenance responsibility may be assumed by the Town.
(b)	If the Town at any time finds that the facility management and maintenance measures constructed in accordance with the system plan are not being properly followed or maintained, or if altered in any way from the location, configuration and capacity of the measures specified in the approved plan, the Town·shall have the right to undertake the needed maintenance or repair. This right shall include the right to enter onto private property as necessary to carry out the needed maintenance or repair. The cost of such maintenance or repair shall be levied as a special assessment or special charge against the
·properties concerned.   The special charge or assessment shall be collectible in the same manner as all other special assessments/charges levied by the Town.



Sec. 14-1-60 through Sec. 14-1-69	Reserved for Future Use..






























 
 
Article G:	Design Standards 	




Sec.  14-1-70	General Street Design Standards.

(a)	Compliance with Statutes. In laying out a subdivision, the owner shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., and all applicable Town regulations. In all cases where the requirements of this Chapter are different from the requirements of Chapter 236, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(b)	Dedication. The subdivider shall dedicate land and improve streets as provided in this Section and Sections 6-1-1, 14-1-53 and 14-1-71. Streets shall be located with due regard for topographical conditions, natural features, existing and proposed streets, utilities and land uses and public convenience and safety. Streets shall conform to  official  maps adopted by the Town Board. The subdivision, certified survey parcel or land division shall be so designed as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to a public street or road.
(c)	Compliance with Comprehensive Plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to any Town Comprehensive Plan or Official Map and to this Chapter and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to run-off of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the appropriate continuation at the same width of the existing streets in adjoining areas.
(d)	Areas Not Covered by Plan. In areas not covered by a Town Comprehensive Plan, or Official Map, the layout of streets shall conform to the plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas of the neighborhood. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and officially planned streets, topography and natural terrain, streams and lakes and existing tree growth, public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.
(e)	Street Classifications.  Streets/roads shall be classified as indicated below.
(1)	Arterial Streets. Arterial streets shall be arranged to provide through traffic for a heavy volume of vehicles.
(2)	Collector Streets. Collector streets shall be arranged so as to provide ready collection of traffic from commercial and residential areas and conveyance of this traffic to the major street and highway system and shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as schools, churches and shopping centers and other concentrations of population and to the major streets into which they feed.
(3)	Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be arranged to conform to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of efficient storm and sanitary sewerage systems and to require the minimum street area necessary to provide safe and convenient access to abutting property.











 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-70


(4)	Proposed Streets. Proposed streets shall extend to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions or unless, in the opinion of the Town Board, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision or land division or for the advantageous development of the adjacent tracts.
(f) Reserve Strips. Reserve strips shall not be provided on any plat to control  access to streets or alleys, except where control of such strips is placed with the Town under conditions approved by the Town Board.
(g)	Alleys. Alleys may be provided in commercial and industrial districts for off-street loading and service access, but shall not be approved in residential districts. Dead-end alleys shall not be approved and alleys shall not connect to a major thoroughfare  or federal, state or county trunk highway.
(h)	Continuation. Streets shall be  laid out to provide for possible continuation wherever topographic and other physical conditions  permit. Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have a direct connection  with, or be continuous and in line with, existing, planned or platted streets with which they are to connect. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions,· or unless in the opinion of the Town Board, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts.
(i)	Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic.
(j)	Number of Intersections.  The number of intersections of minor streets with major streets
shall be reduced to the practical minimum consistent with circulation needs and safety requirements, preferably not more than two (2).  Wherever practicable the distance between such intersections should not be less than six hundred (600) feet.
(k)	Frontage Roads. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial highway, the Town Board may require a frontage road, nonaccess reservation along the rear of the property contiguous to such highway or such other treatment as may be necessary to ensure safe, efficient traffic flow and adequate protection  of residential properties.
(1)	Private Streets. Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public improvements be approved for any private street; all streets shall be dedicated for public use.
(m)	Visibility. Streets shall afford maximum visibility and safety and shall intersect at right angles where practicable. As required by the Town Engineer, sufficient vision clearance triangles shall be provided at intersections.
(n)	Tangents. A tangent at least  one hundred (100) feet long shall be  required between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. Whenever there is a deflection angle of more than ten degrees (10°) in the alignment of a street, a curve shall be introduced with the required radius.










 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-70


(o)	Street Grades.
(1)	Unless necessitated by exceptional topography subject to the approval of the Town Board, the maximum centerline grade of any street or public way shall not exceed the following:

Arterial streets:  six percent (6%). Collector streets:  eight percent (8%).
Minor streets, alleys and frontage streets:  ten percent (10%).
Pedestrian  ways:   twelve percent  (12%) unless steps of acceptable design  are provided.
The grade of any street shall in no case exceed twelve percent (12%) or be less
than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%).

(2)	Street grades shall be established wherever practicable so as to avoid excessive grading, the promiscuous removal of ground cover and tree growth, and general leveling of the topography.
(p)	Radii of Curvature. When a continuous street centerline deflects at any one (1) point by more than ten (10) degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less than the following:

Arterial streets and highways:  three hundred fifty (350) feet. Collector stree.ts:  two hundred (200) feet.
Minor streets:  one hundred fifty (150) feet.

(q)	Half Streets. Where an existing dedicated or platted half-street is adjacent to the subdivision, the other half-street shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The platting of half­ streets should be avoided where possible.
(r)	Intersections.
(1)	Property lines at street intersections of major thoroughfares shall be rounded with a radius of fifteen (15) feet or of a greater radius where the Town Engineer considers it necessary.
(2)	Streets shall intersect each other at as nearly right angles as topography  and other
limiting factors of good design permit.
(3)	Number of streets converging at one (1) intersection shall be reduced to a minimum, preferably not more than two (2).
(s)	Street Names.  New street names shall not duplicate the names of existing streets, but
streets that are continuations of others already in existence and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.  Street names shall be subject to approval by the Town Board.
(t)	Limited Access Highway · and Railroad Right-of-way Treatment. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway, arterial street or railroad  right-of-way,  the  design  shall  provide  the  following  treatment:
(1)	Subdivision Lots. When lots within the proposed subdivision back upon the right-of­ way of an existing or proposed limited access highway or a railroad, a planting strip










 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-70


at least thirty (30) feet in depth shall be provided adjacent to the highway or railroad in addition to the normal lot depth. This strip shall be part of the platted lots but shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat:  "This  strip reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs, the building of structures hereon prohibited."
(2)	Commercial and Industrial Districts.  Commercial and industrial districts shall have
provided, on each side of the limited access highway, arterial street or railroad, streets approximately parallel to and at a suitable distance from such highway or railroad for the appropriate use of the·land between such streets and highway or railroad, but not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
(3)	Streets Parallel to a Limited Access Highway. Streets parallel to a limited access highway or railroad right-of-way, when intersecting a major street and highway or collector street which crosses said railroad or highway, shall be located at a minimum distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet from said highway or railroad right-of-way. Such distance, where desirable and practicable, shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for the future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
(4)	Minor Streets. Minor streets immediately adjacent and parallel to railroad rights-of­ way shall be avoided, and location of minor streets immediately adjacent to arterial streets and highways and to railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided in residential areas.



Sec. 14-1-71  Specifications for Preparation, Construction and Dedication of Streets and Roads.

(a)	General Requirements.
(1)	Construction Standards. In addition to the requirements of Sections 6-1-1 and 14-1-70, the following standards shall be applicable: All roadway and street construction materials used shall be performed in accordance with the construction methods as listed in the appropriate sections of the "State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" and its supplements, and this Chapter, whichever is more restrictive. The design requirements of this Section and Sections 6-1-1 and 14-1-70 shall be applicable to all streets and roads that are to be dedicated to the Town, regardless of whether such streets or roads are part of a new subdivision or land division.
(2)	Project  Costs.	All  roadway  surveys,  dedications,  plans  and  specifications  and
·construction will be at the expense of the applicant or applicants, unless otherwise specified. This includes any expense incurred by the Town in the preparation of plans and review and inspection of plans and construction.










 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-71


(3)	Preliminary Consultation. Prior to the design, preparation and construction of any roadway to be dedicated to the Town of Cady, the applicant shall notify the Town Clerk. An on-site meeting will then be arranged to be attended by the Town Engineer or Town Board and the applicant. Plans must be provided in order for the Town Engineer or Town Board to check the design and the drainage.
(4)	Material Slips. Copies of material slips for all materials furnished for the road construction projects shall be delivered to the Town before the Town approves  the final  construction.
(5)	Required Inspections.  Although the Town Engineer or Town Board may conduct
inspections as necessary at any state of construction, the Town Engineer or Town Board shall be contacted for required inspections after the following phases of construction:
a.	Subbase grading;
b.	Crushed  aggregate base courses;
c.	Bituminous  surface course;  and
d.	Shouldering.
e.	Placement   of   erosion   control   measures   (soil   stabilization   and   stormwater retention/detention  measures).
Any  deficiencies  found  by  the  Town  Engineer  or  Town  Board  shall  be  corrected before proceeding to the next phase of construction.
(6)	Tests of Materials. The Town reserves the right to obtain a sample of the roadway base material prior to placement on the roadway for purposes of determining whether the material meets gradation  and soundness requirements.
(7)	Pavement Samples.   Samples of bituminous  concrete may be required  to be  taken
by the Town at the developer's expense during pavement  construction  operations  for purposes  of determining that the material  meets specifications.
(8)	Town Board Approval. The finished roadway shall meet with the approval of the Town Board since the Town will include this road work in their annual request for highway  aid.
(b)	Construction   Standards.	The minimum construction specifications prescribed by this
Section shall pertain to all new roads and streets, including  roads  set  out  in plats  and private driveways for public  use, and these standards shall be met before  such roads will be accepted by the Town of Cady as public roads. After completion of the underground utilities and approval thereof, the streets shall be  constructed.  Unless  phasing  of construction of improvements is approved by the Town Board or its  designee, building permits shall not be issued prior to the installation of the street improvements  and  the approval of an individual lot grading plan that conforms to the guidelines of the master site grading plan, as determined by the Town Board or Town Engineer, or designee. All streets and highways constructed in the Town or to be dedicated to the Town shall fully comply with the minimum construction standards of Section 6-1-1  and  this  Chapter;  the  Town Board reserves the right to modify these standards as needed:









 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-71


(1)	Roadway Alignment Details. As specified in the St. Croix County Code of Ordinances.
(2)	Roadway Grading; Ditches. Roads shall be graded to their full width in accordance with approved plans, plus an additional distance necessary to establish a four to one (4: 1) backslope. The roadway shall be compacted and graded to subgrade  using, where necessary, approved fill material which is in accordance with Wisconsin Department of Transportation standards. Roadside ditches shall be a minimum of twenty-six (26) inches below the finished roadway centerline elevation, or as approved by the Town Board, upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer (if applicable). Debris may not be buried in the designated road right-of-way. Roadway ditches shall have a normal slope ratio of three to one (3:1) ditch from the edge of the shoulder to the bottom of the ditch slope of one percent ( 1%) and 2 to 1 (2: 1) on the back slope.
(3)	Road Right-of-Way.   The road shall have a right-of-way  width of sixty-six (66) feet.
(4)	Preparation of Road Base. The road right-of-way shall be graded and drained to include sufficient ditches and culvert pipes for adequate drainage of the area considering the highway and adjacent land development, including proposed development. The road shall be graded with a thirty (30) foot top and the back slope of ditches shall end not less than two (2) feet from the right-of-way line.   That part of the road right-of-way not occupied by the road shall be graded with gradual sloping ditches having a minimum depth of  eighteen (18) inches from the grade level of abutting property. Materials excavated from the construction of ditches shall be used as necessary  for raising and leveling the road bed.
(5)	Culverts.
a.	Private entrance culvert pipes shall be placed in ditches so as to provide adequate drainage of standing and running water. Private entrance culvert pipes shall meet the standards of Section 6-2-1 and shall be of sufficient size to carry the surface water drainage of the area considering the highway and adjacent land development, including proposed development.
b.	Public culverts, including culverts at the entrance to any connecting public road, shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in diameter and forty (40) feet in length.
c.	Any road which at a terminus does not connect with a public road shall be constructed with a cul-de-sac having a minimum radius of eighty (80) feet, exclusive of ditches.
(6)	Additional Base Material. If, in the opinion of the Town Board, soil forming the foundation for a road proposed  to be accepted by the Town of Cady, is unstable as a result of water saturation or unstable composition of soils, or is  otherwise  so unstable as to preclude the construction of a sound and durable public road in accordance with the minimum specifications otherwise established by this Chapter, the Town Board of the Town of Cady may require construction of additional base materials before such road shall be accepted as a public road.









l t..l- -4-ltt
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
:14-:L-7:1


(7)	Surface Course Standards. Surfacing must consist of either crushed aggregate or bituminous concrete composition suitable for anticipated traffic loads. The minimum amount of pavement necessary for acceptance must be at  least  two  and  one-half (2-1/2) inches in thickness. Such material shall be laid down at a width of not less than twenty-two (22) feet with its centerline corresponding to the centerline of the right-of-way.
(8)	Shouldering. Shouldering shall be placed on each side of the pavement. Shouldering must correspond with the height of the pavement. It shall be a gravel mixture of one and one-quarter  (1  1/4") or three-quarter  (3/4) inch crusher run with a width of two
(2) feet from said pavement  on each side.
(9)	Topsoil, Grass, Seed, Fertilizer and Mulch. All disturbed areas (ditches, backslopes) within the road right-of-way not provided with pavement and shouldering  material shall be restored utilizing four (4) inches of topsoil and good quality grass seed, fertilizer and mulch. Ditches along the roadway shall  be  protected  by  necessary erosion control materials such as hay bales, sod, erosion control mats, etc., as prescribed by the engineering design for the ditches as approved by the Town Engineer  or Town Board.
(10)	Drainage Improvements. In the case of all new roads and streets, the Town Board may require that stormwater retention areas and storm sewers be constructed in order to provide for proper drainage.
(11)	Post-Construction Traffic Limited. No vehicular  traffic shall be permitted on the pavement for a minimum period of between twenty-four (24) and seventy-two (72) hours following paving, as determined necessary by the Town Engineer or Town Board to protect the new pavement.
(c)	Statutory Requirements. The laying out of highways and roads shall be as provided in Chapters 80 and 86, Wis. Stats., except that in the case of subdivisions and certified surveys, the provisions of Sec. 236.29(2), Wis. Stats., shall apply.
(d)	Final Inspection. Upon completion of the proposed highway, the Town Board or Town Engineer will proceed to make final inspection, accepting or rejecting the road as the case may be.   After all of the provisions of this Chapter have been complied with, the roadway or easement will be inspected by the Town officials and, at that time, proof will be made by the presenting of waivers of liens or receipted bills that all work that has been done has been paid for or arrangements have been made for the payment through written instrument by the subdivider. If the road  is rejected, corrections  shall be made as recommended  by the Town Board, before final inspection can then be made again. If final acceptance is then made, the owner or owners shall turn over to the Town the deed of all land necessary for the road as previously  mentioned.



Sec. 14-1-72	Block Design Standards.

(a)	Length; Arrangement. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be appropriate for the topography and the type of development contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet nor have less than sufficient





14-41
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-72


width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth between street lines. As a general rule, blocks shall not be less than six hundred (600) feet in length. Blocks shall be so designated as to provide two (2) tiers of lots, unless it adjoins a railroad, major thoroughfare, river or park where it may have a single tier of lots.
(b)	Pedestrian Pathways.  Pedestrian  pathways,  not less than six (6) feet wide,  may  be
required by the Town Board, upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, through the center of a block more than nine hundred (900) feet long, where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.



Sec.  14-1-73	Lot Design Standards.

(a)	Size.
(1)	Access.  Every lot shall front or abut on a public street for a distance of at least fifty
(50) feet.  In unique hardship cases where it is impossible for a lot to abut a public street, a private way may be used for access purposes provided a statement is included on the face of the plat indicating that the lot is served by a private way and that the Town or County has no responsibility for the maintenance of the private way. Any such private way is subject to applicable County zoning or platting ordinances, if any.
(2)	Area and Dimensions.  Lots shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in size.
(b)	Depth. Lots shall have a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet. Depth of lots or parcels reserved for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for screened, off-street service and parking required by the use contemplated, and the area zoning regulations for such use. An extra ten ( 10) feet in depth and width may be required for said lots to be restricted for planting of shrubs and trees to screen said parking or to screen proposed industrial lots.
(c)	Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width of ten (10) feet to permit building setback from both streets, as required by the Zoning Code.
(d)	Butt Lots.   Butt lots will be  permitted  by  the Town  Board  only in exceptional  cases.
Permitted butt lots shall be platted at least five (5) feet wider than the average width of interior lots in the block.
(e)	Side Lots. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to or radial to abutting street
lines.  Lot lines shall follow Town boundary lines.
(f)	Double and Reversed Frontage Lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots .shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography  and orientation.
(g)	Natural Features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if
preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.











 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-73


(h)	Land Remnants.  All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a plan shown as to future use rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
(i)	Building Setback Lines. Building setback lines shall conform to the requirements which may be established in Building or Zoning Ordinances. Where not otherwise controlled by ordinance, setback lines appropriate to the location and type of development contemplated shall be established as may be required by the Town Board to achieve the purpose and intent of this Chapter.



Sec. 14-1-74	Drainage System.

(a) Drainage System Required. As required by· Sec. 14-1-56, a drainage system  shall  be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide for the proper drainage of the surface water of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part.  A Final Plat shall not be approved until the subdivider shall submit plans, profiles  and specifications as specified in this Section, which have been prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Town Board, upon the recommendations  of  the Plan  Commission  and Town Engineer  (if consulted).
(b)	Drainage System Plans.
(1)	The  subdivider  shall  submit to the Town  at the  time of  filing a Preliminary  Plat  a preliminary  drainage plan or engineering report on the ability of existing watercourse channels,  storm  sewers,  culverts  and  other improvements  pertaining  to  drainage  or flood control within  the subdivision to handle the additional runoff  which would  be generated  by  the  development   of  the  land  within  the  subdivision.	Additional information  shall be  submitted  to adequately  indicate that provision  has been  made for disposal  of  surface water without  any  damage to the developed  or undeveloped land downstream or below  the proposed  subdivision.   The report  shall also include:
a.	Estimates  of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision naturally  from
areas outside the subdivision.
b.	Quantities of flow at each inlet or culvert.
c.	Location, sizes and grades of required  culverts, storm drainage sewers and other required  appurtenances.
(2)	A grading plan for the streets, blocks and lots shall be submitted by the subdivider for the area within the subdivision.
(3)	The  design  criteria  for  storm  drainage  systems  shall  be  based  upon  information provided by the design engineer, approved by the Town Engineer.
(4)	Material and construction specifications for all drainage projects (i.e., pipe, culverts, seed, sod, etc:) shall be in compliance with specifications provided  by  the  Town Board, upon the recommendation  of the Town Engineer.










 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-74


(c)	Grading.  The subdivider shall grade each subdivision in order to establish street, block and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to topography  as follows:
(1)	The subdivider shall grade the full width of the right-of-way  of all proposed  streets
in accordance with the approved plans.
(2)	Block grading shall be completed by one (1) or more of the following methods:
a.	A ridge may be constructed  along the rear lot lines which provides for drainage
onto the streets.
b.	Parts of all lots may be graded to provide for drainage to the street or to a ditch along the rear lot line.
c.	Draining  across rear  or side lot lines may be permitted  provided  that  drainage
onto adjoining properties is skillfully controlled.
(d)	Drainage System Requirements. The subdivider shall install all the storm drainage facilities indicated on the plans required in Subsection (a) of this Section.
(1)	Street Drainage. All streets shall be provided with an adequate  storm  drainage system. The street storm system shall serve as the primary drainage system and shall be designed to carry street, adjacent land and building  storm water  drainage.  No storm water shall be permitted to be run into a sanitary sewer system within the proposed  subdivision.
(2)	Off-Street Drainage.   The design of the off-street  drainage  system shall include  the
watershed affecting the subdivision and shall be extended to a watercourse or ditch adequate to receive the storm drainage. When the drainage system is outside of the street right-of-way, the subdivider shall make provisions  for dedicating an easement of the Town to provide for the future maintenance of said system. Easements  shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, but the Town may require larger easements if more area is needed due to topography,  size of watercourse,  etc.
(e)	Protection of Drainage Systems. The subdivider shall adequately protect all ditches to the satisfaction of the Town Board and Town Engineer.  Ditches and open channels shall be seeded, sodded or paved depending upon grades and soil types. (Generally ditches or channels with grades up to one percent [1%] shall be seeded; those with grades up to four percent [4%] shall be sodded and those with grades over four percent [4%] shall be paved.)
(f)	Maintenance.
(1)	A maintenance  agreement  shall be required  between  the Town  and the  subdivider.
The agreement shall be recorded as a property deed restriction by the subdivider with the County Register of Deeds in a form which shall be binding upon· all subsequent owners  of land  covered by  the  agreement.	Such  agreement  shall  assign  on-going responsibility  for  maintenance  and  repair  of  the  stormwater  management  system, including detention/retention  facilities and drainageways,  to a homeowners, property owners or condominium  association per Sec.  14-1-23.   Prior to Final Plat approval, the subdivider shall submit to the Town for its approval an on-going maintenance and mowing  plan  for  such facilities,  which  shall be  incorporated  by  reference  into  all











 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-74


approvals and development agreements. In the alternative, if unique circumstances or a special benefit to the public can be demonstrated, such ownership and maintenance responsibility may be assumed by the Town.
(2)	If the Town at any time finds that the stormwater management measures constructed in accordance with the system plan are not being properly maintained, or if altered in any way from the location, configuration and capacity of the measures specified in the approved plan, the Town shall have the right to undertake the needed maintenance or repair. This right shall include the right to enter onto private property as necessary to carry out the needed maintenance or repair. The cost of such maintenance or repair shall be levied as a special assessment or special charge against the properties concerned. The special charge or assessment shall be collectible in the same manner as all other special assessments/charges levied by the Town.

Cross-Reference:   Section  14-1-23.



Sec. 14-1-75	Non-Residential Subdivisions.

(a)	General.
(1)	If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such provisions as the Town may require.
(2)	A non-residential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the Town Building Code. A non-residential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of this Chapter, as well as such additional standards required by the Town and shall conform to the proposed land use standards established by any Town Comprehensive Plan or applicable Zoning Code.
(b)	Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this Chapter, which are appropriate to the planning of all  subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town Board that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed:
(1)	Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
(2)	Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
(3)	Special requirements may be imposed by the Town Board with respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
(4)	Special  requirements  may  be  imposed  by· the  Town  Board  with  respect  to  the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and storm water drainage.












 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-75


(5)	Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips when necessary.
(6)	Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be
extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas.



Sec. 14-1-76 through Sec. 14-1-79	Reserved for Future Use.





















































 
 
Article  H:	Park and Public  Land Dedications 	




Sec.  14-1-80	General Park and Public land Dedication Requirements.

(a)	Dedication Requirement. In order that adequate open spaces and sites for public uses may be properly located and reserved and in order that the cost of providing public areas, such as but not limited to, parks, recreation areas and public schools may be equitably apportioned on the basis of additional need created by the subdivision development, each subdivider shall be required to dedicate land or fees in lieu of land for park or other public uses.
(b)	General Design. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned unit development or development project, provision shall be made for suitable sites of adequate  area for schools, parks, playgrounds, open spaces, drainage-ways and other public purposes. Such sites are to be shown on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat, and shall comply with the Town of Cady Master Plan or component of said Plan. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, watersheds, ravines and woodlands, prairie and wetlands, and plant and animal communities.



Sec.  14-1-81	Land Dedication.

(a)		Dedication Calculation.  All subdividers shall be required  to dedicate developable land to the Town for park, school or other public uses, other than  streets or drainageways, at a rate  of  four-hundredths  (.04)  acres  (1,742  square  feet) per  dwelling  unit  if the project exceeds ten (10) dwelling units.  Whenever a proposed  playground, park, or other public area, other than  streets or drainageways,  designated  in  the Master  Plan  or Master Plan component  of the Town of Cady is embraced, all or in  part, in the tract  of land to be subdivided, these lands shall be made part  of the  required  land dedication.	The Town Board shall have sole authority  to determine the  suitability  and adequacy  of park lands proposed  for  dedication.	The  Town   Board  may  reduce  the  dedication  requirement depending on the particular  or unique  circumstances  of the subdivision.	Drainageways, wetlands or areas reserved for streets shall not be considered as satisfying land dedication requirements.
(b)	Shoreland.
(1)	lake and Stream Shore Plats. All subdivisions abutting on a navigable lake or stream shall provide public access at least sixty (60) feet wide providing access to the low watermark so that there will be public access, which is connected to existing public roads, at not more than one-half (1/2) mile intervals as measured along the lake or stream shore except where greater intervals and wider access is agreed upon by the









14:--S 3
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-81


Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the Wisconsin Department of Administration, and excluding shore areas where public parks or open-space streets or roads on either side of a stream are provided. No public access established under this Chapter may be vacated except by Circuit Court action. This Subsection does not require the Town to improve land provided for public access.
(2)	Lake   and   Stream   Shore   Plats.	The  lands  lying  between  the   meander  line,
established in accordance with Section 236.20(2)(g), Wis. Stats., and the water's edge, and any otherwise unplattable lands which lie between a proposed subdivision and the water's edge shall be included as part of lots, outlots or public dedications in any plat abutting a lake or stream. This Subsection applies not only to lands proposed to be subdivided but also to all lands under option to the subdivider or in which the subdivider holds any interest and which are contiguous to the lands proposed to be subdivided and which abut a lake or stream.
(c)	Unknown Number of Dwelling Units. Where the plat does not specify the number of dwelling units to be constructed, the land dedication shall be based upon the maximum number of units permitted by the Town Zoning Chapter and this Chapter.
(d)	Deeded to the Town.  Land dedicated for public purposes shall be deeded to the Town
at the time the Final Plat is approved.
(e)	Access to Dedicated Land. All dedicated land shall have frontage on a public street and shall have unrestricted public access.
(f) . Utility Extensions. The subdivider shall install or provide for installation of water and sanitary sewer lines to the property line of all dedicated land, where such services are to be provided to the adjacent properties.



Sec. 14-1-82  Reservation of Additional land.

When public parks and sites for other public areas as shown on the Master Plan or Master Plan component lie within the proposed area for development and are greater in area than required by Section 10-2-81, the owner shall reserve for acquisition by the Town, through agreement, purchase or condemnation, the remaining greater public area for a period of one (1) year of Final Plat approval unless extended by mutual agreement.



Sec. 14-1-83   Development of Park Area.

(a)	When parklands are dedicated, the subdivider is required  to:
(1)	Properly grade and contour for proper drainage;
(2)	Provide surface contour suitable for anticipated use of area; and
(3)	Cover areas to be seeded with a minimum of four (4) inches of quality topsoil and good quality grass seed, fertilizer and mulch.








, '-t-sA
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-83


(b)	The Town Board may require certification of compliance by the Town Engineer. The cost of  such report shall be paid by the subdivider.
(c)	Development of parklands is to be completed as soon as ten percent (10%) of the planned
lots in the subdivision are sold, as determined by the Town Board.
(d)	If the subdivider fails to satisfy the requirements of this Section, the Town Board may contract said completion and bill such costs to the subdivider, following a public hearing and written notice to the subdivider of noncompliance. Failure to pay such costs may result in the immediate withholding of all building permits until such costs are paid.



Sec. 14-1-84	Fees in Lieu of land.

(a)	Method of Calculation. Where, in  the  opinion of the Town Board, there is no land suitable for parks within the proposed subdivision of ten (10) or more residential units or the dedication of land would not be compatible with the  Town's  comprehensive development or park plan, or Town officials determine that a cash contribution would better serve the public interest, the Board may require the subdivider to contribute cash payment in lieu of land according to the following provisions:
(1)	Method of Calculation.
a.	The fee in lieu of land shall be Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per residential unit created.
b.	The fee is to be calculated and is payable as soon as ten percent ( 10%), and not later than fifteen percent (15%), of planned lots are sold, as determined by the Town Board, or when occupancy occurs in fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units when the subdivider retains ownership of some or all of the parcels. The subdivider shall post a bond irrevocable letter of credit or escrow monies to guarantee performance, in an amount as determined by the Town Board.
c.	The total price paid for developed lots sold prior to payment of the fee, divided by the total acreage of said lots, will be used to determine the required fee per acre. The fee per acre times the acres that would have been required in a land dedication will determine the total fee in lieu of land.
d.	In the event of nonperformance,  no additional building permits will be issued
until the fee is paid in full.
(2) Alternate Method of Calculation. The subdivider may elect to calculate and pay the fee at the time of Final Plat acceptance. If this method is used, no building permits shall be issued until the fee is paid in full.
(b)	Park Fund. Funds paid to the Town under any Fees in Lieu of Land provision or contributed from other sources for park development and improvement are to be placed in a separate account designated for park development and improvement projects. The Town Board shall have the final right to approve or reject such projects.   Said account shall be a continuing account and shall not lapse at the end of a budget period.



Sec. 14-1-85 through Sec. 14-1-89	Reserved for Future Use.






 
 
Article  I:	Fees




Sec.  14-1-90	Administrative and Other fees.

(a)	General.
(1)	The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal work which may be undertaken by the Town of Cady in connection with the plat or certified survey map. Legal work shall include the drafting of contracts between the Town of Cady and the subdivider. These fees may also include the cost of obtaining professional opinions including, but not limited to attorneys, engineers, landscape architects, and land planners, requested by the Town Board, Plan  Commission, or Town staff in connection with the land division being considered.
(2)	The Town may retain the services of professional consultants (including planners, engineers, architects, attorneys, environmental specialists, recreation specialists, and other experts) to assist in the Town's review of a proposal coming before the Town Board.	The submittal of a development proposal application or petition by a subdivider, shall be construed as an agreement to pay for such professional  review services applicable to the proposal. The Town may charge the costs for these services to the subdivider. The Town may delay acceptance of the application or petition as complete, or may delay final approval of the proposal, until such fees are paid by the subdivider. Review fees which are charged to a subdivider, but which are not paid, may be levied by the Town as a special assessment against the subject property. The subdivider shall be required to provide the Town with an executed copy of an Agreement as to Costs, as set forth in the Appendix, to pay for  said  consulting services as a prerequisite to the processing of the development application.
(3)	At the time of submission of a plat or certified survey, the Plan Commission or Town
Board, at their sole discretion, may require the subdivider to make a  good  faith deposit with the Town Clerk to cover, in all or part, the expenses anticipated to be incurred by the Town because of the land division. Unused portions of such fund may be refunded to the subdivider.
(b)	Engineering Fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Town for all engineering work incurred by the Town in connection with the plat or certified survey map, including inspections required by the Town pursuant to this Chapter. The subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the actual cost to the Town for such engineering  work  and inspection as the Town Board and/or Town Engineer deems necessary to assure that the construction of the required improvements is in compliance with the plans, specifications and ordinances of the Town or any other governmental authority. Engineering work shall include the preparation of construction plans, standard specifications and administration of the engineering work.
(c)	Administrative Fee. The subdivider shall pay a fee to the Town equal to the cost of any legal, administrative or fiscal work which may be undertaken by the Town in connection with the plat or certified survey map.








 
 
Subdivision Regulations
14-1-90


(d)		Concept Plan.  There shall be no fee for the Town's review of a concept or sketch plan of a proposed land division.  However, such reviews shall be conducted only as staff time  . permits.
(e)	Preliminary Plat.
•· (1) A subdivider who submits a Preliminary Plat for the Town Plan Commission and the Town Board shall file said Preliminary Plat with the Town Clerk and shall deposit with the Town Clerk a fee to cover the costs of reviewing said application. The fee for a Preliminary Plat shall be One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) for up to and including six (6) lots plus an additional fee per each additional lot over six (6). If the plat is rejected, no part of the fee shall be returned to the petitioner.
(2) A reapplication fee of One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the time of reapplication for approval or amendment of any Preliminary Plat which has previously been reviewed.
·	(f)	Final Plat Review Fee.
(1)	The subdivider shall pay a fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per lot within the Final Plat to the Town Clerk at the time of first application for Final Plat approval of said plat to assist in defraying the cost of review.
(2)	A reapplication fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the
time  of  a reapplication  for  approval  or  amendment  of  any  Final  Plat  which  has previously been reviewed.
···A	(g)	Certified  Survey.
(1)	The subdivider shall pay an application fee of Forty Dollars ($40.00) for each certified
survey map.
(2) Should the subdivider submit an amended or revised certified survey map, the resubmittal fee shall be Forty Dollars ($40.00) for each amended or revised certified survey map.
(h)	Objecting Agency Review Fees. The subdivider shall transmit all fees required for state agency review to the Town Clerk at the time of application. Said review fees shall be retransmitted to the proper state review agency by the Town Clerk. Said fees shall be applicable, where appropriate, to review fees required by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Wisconsin Department of Administration and the Wisconsin Department of Natural  Resources.
(i)	Public Site Fee. If the subdivision does not contain lands to be dedicated as required in this Chapter, the Town Clerk shall require a fee pursuant to Section 14-1-84 for the acquisition and development of public sites to serve the future inhabitants of the proposed subdivision.
U)	Improvement Review Fee.  The subdivider shall pay a fee or present  a bond, certified
check, or irrevocable letter of credit equal to five percent (5%) of the cost of the required public improvements as estimated by the Town Engineer at the time of the submission of












 
 





AMENDMENT TO THE CADY CODE OF ORDINANCES LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISION CODE CHAPTER 14
Section 14-1-90(e)


Ordinance No. 3 -C) b
Town of Cady, Wisconsin

The Town Board of the Town of Cady does ordain as follows:

WHEREAS, The number oflots identified in Chapter 14- -90 is more than the minimum number for a subdivision.

THEREFORE, Chapter 14-1-90 (e) shall be amended as shown below, effective November 7, 2006

The fee for the Preliminary Plat shall be One Hundred Fifty ($150.00) for up to and including six (6) five (5) lots plus an additional fee for each additional lot over six (6) five (5).  If the plat is rejected, no part of the fee shall be returned to the petitioner.



 
Dated this 61
 

day of November, 2006.
 



 


 






Clerk, Carla Greiber
 
Subdivision Regulations
14-1-90


improvement plans and specifications to partially cover the cost to the Town of checking and reviewing such plans and specifications. Fee may be recomputed, upon demand of the subdivider or Town Engineer, after completion of improvement construction in accordance with the actual cost of such improvements and the difference, if any, shall be paid by or remitted to the subdivider. At the Town Board's sole discretion, this procedure may be used as an alternative to the escrow account in Subsection (1) below. Evidence of cost shall be in such detail and form as required by the Town Engineer.
(k)		Assessments.	All outstanding  assessments due to the Town  shall be  due prior  to the signing of the Final Plat or Certified Survey by the Town.
(1)	·	Administrative        Costs.
(1)	Cost Determination. The subdivider of land divisions within the Town shall reimburse the Town for its actual cost of design, inspection, testing, construction and associated legal, real estate and other fees incurred by the Town in connection with the preliminary plat, final plat, replat or certified survey. The Town's costs shall be determined as follows:
a.	The cost of Town employees' time engaged in any way with the land division based on the hourly rate paid to the employee multiplied by a factor determined by the Town Clerk to represent the Town's cost for expenses, benefits, insurance, sick leave, holidays, vacation and similar benefits.
b.	The cost of Town equipment employed.
c.	The cost of mileage reimbursed to Town employees which is attributed to the land division.
d.	The actual costs of Town materials incorporated into the work, including transportation costs plus a restocking and/or handling fee not to exceed  ten percent (10%) of the cost of the materials.
e.	All consultant fees, including but not limited to legal and engineering fees, at the invoiced amount plus administrative costs. Unless the amount totals less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00), the Town shall draw against the escrow account or bill the subdivider monthly for expenses incurred by the Town. Statements outstanding for more than thirty (30) days shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent  (1-1/2%) per month.   Bills outstanding for more than ninety  (90) days
\shall be forwarded to the subdivider's surety agency for payment.   Amounts less
than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) shall be held for billing by the Town until amounts total more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) or until the conclusion of project activities.
(2)	Escrow for Fees.
a.	At such time as the subdivider submits a Preliminary Plat or Certified Survey Map for review by the Town, it shall deposit with the Clerk, in escrow, the sum required by the following schedule to guarantee the timely payment of the Town's administrative costs:
1.	Minor   Subdivision	(Certified   Survey  Map):	Three   Hundred   Dollars
($300.00).










 
 
Subdivision Regulations
:14-1-90


2.		Subdivisions:	One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each  five (5) lots or units, up to a maximum of Five Thousand Dollars  ($5,000.00).
b.	In the event the amount deposited with the Clerk falls below twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount required to be deposited, the subdivider agrees, as a condition of application, to replenish the escrow to the original amount required hereunder.   The subdivider agrees to deposit such additional sum within fifteen
(15) days of written demand  by the Town Clerk or the consideration and/or approval of the proposed land division may be delayed or rejected.   The Town is not under any obligation at any time to provide notice to the subdivider that the escrow funds under this provision are insufficient. Statements outstanding for more than thirty (30) days shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) per month. In the event the subdivider withdraws his/her plat or certified survey map, or the same is approved, and money remains in escrow over and above the Town's fees, the excess shall be refunded to the subdivider. The escrow account shall not draw interest for the benefit of the subdivider. The Clerk, with the approval of the Town Board, shall have the right to draw upon the escrow to reimburse the Town for the fees it has incurred in reviewing the minor subdivision or subdivision on a periodic basis.
c.	An accounting of all fees incurred by the Town and the status of the escrow shall
also be provided to the subdivider periodically. The Town will provide the subdivider with amounts paid from any such  escrow account and copies of invoices it receives for any professional review services for the subdivider's proposed subdivision. In the event the subdivider defaults in establishing or replenishing the escrow, the Town shall not be required to act further upon the subdivider's request. Failure to replenish the escrow shall be sufficient cause to reject the minor subdivision or subdivision.



Sec. 14-1-91 through Sec. 14-1-99 ·	Reserved for Future Use.

























 
 
Subdivision  Regulations
Appendix:  Sample Agreement


APPENDIX

Sample Agreement as to Costs With the Town of Cady



------------------ - The applicant/petitioner for	dated	_    	
(nature of application/petition)

agrees, in addition to those normal costs payable by an applicant/petitioner (e.g. filing, or permit fees, publication expenses, recording fee, etc.), that in the event the action applied or petitioned for requires the Town of Cady, in the judgment of its staff, to  obtain additional professional services(s) (e.g. engineering, surveying, planning, environmental, recreational, legal) than normally would be routinely available "in house" to enable the Town to properly address, take appropriate action on, or determine the same, appli­ cant/petitioner  shall reimburse the Town for the costs thereof.

 
Dated this   	
 
day of	_
 




(Signature of Applicant/Petitioner)































t'-1-- Le  I
 
Article J:	Variances; Penalties and Violations 	




Sec. 14-1-100  Variations and Exceptions.

(a)	Where, in the judgment of the Town Board, it would be inappropriate to apply literally the provisions of this Chapter because exceptional or undue hardship would result, the Town Board may waive or modify any requirements to the extent deemed just and proper. Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the Preliminary Plat is filed for consideration, stating fully all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the Town Board in the analysis of the proposed project.
(b)	The Town Board shall not grant variations or exceptions to the regulations of this Chapter unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
(1)	The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
(2)	The conditions  upon  which the request for a variation  is based  are unique  to the
property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable generally to other property;
(3)	Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, financial hardship or self-imposed hardship, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
(4)	There would be no costs (present or future) to the Town resulting from the granting
of the variance or exception.
(c)	Such relief shall be granted without detriment to the public good, without impairing the intent and purpose of this Chapter or the desirable general development of the Town in accordance with any Town Comprehensive Plan or component thereof, this Chapter, or applicable Zoning Code. A majority vote of the entire membership of the Town Board shall be required to grant any modification of this Chapter, and the reasons shall be entered in the minutes of the Board.
(d)	The Town Board may waive the placing of monuments, required under Sec. 236.15(b), (c)
and (d), Wis. Stats., for a reasonable time on condition that the subdivider execute a surety bond to insure the placing of such monuments within the time required.



Sec. 14-1-101 Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies.

:i\Ca) Violations. It shall be unlawful to build upon, divide, convey, record or monument any land in violation of this Chapter or the Wisconsin Statutes and no person shall be issued a building  permit  by  the  Town  authorizing  the  building  on,  or  improvement  of,  any









 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-101


subdivision, land division or replat with the jurisdiction of this Chapter not of record as of the effective date of this Chapter until the provisions and requirements of this Chapter have been fully met. The Town may institute appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin violations of this Chapter or the applicable Wisconsin Statutes.
(b)	Penalties.
(1)	Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply· with the provisions of  this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit no less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and the costs of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until payment thereof, but not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2)	Recordation improperly made has penalties provided in Sec. 236.30, Wis. Stats.
(3)	Conveyance of lots in unrecorded plats has penalties provided for in Sec. 236.31, Wis.
Stats.
(4)	Monuments disturbed or not placed have penalties as provided for in Sec. 236.32, Wis. Stats.
(5)	Assessor's plat made under Sec. 70.27 of the Wisconsin Statutes may be ordered by the Town at the expense of the subdivider when a subdivision is created by successive divisions.
(c)	Revocation of Permits and/or Approvals.
(1)	The Town Engineer, Town Chairperson or Building Inspector may revoke or suspend any permit or approval issued under the regulations of this Chapter and may stop construction or use of approved materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances for any of the following reasons:
a.	Whenever the Town Engineer shall find at any time that applicable ordinances,
laws, orders, plans and specifications are not being complied with and that the subdivider or his contractor has refused to conform after written warning or instruction has been issued to him.
b.	Whenever the continuance of any construction becomes dangerous to life or property.
c.	Whenever there is any violation of any condition or provisions of the application for permit, or of the permit or of any approval.
d.	Whenever, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, Town Chairperson or Building
Inspector, the subdivider has provided inadequate management of the project.
e.	Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made in the application for permit, plans, drawings, data specifications or certified lot or plot plan on which the issuance of the permit or approval was based.
f.	Whenever there is a violation of any of the conditions of an approval or occupancy given by the Town Engineer, Town Chairperson or Building Inspector for the use of all materials, equipment, methods of construction, devices or appliances.









 
 
Land Division and Subdivision Code
14-1-101


(2)	The notice revoking a permit or approval shall be in writing and may be served upon the applicant of the permit, owner of the premises and his/her agent, if any, and/or on the person having charge of construction.
(3)	A revocation placard shall also be posted upon the premises in question by the Town
Engineer, Town Chairperson  or Building Inspector.
(4)	After the notice is served upon the persons as aforesaid and posted, it shall  be unlawful for any person to proceed thereafter with any construction operation whatsoever on the premises, and the permit which has been so revoked shall be null and void, and before any construction or operation is again resumed, a new permit, as required by this Chapter, shall be procured and fees paid therefor, and thereafter the resumption of any construction or operation shall be in compliance with the regulation of this Chapter. However, such work as the Town Engineer, Town Chairperson or Building Inspector may order as a condition precedent to  the reissuance of the building permit may be performed, or such work as he/she may require for the preservation  of life and safety.
(5)	Any appeals of such revocations or suspensions must be made in writing and within
seven (7) calendar days to the .Town Clerk for consideration by the Town Board  at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided  the appeal is filed not less than seven
(7) days prior to the meeting date.
(6)	The Building Inspector is hereby directed to withhold the issuance of building permits within the land division until compliance with the provisions of this Chapter is obtained.
(7)	The Building  Inspector  is  hereby  directed  to  withhold  the  issuance  of  occupancy
permits within the land division if violations of this Chapter may result in health or safety problems for the occupants.
(d)	Appeals. Any person  aggrieved by an objection to a plat or a failure to approve a plat may appeal therefrom, as provided in Sections 236.13(5) and 62.23(7)(e)10, 14 and 15 of the Wisconsin Statutes, within thirty (30) days of notification of the rejection of the plat. Where failure to approve is based on an unsatisfied objection, the agency making the objection shall be made a party to the action. The court shall direct that  the plat  be approved if it finds that the action of the approving or objecting agency is arbitrary, unreasonable  or discriminatory.






















 
 
Title	14 ..,.   Chapter  2

Subdivision Plat Moratorium






14-2-1           Moratorium on Plats for Planning Purposes




Sec. 14-2-1	Moratorium On Plats For Planning Purposes.

(a)	The Town of Cady Town Board and Plan Commission are studying and considering the adoption of a comprehensive Town Land Division Ordinance. To foster this process of thoughtful planning, a temporary suspension of accepting applications for, and the review and granting of approvals/disapprovals of preliminary and/or final subdivision plats, for 90 days creates an adequate opportunity to properly and fairly complete this research and adoption process. The Town Board hereby enacts said ninety (90) day  moratorium, effective after original date of passage/posting.
(b)	Any subdivision plat filed for review by the Town after the effective date ofthis Ordinance
shall only be considered under the regulations in place at the expiration of this moratorium; this moratorium is only inapplicable to applications properly filed with the Town Clerk that fully satisfy the then applicable requirements of Town, County and other pertinent subdivision arid related regulations (private septic regulations, driveway access standards, etc.) in effective prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
(c)	During the time of this moratorium,  no action by the Town shall be taken  to review  or
approve/disapprove any preliminary and/or final subdivision plat, nor shall applications for such plats be accepted. If the Town Board should fail to prepare and  adopt  new  or successor regulations/ordinances governing the review and acceptance/disapproval of preliminary and/or final plats prior to the expiration of the 90 day moratorium, then this Ordinance shall automatically terminate without any further review or action by the Town Board, and be deemed, for all purposes, to be null and void. The Town Board reserves the right to terminate the 90 day moratorium period earlier if no longer necessary to safeguard proper  planning.



















 
 

 


 





 
The Town Board of



i,
 
St.
 

 
Sections 11-7-1 th..rough  1 follows:
 
of the Town of	of Ordinances are created to read  as
 



 






 







 




businesses  as well
 

(b)	The Town of Cady finds used  for unlawful sexual
sexual liaisons of a casual nature;
(c)	The concern over """'u<U.q of the Town of Cady, oriented businesses public; and
(d)	There is convincing arn un1en1ea
have a deleterious
 

oriented  businesses  are  frequently including  prostitution,  pandering.  and

concern re;;1sona:J1e regulation of sexually the  health  and  well-being  of  the

onented businesses businesses around them and the
to  them,  causing and diminished
 







(f)


It  is  not









 


(1)


















(b)	me adver	
se	of
	adult uses on communities stated above, and on	incorporated in the
 

cases of City of Erie  v. Pap's	120 S.Ct  1382 (2000); City of Renton
v. Playtime  Theatres, Inc.,  475 U.S. 41 (1986);  Young v. American  jl;Jini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); and Barnes  V. Glen Theatre, Inc.,  501 U.S.
560 (1991); Arcara v.	697,	California
v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109	Newport, Ky., 479 U.S.
92 (1986); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); Schultz. v. City of
Cumberland, Case Nos. 98-4126 and 98-4209 (7th Cir., September 26, 2000)
(2000 U.S. App.	107 F.3d
403 (6th Cir.  1997);
1986); Hang  On, Inc.




































 

 
 



(b)
 

distinguished or  nai·actcrizcd. by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or	anatomical areas."
or business  which  provides  the all forms and	hydrother-
 
apy, that is not operated
therapist   licensed   by  the provides  to  its  patrons  an
 
a medical practitioner or a professional physical State  of  Wisconsin  and  which  establishment
engaging  in  specified  sexual
 
activities as defined in this ,,A,•«IJ''"'
(c)	or business  wherein





sale or rental  for  any







































or the removal  of articles of clothing to reveal
 

(g)

 






(h)
 
operated  video  or distinguished   or describing, or
areas as defined

services
or partially nude otherwise.
 










lhan

the room

lj)





(k)



















to, any
adult entertainment studio or any	1..-u.u0 -"  that is physically  arranged and
used   as  such  whether	or ..,,, ,,.,,, .,.J>rPn  as an adult entertainment
 

studio, rap studio, exotic dance	encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other term of like import.
(m)                   A             concert                    or             commercial establishment that regularly  features        who appear, in person,  in a state  of  nudity                                     and/or  live  performances   that  are
characterized  by	specified  anatomical  areas"  or  by

(n)	enclosures as are specifically offered to the public or members of an                  establishment for hire or for a fee as part  of  a business  operated  on the
business the	to be """""''"'"
such  enclosures  ""'"n ,,-,
 
dispensed enclosure.
 
a  fee  is  not  charged  for
 
access  to  the enclosures
 
that are private v.uiv ""
 
HH•U'-'-.h -"''   or	employed
employment,  which



















orientecl e 1tablishrnent  i11  relurn  tu1  the
or
 

!._',..::;





( )






 


business.
 
said exclusively on the premises
 





(u)
 

for repair or
for the delivery of goods to person exclusively on the
 

rm m1se:s or equipment on the premises, or nor  does  "employee"  include  a
or customer.
 
(1)	Any  person  who  appears  in  a  state  of  nudity  or  semi-nudity  in  a sexually  oriented  business;  or
(2)	that are characterized by


 




(w)
 
companion, guide, or privately  model lingerie person.
 
agrees or offers to
for  another



business
 








(3)
 

and  parking   lots  and/or  parking	adjacent  thereto,  under  the ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the business.
(ee)   Sexual              The               of  any  of  the  following:     sexual intercourse, sodomy,                                      human                  masturbation,
sadism,  masochism,	exhibition  of  human
genitals.
(ff)   Sexual                             A business or commercial enterprise that, as one if its principal                                                  any          of consideration: ( 1)    Physical contact in the form of                 or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
(2)	Activities between male	and/or nPr<:r>TI"
 
sex nudity.
 
one or more	or semi-
 
(.· gg;	individuals     that



(hh)




covered:


 



 







(1)	synagogue,
 

(2)	Seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a school; public or private preschool, elementary, middle or high school; or youth recreational center, or library;
(3)	Seven hundred             of a licensed        care center, clinic or hospital;
(4)	Seven hundred fifty (750)	of a public park;
(5)	Seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any property zoned residential.
(c)	A	business		same building, structure, or portion		sexuaHy oriented business.
(d)	For the purpose of	Chapter, measurement shall be made in a straight line,  1,vithout regard to		structures or objects, from the nearest
 
portion  of the
 



above.
 
i.;n'"'"'"""" where a property  line  or
 






 
 

(e)	It  shall be    of    operator  of  each  sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the                                     at                  during such sexually oriented	It  shaH  be  the            of  the
attendant to prohobit any       under the age      eighteen ( 18) years of age from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant  knew  a person  was  under  the  age of                  ( 18) unless  such
attendant asked  for           
(1)	Operator's, commercial                                                       license; or
(2)	Personal  identification  card	of  residence  of the individual seeking		is eighteen  (18)
years of age; or
(f)	 


on   these




















business  from  or into  an
oriented  business.	The	of   a  sexually   oriented husiness  shall  not  be  visible  by  any  means  from  another  premise,
 











(j)
 
whether  adjoining  or  separate,  which  is  not  a  sexually  oriented business.
(2) While a performance is in progress, the establishment shall be adequately		so as to		and egress from the premises.
(3)	The license holder shall	that building capacity limits as set by
the Fire Department  and/or -......,.., or	Codes are complied with at all times.
 
a register of all employees, showing the
birth date, sex,

 
and jobs.  The above information on
the register on the premises of a termination.
 



years following
 
 



 











only to UUUHUH.•'-'
on the community. these establishments.
 


Sec. 1

 
(a)
 


txceJ)t as	below, no
sexually oriented business shall be operated or maintained within the corporate limits of       Town of Cady             first obtaining a license to operate issued by the            of   
(2)	A	one (1)
sexually oriented business             at a fixed and certain place per filed
partnership, or	which desires to
 


(3)






(b)
 

the  business	or  trade  name  under  which  the  applicant operated that was subject to	suspension or revocation:.


of nolo contendere on all charges,	traffic offenses;
h.		Two (2) portrait photographs of at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches of the applicant;
t.	The address of the	to	operated
by the  u u· · ••»
J.	Proof of right to occupy under Subsection (c)(4) below; and
k.	If the applicant is a	the	specify the the	· ,

(3)





















3.



D.


2.







3.
 

c.	If the  applicant  is a                 venture,  limited  liability company or any other type of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest:
1.	All persons	a	interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other        of organization shall be at least eighteen
(18) years of age;
2.	Subject  to  Chapter	no  person  having  a
financial  interest  in                                          venture,  or  other
type of organization                                      of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution or other of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction              five                                                         the

interest in  the partnership, joint shall have been found to


(2)















a.






venture.
ct






 
(e)
 


license
wm terminate  on  June  30  of  the  year
 


to  this  Section
unless  sooner
 

opcratjon  is  allowed  in  the
to renew a license shall make application to the Town Clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than sixty (60) days before the license expires. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed by the Town Clerk to the Building  Inspector,                             law enforcement authority, and the applicant.  The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the Town Clerk and shall contain such information and  data,  given  under  oath  or       as  is  required  for  an application      a new "'"''""''"'·
(2)	Fee,   A	business license renewal fee of
Three   Hundred   Dollars	shall	submitted  with  the application for each renewal







































 
b.	The Tovvn Clerk shall applications  shall  be under   oath	the
 


'""''""·    a  statement armlication   remains   correct   as
' '
 

" ''nn. shall contain a statement under oath that the individual signing the transfer application has personal knowledge of the information contained therein and that the information is true and correct and shall not be complete unless                         a                       transfer fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). Transfer applications shall be
filed in the same place	at the same time as original applica-
tions,  and the fee shall be	the  same manner  as

 
(2)
 


to appeal in the same manner as uu.i:;ll•H.U   ,.,..,H ··"""u•
be  issued	the
 

(3)


































C'L

e.
use,	be a
measured  from the floor.
 









(i)
 

one	occupy a booth, room or
No              same               m        type of specified sexual activity, cause     bodily discharge or litter while in lhe booth. No person shall alter, damage or deface any portion of any such booth, room or cubicle in such a manner that it no longer complies with the

""''""'''"' v    onen1rea  business  ljcense granted  herein  may sm;pe:naea,  or not renewed
a.	has made o.r n i;01·aeci this  Section knowing  it to be deceptive;
b.	For  the  violation  of  any	except  for
matters
Codes, in such case the license
(2nd)	thereof in any Jicense year;
 
c.








rl








f.
g.














The notice
to the date of the np;,nnu
 





















(a)








(b)
 

       to  be  represented  by
counse1. to                                                         IO            witnesses on his or
her own behalf under subpoena by the Town Board if such is required, on his or her own behalf under subpoena by the Town Board if such is required, and the hearing may stenographically recorded at the licensee's option and expense.   At                         such                      Town Board shall prepare findings of        conclusions as to what, if any, action the Town Board will  with respect to the sexually oriented license.  The Town Board shall provide the                                           a          of the report.



1
 
























 

In addition to any other "'"'"''c
including the action of license revocation or nn,n-rP1r'l.P1i'15'
of  the  provisions  of
 

Dollars ($250.00), but not more than One		for each and every offense,	with the costs    costs are not paid, such person so convicted shaII be	to any civil penalties
or other penalties available by law.  Each violating incident or day in violation shall be a separate C'\TT.PnC:P



 

 
If any provision Ordinance  to any unconstitutionality can be given
 


or	invalidity  or
or applications of this Ordinance which
or applications.
 





This   take effect
 






 







 
Town Clerk
 


 
 














TITLE 6




 
  lie



Chapter 1
Chapter 2
 
orks



Highway Construction Driveways; Culverts
 





































(Q - l
 
ORDINANCE NO.	J   -- )-ov ·7
TOWN OF CADY
An Ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 2-2005 Regulating Highway Construction The Town Board of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, hereby
ordains as follows:

Section 1.  Town of Cady Ordinance No. 2-2005 Sec. 6-1-1 ( r ) (2) shall be amended to read as follows:

(2) Submittal. The completed permit application shall be submitted to the Plan Commission along with a preliminary plan view showing the extent of the development, if any,  the point(s) of access to an existing public highway(s), the location and length of the new Town highway centerline, and preliminary lot layout for all lots which will be provided access by the Town Highway.  The applicant shall also submit road construction plans prepared by an engineer which show to the Town's satisfaction that the road shall be built to town specifications.

Section 2.  Town of Cady Ordinance No. 2-2005, Sec. 6-1-1 (t) shall be amended to read as follows:

(t) Expert Assistance.   The Town Board may hire a consultant(s)  (such as the Town Engineer, County Highway Commissioner, etc.) to review the application, certified survey map/plat and site, if necessary.  The cost of the consultant and all costs incurred in the development and construction of said Town highway shall be the responsibility of the applicant and/or property owner on whose property the road is being built.  The Town may, at its option, consider the property owner to
be primarily responsible.  At the time of road permit application,  the applicant
shall be required to pay to the Town a review deposit in the amount of Five Hundred Dollars.  Said amount shall be used to pay any consultants the Town retains to review the road permit application.   In the event the amount deposited with the Town  falls below twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount originally required to be deposited, the Town Board shaii have the authority to require the applicant to replenish the amount on deposit to the original amount required in this section.  If the deposit amount is not replenished the Town will not process the application any further.  After the road is completed and accepted by the Town and all consultants are paid, any amounts remaining on deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.	Any costs the Town incurs in reviewing a road permit application, including consultant costs as provided herein,  shall be considered special charges for current services to the property under Wis. Stat. 66.0627.  If the applicant and/or property owner fails to pay any consultant fees when billed,
such amount remaining unpaid shall be certified against the property on which the
road is built or proposed to be built as a special charge under Sec. 66.0627 for collection along with the property taxes.

Section 3.  Except as amended above or by other ordinances amending
 
Ordinance No. 2-2005, all other provisions of Ordinance No. 2-2005 shall remain as originally adopted and shall be in continuing effect.

Section 4.  Effective Date.  This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by law.

Adopted by the  Town Board this	;2._	day of January, 2007

TOWN OF CADY

Dennis B);9en, Town C 8ffe	J
ATTEST:	(_. X;f	.
Carla Greiber, Town Clerk
 

Title 6	Chapter	1

ighway Construction






6-1-1	Town Highway  Construction  Standards




Sec. 6-1-1	Town Highway Construction Standards.

(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to promote the safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, and others who travel the Town's highways by providing for the orderly layout and construction of Town highways, roads and streets ("highway" and/or "road"). If a new parcel(s) is being created by subdivision or certified survey map causing the need for new highways, roads or streets, the location of such new highways, roads or streets shall be approved by the Town Board, following a recommendation of the Plan Commission, pursuant to the Town's Land Division Ordinances.
(b)	Definition. Per Chapter 82, Wis. Stats., all Town roads,  highways  or  streets  shall  be termed "Town highways." A "Town highway" is any highway that the Town of Cady holds fee simple title to or has prescriptive rights in. Generally, the Town of Cady considers a highway to be a Town highway if it appears on  the  Wisconsin  Department  of Transportation  Highway  Aids map, which is reviewed  and approved by the Town.
(c)	Naming of Highways. Prior to completion of a new highway application,  propose_d highway names shall be  submitted to both  the Town of Cady and St. Croix County for preliminary approval, with particular attention paid  to the needs  of emergency  personnel and vehicle response requirements. Highway names shall be assigned as set forth in Sec. 82.03(7), Wis. Stats., and shall be subject to approval by the Town Board.
(d)	Right-of-Way Standards. Per Sec. 82.18, Wis. Stats., all Town highways shall have a right of way width of sixty-six (66) feet or greater unless, in the. Town Board's discretion, that width is impractical solely due to unique terrain characteristics of the location. If the Town Board determines that a sixty-six (66) foot width is impractical, the width shall be determined by the Town Board but shall be at least forty-nine and five-tenths (49.5) feet in width. The Town Board reserves the right to require rights-of-way greater than sixty-six
(66)  feet where  it is deemed  necessary  for  anticipated  heavy  traffic,  vision  clearance  or other public purpose  needs.
(e)	Clear-Cut Zone. In locating new Town roads in heavily wooded areas, a minimum clear­
cut width  of not  less than  thirty  (30) feet  from the centerline  shall be  acceptable.	Said
 
Highway Construction
6-1.-1.


clear-cut width shall be recommended to the Town Board by the Town Superintendent of Highways or Town Chairperson at the time of the permit application and site inspection.
(f)	length. No Town highway right-of-way shall be  less than five hundred (500) feet in length, unless a variance is granted by the Town Board due to the nature of the development.
(g)	Dead-End Highways.
(1)	Turnaround Requirements.   All dead-end highways, regardless of length, shall have a cul-de-sac or a "T" turnaround, as directed by the Town Board.
(2)	Cul-de-Sac  Radius  Specifications.	A  cul-de-sac  right-of-way  radius  shall be  a
minimum of eighty (80) feet, have a base course radius not less than sixty-two (62) feet, and a pavement radius not less than sixty (60) feet.
(3)	"T" Turnaround Standards. A "T" turnaround shall be at right angles to the centerline of the highway, have a sixty-six (66) foot wide right-of-way, a minimum base width of not less than thirty-four (34) feet, a minimum paved surface of not less than twenty (20) feet, and be not less than sixty (60) feet long on both sides of the highway centerline.
(4)	Construction Standards. Construction standards for a "T" turnaround and a cul-de­ sac shall be the same as those delineated under Subsection (i) below. All Town highway requirements for shoulders, clearance and ditching shall apply to the entire length of the "T" turnaround and the cul-de-sac.
(h)	Highway Width.
(1)	Standard Highways. Town highways with a projected average daily traffic count shall have a twenty-two (22) foot minimum of paved driving surface, gravel shoulders a minimum of two (2) feet  in width, and a surface  crown of 2.2% slope at the centerline of the highway.  The Town Board may approve a narrower pavement width if it is deemed that a twenty-two (22) foot width is impractical due to the unique physical limitations of the proposed highway location.
(2)  Commercial/Industrial  Traffic  Highways.  Commercial/industrial  highways  may require greater structural requirements than those residential requirements  specified in this Section. Any additional construction requirements, and final approvals, shall be determined by the Town Board.
(i)	Construction Standards.  All highways constructed in the Town shall fully comply with the following construction standards:
(1)	Topsoil Removal. All topsoil shall first be removed. In order to ensure a stable foundation for the roadway, unstable fill, stumps, marsh/swamp material, muck, large rocks, old culverts, and other foreign material shall be removed from under the area of the roadway and replaced with sand, pit run or other Town-approved materials and brought up to grade before the sub-base is placed. Where such potentially unstable sub-base materials exist, the Town Board may require that such removed material be replaced with a minimum of eighteen (18) inches of fabric-reinforced sand where deemed necessary by the Town 'Board due to soil types.
 
Highway Construction
6-1.-1


(2)	Sub-Base.
a.	The width  [see Subsection (h) above] of all highways  shall have:
1.	A compacted sub-base of eight (8) inches of breaker rock [three (3) to six
(6) inch crusher run stone];
2.	Twelve (12) inches of sand: and
3.	A top course of five (5) inches of compacted one and one-quarter (1 1/4") inch gravel, limestone or other Town-approved material;  each course  shall be compacted  at each interval.
b.	Additional material may be needed to create stability in problem areas. The need for additional sub-base material(s) will be determined by the Town Board, following a recommendation from the Superintendent of Highways,  with assistance by an engineer employed by the Town, if needed.
(3)	Shoulders; Utility Setbacks. Crushed limestone shall be applied to the shoulder compacted flush with the paved area at a width of two (2) feet. Utility setbacks shall be twelve (12) feet on each side of the highway.
(4)	Surfacing. Surfacing shall be an applied minimum of two and one-half (2-1/2) inches of Asphaltic Type AC Penetration 120-150 Single Aggregate Bituminous Pavement (compacted). The Town Board may.require greater pavement thickness where traffic volumes  and composition  dictate the need.
(5)	Cleanup. All unearthed rubbish or similar materials shall be removed from the site.
U) Ditches. Ditching of the roadway must be complete and have proper elevation to provide adequate drainage. The Town Board, upon the recommendation of the Superintendent of Highways, shall determine the ditching requirements pursuant to Section 14-1-71 standards.
_	(k) Back  and Side Slopes. All highways  shall have  an eight (8) foot fore slope and back slope with a four to one (4: 1) pitch, except where geographic features or terrain would not allow for the same, but in no case shall the slope be greater than two and one-half to one foot (2 1/2:1).
(1)	Town Highway Culverts.
(1)	Minimum Length. Any Town under-highway culvert necessary for proper drainage shall be installed after proper elevation and location is obtained from the Town Superintendent of Highways, with assistance from an engineer, as needed. The minimum length of any culvert installed in a road bed shall be, at a minimum, two
(2)	feet greater  than  the base  course width.	Apron  end  walls  shall be  installed  as
dictated by the Town Superintendent of Highways.
(2) Culvert Diameter.  The culvert diameter and length shall be subject to the approval of the Town Board, following a recommendation from the Superintendent of Highways, after the amount of flowage is determined.  In no case shall the culvert be less than eighteen
(18) inches in diameter.
(m)	Private Driveway Culverts.  The developer/applicant  shall be responsible  for the installation of all private driveway culverts, and the cost thereof, necessary to serve parcels fronted by the new highway. Private driveway culverts shall be installed as prescribed  in the Town of Cady's ordinances governing private driveway culverts.                                ·
(n)	Curves and Inclines. All curves and inclines shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in Sec. 86.26, Wis. Stats., which  are incorporated  herein  by  reference.





 
 
Highway    Construction 6-:1-:1
/

(o)	Vision Corners.
(1)	Vision Clearance Triangle. In each quadrant of every Town highway  intersection there shall be a visual clearance triangle bounded by the highway centerline and a line connecting points on them as prescribed. In each quadrant of every highway intersection, there shall be designated a visual clearance triangle bounded by the road centerline and a line connecting then three hundred (300) feet from a "Class A" (state or federal numbered) highway intersection, two hundred (200) feet from a "Class B" (county trunk) highway intersection, and one hundred fifty (150) feet from a "Class C" (Town highway) intersection. If two highways of a different class intersect, the largest distance shall apply to both centerlines. Within this triangle, no object over two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height above the roads shall be allowed if it obstructs the view across the triangle. Posts or open fences are excluded from this provision. Tree trunks shall be exempt where they are unbranched to a height of ten (10) feet and located a minimum of thirty (30) feet apart.
(2)	Ground-Mounted Items. Traffic signs, telephone poles and power transmission poles are permitted. Permanently-mounted ground level equipment must receive approval from the Town Superintendent of Highways prior to installation. The location of said equipment shall be designated by the Town Superintendent of Highways and all locations shall have orange markers. Trees in the vision clearance triangle must not obstruct the view to a height of ten (10) feet.
(3)	Greater Requirements. All Town highways intersecting with state or  county highways must meet the requirements of the state or county if their vision corner requirements are greater than those of the Town.
(4)	Trimming Easement. The property owner/developer shall furnish to the Town of Cady a recordable easement to trim vegetation within the vision corners based on the specifications listed with this Section.
(p)	Access.
(1)	Access Limits. Wherever possible, for each one-quarter  mile of an existing Town road not more than one (1) road may be constructed to adjoin the existing road.
(2)	Access Permits.  The property owner/developer  shall obtain a permit from the State
of Wisconsin Department of Transportation for access to state and federal highways, and from the St. Croix County Highway Department for access to any county highway.
(q) Topsoil, Grass, Seeding. All disturbed areas (ditches, back slopes and fills) within the highway right-of-way not provided with surfacing and shouldering material shall be restored, seeded for permanent cover, and protected by proper erosion control materials.
(r)	Permit Application.
(1)	Permit Required. No person, partnership, company or corporation shall commence construction of any Town highway which is intended to provide public access to more than one ( 1) landowner without first obtaining a Town Highway Permit Application and a copy of this Ordinance from the Town Clerk.










 
 
Highway Construction
6-1-1


(2)	Submittal. The completed permit application shall be submitted to the  Plan Commission along with a preliminary plan view showing the extent of the development, the point(s) of access to an existing public highway(s), the location and length of the new Town highway centerline, and preliminary lot layout for all lots which will be provided  access by the Town highway.
(3)	Review; Approval.  The Plan Commission will review the permit application and plan
view as prepared by the applicant and make an advisory recommendation to the Town Board. The Town Board shall then consider the application and  the  Plan Commission's recommendation  and make a determination regarding the request.
(s)	Highway Survey. All  applications for a new Town highway shall be accompanied by a survey of said proposed highway delineating public utility placement and a corresponding legal description for said highway. Said certified survey/plat shall be performed by a land surveyor licensed by the State of Wisconsin. The cost of said certified survey/plat is the responsibility  of the private land owner and/or developer.
(t)	Expert Assistance. The Town Board may hire a consultant(s) (such as  the  Town Engineer, County Highway  Commissioner, etc.) to review the application, certified survey map/plat, and site, if necessary. The cost of the consultant and all costs incurred in the development and construction of said Town highway shall be assumed by the property owner/developer.
(u)	Bridges. If a bridge is necessary to serve the site, such bridge shall be paid for by the applicant and shall be of a design and location approved by the Town Board, following recommendations  from the Town Engineer and other regulation  agencies.
(v)	Phased Construction; Performance Bond.
(1)	At the option of the Town Board, the applicant(s) may prepare the highway (grade, ditch and gravel, etc.) one year and surface it the next year in  order  to  further compact the roadbed.
(2) The applicant (i.e. subdivider or landowner) shall be responsible for payment of all costs of highway construction under this Ordinance made necessary by his/her' development project, including surfacing.  The applicant(s) shall provide to the Town a bond, cash escrow agreement or irrevocable letter of credit which shall enable the Town to finish the road in case of default by the applicant(s). The performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or cash escrow account agreement shall be equal to one and one-quarter (1 1/4) times the estimated cost of the required improvements, as determined by the Town. If the required improvements are not completed within an eighteen ( 18) month period, all amounts held under the escrow agreement, irrevocable letter of credit, or performance bond shall be turned over and delivered to the Town and applied to the cost of the required improvements. Any balance remaining after such improvements have been made shall be returned to the property owner or developer.	The Town Board, at its option, may extend the bond period for any additional period not to exceed one (1) year; however, the initial bond  shall  be required to run one ( 1) year beyond the initial date of acceptance of improvements.










 
 
Highway Construction
6-1-1


(w)	Required Inspections; Deficiencies.
(1)	Mandatory Inspections. The contractor shall notify the Town Superintendent of Highways or Town Clerk prior to the start of construction and when each stage of construction is ready for inspection. A minimum of three (3) inspections, paid for by the applicant, shall take place at the following phases of construction, conducted by the Superintendent of Highways, Town Chairperson and/or Town Engineer:
a.	Clearing, stripping of topsoil and stump removal; shaping of road bed grade and sloping of ditches;
b.	Application of base course, culverts and seeding; and
c.	Bituminous surface course, shouldering and cleanup.
(2)	Inspection Report. The inspection report shall be completed after each phase of inspection, with a verbal or written report presented to the Town Board.
(3)	Deficiencies. Any deficiencies found by the Superintendent of Highways, Town Chairperson and/or Town Engineer shall be corrected before proceeding to the next phase of construction.
(x)	Test of Materials. The Town reserves the right to obtain a sample of the roadway base material prior to placement on the roadway for purposes of determining whether the material meets gradation and soundness requirements.
(y)	Pavement Samples. Samples of material may be required to be taken by the Town at the contractor's expense during pavement construction operations for purposes of determining that the material meets specifications.
(z)	Final Inspection.
(1)	Upon completion of the proposed highway, the Town Superintendent of Highways, Town Engineer and/or Town Board shall proceed to make a final inspection, accepting or rejecting the highway as the case may be. After all of the provisions of this Section have been complied with, the highway will be inspected by the Town Board or designees, and, at that time, proof will be made by the presenting of waivers of liens or receipted bills that all work that has been done has been paid for in full or arrangements have been made for the payment through written instrument by the developer/applicant.	If the highway is rejected, corrections shall be made as recommended by the Town Board before final inspection can then be made again. New highways constructed shall fully comply with all requirements of this Section as a condition of Town acceptance.
(2)    If final acceptance is made by the Town Board, the property owner(s) shall turn over a Warranty Deed conveying title of the entire right-of-way to the Town of Cady, or through plat dedication per Chapter 236, Wis. Stats., and Town ordinances. Easement documents authorizing the Town to cut vegetation within vision clearance comers shall also be provided. All Town highways conveyed to the Town of Cady shall be free and clear of all lien encumbrances and restrictions, except utility easements. The cost of recordation shall be the responsibility  of the developer/property  owner.












 
 
Highway Construction
6-1-1


(aa) Appeals. The owner/developer has the right to appeal to the Town Board any decision/recommendation made by the Town Superintendent of Highways or Town Engineer.
(bb)  Applicability.
( 1) Validity After Effective Date. This  Section  shall  apply  to  all  highways,  the construction of which is completed after the original effective date of this Section and all existing highways which may in the future become dedicated for public use or submitted to the Town as a Town highway.
(2)	Existing Roads. This Section shall not require the Town of Cady to construct or reconstruct  any existing Town highway to the standards set forth in this Section.
(3)	Private Roads. After the original enactment of this Section, it is the policy of the Town of Cady not to allow private roads. However, private roads which  provide access to no more than two (2) lots or parcels may be permitted if first approved by the Town Board. Such private roads shall meet the design requirements for Town roads found in this Section
(cc)  Acceptance of Private Roads to Town Highways.
(1)	Statutory Procedure. Under the provisions of Sec. 82.10, Wis. Stats., application for acceptance of a private road to become a public town highway may be submitted to the Town Board for review and action by petition of a majority of property owners having frontage on said road.  The application shall contain all of the following:
a.	A legal description  of the road to be altered.
b.	A scale map of the land that would be affected by the application.
(2)	Acceptance Standards. With the adoption of the standards in this Section, the Town Board establishes the standards which existing private roads must meet to be accepted on a road-by-road basis by the Town as a public highway. All estimated costs for bringing the road up to the established standards, including bituminous surfacing, shall be prorated to all existing property owners having frontage on said private road or to those property owners which have consented, in writing, to pay for said improve: ments.	Any improvements made to the private road will be at no expense to the Town of Cady. If desired, the cost of said private road improvements will be applied as a special assessment per Sec. 66.0703, Wis. Stats., in an agreed upon time frame.
(3)	Certified Survey Map; Warranty Deed; Easements. Prior to Town Board acceptance, owners must provide a Certified Survey Map of said road right-of-way and proof of ownership to the Town Board. The Town Board shall comply with the provisions of Secs. 82.10 and 82.12, Wis. Stats. If final acceptance is made by the Town Board, the property owner(s) shall turn over a Warranty Deed conveying title of the entire right-of-way to the Town of Cady. Easement documents authorizing the Town to cut vegetation within vision corners must also be provided. All Town highways conveyed to the Town of Cady shall be free and clear of all lien encumbrances and restrictions, except utility easements. The cost of recordation shall be the responsibility of the dev loper/property owner.










 
 
Highway Construction
6-1-1


(4)	Improvements  Completion.	Improvements  to  the  former  private  road  shall  be completed within  one (1) year of Town Board  acceptance.
(dd) Variances. Where, in the judgement of the Town Board, it would be inappropriate  to literally apply the provisions of this Section, the Town Board may waive or modify any requirement  in accordance with this Subsection:
(1)	Conditions.  The Town Board may consider the following in exercising its judgment to waive or modify the requirements  of this Section:
a.	The  division  of  land  involves  the  transfer  of  property  within  the  immediate
family.
b.	Exceptional  and undue hardship would result, unique to the parcel involved.
c.	Other variance conditions spelled out in the Zoning Code governing the parcel which is in effect at the time the application has been filed.
(2)	Restrictions on Issuance.  The Town Board may waive or modify any requirements under this Section to the extent deemed just  and proper, provided:
a.	Such relief is granted without impairing the intent and purpose of this Section or
the desirable general development  of the Town of Cady.
b.	No variance or waiver may be granted that would be contrary to any Wisconsin Statute, the Wisconsin Administrative Code, County ordinances or the intent of this Section. Financial hardship alone for the applicant to fully comply with the requirements  of this Section shall not be the basis for a variance  or waiver..
(ee)  Violations and Penalties. The Town Board shall authorize issuance of a citation(s) to any person, firm or corporation who violates this Section, subject to the penalty provisions of	/ Section 1-1-6.  If found guilty of said violation, and needed correction is not completed
within ninety  (90) days of written notice from the Town, the Town shall hire a contractor to make the needed corrections and the cost of bringing the highway  to compliance with this Section shall be paid by the developer/property owner either directly or through the special assessment procedure in Sec. 66.0701, Wis. Stats. No building permits shall be issued for new construction on newly created lots if the highway serving such lot(s) is not in full compliance with this Section.
(ff) Highway Signage. On all highways constructed within the Town  of  Cady  (including private roads), the Town shall determine what signs are needed, including highway name, regulatory and traffic signs, order such signs, and have the signs installed. The statement for said signs and their installation shall be provided to the property owner/developer and shall be paid by the property  owner/developer prior to the dedication of the highway.
(gg) Conflict of Provisions. In the event the provisions of this Section conflict with any provision contained in a Town land division or other ordinance, the stricter provision shall be  applicable.
















 
 
Title 6	Chapter 2

Driveways; Culverts






6-2-1	Construction of Driveways; Placement of Culverts




Sec. 6-2-1	Construction of Driveways; Placement of Culverts.

(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to promote the safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Cady through Town authorization of driveway locations and minimum  standards which  allow proper  drainage of surface waters  within Town  ditches.
(b)	Definition.  A "driveway" is defined as a private roadway which serves no more than one
(1)	parcel of land owned by the same individual(s).
(c)	Driveway/Culvert Construction Application Required.
(1)	Application Requirement. No person, partnership, company  or  corporation  shall locate, establish or construct any new driveway or install or replace  any  culvert without having first obtained a Driveway/Culvert Construction Application from the Town Clerk or Building Inspector who shall collect the  fee  as  determined  by  the Town  Board.
(2)    Authorization Required Before Property Use Change.  Prior to the time the use of a property to be served by a driveway changes, the owner and/or his/her agent shall obtain a Construction Application from the Town Clerk/Building Inspector and approval from the Town of Cady before the new use of the property can commence:
(d)	Driveway Location Approval; Other Agency Approvals.
(1)	Location Approval. The Town Building Inspector or Superintendent of Highways shall make a recommendation on the location of any driveway which will intersect with any private road or Town highway located within the Town of Cady. The Town Building Inspector or Superintendent of Highways shall make a recommendation on the need for culverts on all driveways. No more than three (3) driveways shall be permitted along the arc of a cul-de-sac. Easements for driveways shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter. Driveway location applications shall be acted on by the Town Board.
(2)	Other Agency Approvals. The property owner/developer shall obtain permission from
the State of Wisconsin Department of Transportation for access to state and federal highways, and from the St. Croix County Highway Department for access to any county highway.










 
 
Driveways; Culverts
6-2-1


(e)	General Requirements and Design Standards.  The location, design and construction of driveways shall be in accordance with the following:
(1)	General Driveway Design.
a.	All driveway approaches shall be at least twenty (20) feet apart, and there shall be at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the driveway to the property line except by special permission from the Town Board. Driveways shall be of such width and so located that all of such driveways and their appurtenances are within the limits of the frontage abutting the street/road of the property being served.
b.	Driveways shall in all cases be placed wherever possible as to not interfere with
utilities in place.
(2)	Special Requirements for Driveways Over 150 Feet in Length; Special Situations.
a.	In addition to those driveway requirements prescribed in Subsection (e)(l) above, private driveways one hundred and fifty (150) feet and over in length, measured from the edge of the traveled surface of the intersecting highway to the structure, shall meet the following standards to permit access to principal buildings by Fire Department and/or other public  safety authorities:
1.	A minimum of a thirty-three  (33) foot right-of-way;
2.	A minimum clear-cut width of twenty (20) feet;
3.	A minimum driving surface of sixteen (16) feet;
4.	A minimum height clearance of fifteen (15) feet; and
5.	A minimum width of twenty-six  (26) feet for all aprons and approaches.
6.	The minimum size of a culvert in a road right-of-way  shall be eighteen (18") inches, with endwalls, twenty-six  (26) feet in minimum length.
7.	In addition for driveways over three hundred (300) feet in length, at least one
(1)	twenty-five (25) feet in length and eighteen (18) feet in width segment of road surface shall be provided for each three hundred (300) feet of driveway length for turnout purposes.
b.	Driveways of one hundred fifty (150) feet and over accessing parcels on which there  are no structural  improvements  are exempt from the requirements  of this
Subsection. However, if a structure is subsequently built, all standards and requirements for driveways and culverts prescribed by this Section shall then be fully complied with.
c.	The Building Inspector, based on recommendations  of the Fire Department, may
require additional clear-cut width clearances and extra driving surface widths to alleviate concerns caused by sharp curves, steep inclines or other situations which could interfere with emergency vehicles properly  and  safely  utilizing  the driveway.
(3)	Culverts.
a.	The Town Building Inspector or Superintendent of Highways shall make a recommendation on the need for culverts for all  driveways.  If culverts  are needed, the Building Inspector or Superintendent of Highways will determine the required culvert diameter, design/type and length based on the site location and drainage needs. Applications shall be acted on  by  the  Town  Board.  Used culverts  are not  permitted  without  Town Board  authorization.    Double-walled





 
 
Driveways; Culverts
6-2-1


PVC plastic pipe or concrete culverts may be used provided the Building Inspector or Superintendent of Highways determines adequate cover will be installed and it is determined that such culvert can be so placed as to not routinely be hit and damaged by maintenance and snowplowing equipment. In no case shall the culvert diameter be less than twelve (12) inches nor shall the culvert length be less two (2) feet greater than the width of the driveway. Endwalls need not be constructed unless so directed by the Town Board.
b.	Culverts shall be placed in the ditchline at elevations that will assure proper drainage.
c.	Material used for backfill shall be of a quality acceptable to the Town and shall be free from frozen lumps, wood, stumps, or other extraneous or perishable/bio­ degradeable materials.
d.	The minimum cover, measured from the top of the culvert pipe to the top of the subgrade, shall be six (6) inches.
e.	Erosion control measures shall be implemented as necessary to control erosion when culvert and/or driveways are installed, as directed by the Town.
f.	The property owner shall install the culvert and be responsible for the cost thereof. Illegal culverts shall be removed at the owner's expense following notice and a prior opportunity to correct. Maintenance of culverts and/or driveways and repair of defective culverts shall be the responsibility of property owners, except when the Town does a reditching project and culverts are replaced, the Town will replace the culvert and pay the cost thereof.
(4) Drainage; Apron Interference With Pavement Prohibited. The surface of the driveway connecting with the highway cross sections shall slope downward and away from the highway shoulder a sufficient distance to preclude ordinary surface water drainage from flowing onto the highway roadbed. Under no circumstances shall such driveway apron extend above any highway pavement surface.
(f)   Final Inspection/Approval.  The final inspection and approval for driveways will be made by the Town Chairperson, Town Building Inspector or Superintendent of Highways upon completion of construction.
(g)	Prohibited Driveways and/or Approvals. No person, firm or corporation shall place, construct, locate in, or cause to be placed, constructed or located in, any obstruction or structure within the right-of-way limits of any highway in the Town of Cady except as permitted by this Section. As used herein, the term "structure" includes private driveways, a portion of which extends into any highway, and which is in non-conformance with the requirements of this Section. Filling of ditches and/or culverts located within a public right-of-way is prohibited without written approval from the Town Board.
(h)	Applicability. This Section shall apply to all driveways constructed or reconstructed within the Town of Cady after the original effective date of this Section.
(i)	Appeals. The property owner/developer has the right to appeal to the Town Board any decision and/or recommendation  made by the Town Building  Inspector  or Superintendent of Highways.







-13
 
Driveways; Culverts
6-2-1


(j)     Enforcement.  No fire/address number or building permit for construction of any kind will be issued until such time as the Driveway/Culvert Construction Application has been approved.
(k)    Penalties.   Any person, partnership, company or corporation who violates any provision of this Section shall pay, when a permit fee is required, double the required fee and shall remove, alter or correct the installation as ordered by the Town of Cady. If the owner or occupant does not correct the installation as ordered by the Town within the allotted time, the expense and work of correcting the installation shall be done by the Town and the expenses thereof shall be charged against the property as a special charge pursuant to Sec. 66.0301, Wis. Stats., after notice and hearing. In addition, a forfeiture penalty may  also be applicable per Sec. 1-1-6, with each day of non-compliance being a separate violation.



















































 
 
The Cady Town Board approved Ordinance 2012‐4 “An Ordinance Extending a Moratorium on Expansion and Creation of New Nonmetallic Mining Operations”. The ordinance is posted at the Town Hall, Stockman Farm Supply and Kwik Trip (Hwy 128) and is also available at www.townofcady.com

Carla Greiber, Clerk
 
Town of Cady Address Sign Ordinance
 


STATE OF WISCONSIN TOWN OF CADY
ST CROIX  COUNTY
 
,.,	; (
;U I
 



The Town Board of the Town of Cady, St Croix County, Wisconsin, adopted by majority of the town board on a roll call vote with a quorum present and voting and proper hotice having been given, this ordinance which provides for the installation of address signs for properties with structure improvements in the town as follows:

A.		Address signs shall be placed 33 ft from the center of the road and 15 feet to the right of the driveway, where applicable. Any change in the location must receive approval of the Town Board or a designee of the board.

B.   The property owner will maintain the area around the sign so it is visible for emergency vehicles.

C.	The cost of a replacement sign that is lost or damaged will be charged to the property owner.


D.	Address signs needed for structures added to vacant land will be paid for by the property owner.


E.  The town chairperson or his or her designee, shall erect all address signs as provided in this ordinance after the effective date of this ordinance.
This ordinance is effective on	"?..( '1 f • 1

 


Stats.
 
The town clerk shalt properly post or publish this ordinance as required under s. 60.80, Wis.



Adopted this  "'1	day of  4-"'c..-1' 2011.
 




 


f\na...   T11ii"   rh'"'i.-m··u·"'
IVJl"'-c;  I UllY I "-'l JOH 11101 I
/1	I
 
\	/	7
 
elf l	-	I
 
JJ/./1;U/"rj k	( -I,
 

A11
 

Rogerfimm, Supervisor	Carla Greiber, Clerk
 
Ordinance to Extend Town Officer Terms In Response to Election Law Changes

No.  ;), O I J.



Whereas, the term of elected town officers (other than elected assessors) have previously begun on the 2nd Tuesday in April;

Whereas town officers (other than assessors) elected in April 2012 and thereafter will now have their terms of office commence on the 3rd Tuesday in April due to recent state election law changes;

Whereas this law change results in a week long "gap" between the end of the current terms of office for those town officers elected in either 2010 or 2011 and the start of the new terms of office for those officers elected in April 2012 or April 2013;

Whereas, 2011 Wis. Act 115 provides that a town board may enact an ordinance providing that the terms of any elective officers in the town who were elected or appointed to serve for terms expiring on the 2nd Tuesday in April 2012 or 2013 may be extended to the 3rd Tuesday in April in the same year in which the terms  would otherwise have expired;
/' _ J
/1	Therefore, be it hereby ordained by the Town Board of the Town of	(_tr 1.-.l!'f,,
:{ {;l,!J.;,,':..f   , County, that the terms of elected town officers which shall expire after 1°1 :59
p.m. on the 2nd Monday of April in either April 2012 or April 2013 shall be extended until the 3rd Tuesday of April in the same year in which the terms would otherwise have expired.



This ordinance shall be effective upon publication or posting by the town clerk as required, pursuant to s. 60.80, Wis. Stat.

Adopted this  7-	day of  t9-A...;L	2orz_.

By the Town Board of the Town of Q tl=i)yv(f-.	,	.C.rD;'<;..	County,    Wisconsin:




Town Chairperson




Clerk
 
Title 7 > Chapter 3


Designation and Regulation of All Terrain Vehicle/Utility Terrain Vehicle Routes

Sec. 7-3-1 TITLE AND PURPOSE

The title of this ordinance is the Town of Cady All-Terrain Vehicle/Utility Terrain Vehicle Route (ATV/UTV) Ordinance.  The purpose of this ordinance is to establish ATV/UTV routes in the town and to regulate the operation of all-terrain and utility terrain vehicles in the town.

Sec. 7-3-2 AUTHORITY

The Town Board of the Town of Cady, St Croix County, Wisconsin has the specific authority to adopt this All-Terrain Vehicle/Utility Terrain Vehicle Route Ordinance under s23.33 (8) (b) and (11) Wis. Stats

Sec. 7-3-3 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE

The Town Board of Cady, St Croix County, Wisconsin, by this ordinance, adopted on proper notice with a quorum and roll call vote by a majority of the Town Board present and voting, provided the authority for the town to designate all-terrain vehicle routes in the town and to regulate the use of those routes and all-terrain vehicles in the town.

Sec. 7-3-4  OPERATION OF ALL TERRAIN AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES

Pursuant to s.23.33 (4) (d) 4, :.Vis. Stats, except as otherwise provided in s.23.22
(4)	Wis. Stats, no person may operate an ATV/UTV on the roadway portion of any highway in the town except on roadways that are designated as ATV/UTV routes by this ordinance.  Operation of ATV/UTV s on a roadway in the town that is an ATV/UTV route is authorized only for the extreme right side of the roadway except that left turns may be made from any part of the roadway that is safe given prevailing conditions.	On paved roadway ATV/UTV s must be operated on the paved portion of the roadway and not on  the gravel shoulder.

Sec. 7-3-5 DESIGNATION OF ALL-TERRAIN/UTILITY  TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES


The following routes are designated ATV/UTV routes in the town:
 
 	Designation and Regulation of All Terrain Vehicle Routes
7-3-6


All roads in the Town of Cady that are properly signed as ATV/UTV routes, excluding dead-ends and driveways.   Dead ends may be used only by town residents and only to access designated routes.



Sec. 7-3-6  CONDITIONS TO ALL-TERRAIN/UTIL TY TERRAIN VEHICLE  ROUTES


Pursuant to s.23.33 (8) (d), Wis. Stats, the following restrictions are placed on the use of the town ATV/UTV routes designated by this ordinance.

A.	Routes shall be marked with uniform all-terrain vehicle route signs in accordance with s. NR 64.12 (7), Wisconsin Administrative Code.  No person may do any of the following in regard to signs marking all-terrain vehicle routes:

1.	Intentionally remove, damage, deface, move, or obstruct any uniform
all-terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standard or intentionally interfere with the effective operation of an uniform all-terrain vehicle route or
trail or standards if the sign or standard is legally placed by the state, any municipality or any authorized individual.

2.	Possess any uniform all-terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standard of the types established by the department for the warning, instruction or information of the public, unless he or she obtained the uniform all­ terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standard in a lawful manner. Possession of a uniform all-terrain vehicle route or trail sign or standard creates a rebuttable presumption of illegal possession.

B. Operation shall be subject to all provision of s.23.33, \1/is. Stats, which is adopted as a part of this ordinance by reference, pursuant to s. 23.33 (11), Wis. Stats.

C.	A copy of this ordinance shall be sent by the town clerk to the St Croix, Dunn, and Pierce County Sheriff Departments.

D.	In addition to the provisions of s.23.33, Wis. Stats, the following restrictions are placed on the use of the town ATV/UTV routes designated by this ordinance:

1.	All ATV/UTV operators shall observe a speed limit of not more than 40 mph or the posted roadway speed limit, whichever is lower.
2.	All ATV/UTV operators shall ride single file.
3.	The allowed hours of operation shall be from dawn until dusk.
 
Designation and Regulation of All Terrain Vehicle Routes
7-3-7

4.	,11nyone under the age of twelve (12) cmmot operate an ATV or under the age of sixteen ( 16) operate a UTV on a road or route under any circumstances.
5.	Anyone born after January 1, 1988 cannot operate an ATV on a roadway without a safety certification.
6.	All ATV operators under the age of 18 must wear a helmet.
7.	All ATV/UTV s must use a license plate
8.	Lights must be on at all times.

Sec. 7-3-7 ENFORCEMENT

This ordinance may be enforced by any law enforcement officer authorized to enforce the laws of the State of Wisconsin.

Sec. 7-3-8 PENALITES

The penalties under s.23.33 (13) (a), Wis. Stats, are adopted by reference.



Sec. 7-3-9 EFFECTIVE DATE

This ordinance is effective when all-terrain vehicle routes signs are posted by the local ATV clubs and the routes will be open year round, but can be discontinued at any time by the decision of the Cady Town Board.

 


Stats.
 
The town clerk shall properly post this ordinance as required under s 60.80, Wis.'
 

Amended and adopted this ls.t  day of October, 2012 TOWN OF CADY



Carla Greiber, Clerk, Attest n
 
ORDINANCE NO.]_ - W /0
 



CHARGES
 




The Town Board of the Town of	St. Croix   do ordain as follows:

Title 7 >Chapter 1


Sec 7-1-1 PURPOSE


(a)  The intent is to implement the procedures to charge property owners in the Town for fire protection services.

Sec. 7-1-2  AUTHORITY

(a) Pursuant to Sections 60.55, 60.555 and 60.557 of the Wisconsin Statutes, the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, hereby established the following policy and procedure for the payment offire costs incurred by the Town of Cady.

Sec 7-1-3 UABULTY fOR FIRE PROTECTION

(a)   The property owners of real estate within the Town of Cady for which fire protection is provided shall be responsible for the costs of the fire calls made to the property based upon the actual amount billed the Town of Cady by the fire department provider which provides the fire PH)tei::tic;n service to the subject real estate and/or personal property. This indudes the cost of other	at the request of an authorized department under mutual aid.

Sec 7-1-4 BILLING AND PAYMENT PROCEDURE

(a)  The costs of fire calls as outlined above shall be billed by the Town Treasurer to the property owner and paid to the Town Treasurer within 60 days of the date of the invoice. The failure to pay the invoice within 60 days will result in interest being charged at the rate of 1.5% per month (18% per annum) from the date of the invoice. Those invoices remaining outstanding, plus any interest accrued, for more than 90 days as of November 1of any year shall be piaced on the tax roil as a deiinquent speciai charge pursuant to Section 66.60 of the Wisconsin Statutes.

Sec. 7-1-5 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be effective upon passage and nn<o-tin•a or publication as provided by law Adopted this J '0 day of	Oc;rol,vr	2010
 
Yes	No	C'\.,...,-
 

Abstain	_ Absent-----
 

TOWN OF CADY

By:  /Yl?l2z\ u.....kk:'.-"'
I
Mike Tully, Chairman



 
Hugh Hampton, Supervisor
 
ORDINANCE No.	'l- '2-C/0


AN  ORDINANCE REGARDING AMENDMENTS  TO
TOWN LAND DIVISION AND SUBDIVISION CODE






The Town Board of the Town of Cady, St. Croix County, Wisconsin, do ordain as follows:



SECTION I.	RENUMBERING AND ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS.

Section  14-l-33(b)(4) of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances is created to read as follows:



(4) The Final Plat shall be examined by the Town Engineer, Town Planner, Town Attorney or other qualified staff to determine whether the Final Plat conforms substantially to the Preliminary Plat. Any such conclusions shall be made a part of the record of any meeting at which the Final Plat is considered, pursuant to Section  236.1 l(l)(e),  Wis.  Stats.



SECTION II.	AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS.

The third sentence of Section 14-l-33(a)( 1) of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances is amended and adopted to read as follows:



If the Final Plat is not submitted within thirty-six (36) months of the last required approval of the Preliminary Plat, the Town Board may refuse to approve the Final Plat, unless the Town Board and the applicant have agreed, in writing, to an extension; the applicant shall file eight (8) copies of the Final Plat with the Town Clerk.



SECTION Ill.	AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS.

Section 14-l-33(b)(2) of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances is amended and adopted to read as follows:
 
(3)	If the Final Plat is not submitted within thirty-six (36) months of the last required approval of the Preliminary Plat, the Town Board may refuse to approve the Final Plat.

SECTION IV.	AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS.

The last sentence of Section 14-1-33(c)(4) of the Town of Cady Code of Ordinances is amended and adopted to read as follows:



Pursuant to Sec. 236.25(2)(b), Wis. Stats., the County Register of Deeds cannot record the Final Plat unless it is offered within twelve ( 12) months from the date of last approval of the Final Plat or thirty-six (36) months from the last required approval of the Preliminary Plat.



SECTION V.	REPEAL AND RECREATION OF PROVISIONS.

Sections  14-1-Sl(b) of the Town  of Cady  Code of  Ordinances  is repealed  and recreated  and Section  14-1-Sl(c) as follows:



(b)	Subdivide r's Agreement; Security for Improvements.
(l) Prior to the final approval and recording of any Certified Survey Map, Subdivision Final Plat, or  Condominium requiring improvements located within the jurisdictional limits of this Chapter, and prior to the installation of any required improvements, and as a condition of said approval, the Subdivision, Condominium or Certified Survey Map Developer (as applicable), shall enter into a contract ("Subdivider's Agreement") with the Town of Cady agreeing to furnish, construct, and install the required improvements at the sole cost of the Subdivision, Condominium or Certified Survey Map Developer (as applicable) and shall file with said contract a bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or certified check in the amount equal to one hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the Town Engineer's estimate. Such  security amount determination shall be made by the Town Board after review and recommendation of the Town Engineer; security phasing, pursuant to Subsection (b) below, shall be utilized if the project is to be completed pursuant to an approved phasing plan.
(2)	The  purpose   of   the   guarantee   is   to   ensure   that   such   required
improvements will be completed by the Subdivision, Certified Survey Map or Condominium Developer (as applicable), or the Developer's subcontractor or agent, and serves as a further guarantee that all obligations to subcontractors for work on the development are satisfied. Such  improvements  shall  be  completed  by  the  Developer  of  the
 
Subdivision, Certified Survey Map or Condominium project, or by his/her subcontractor, as set forth in the Subdivider's Agreement.
(3)	The  contract  form  shall  be  approved  by  the  Town  Attorney  and
provided by the Town and may provide for a phasing of public improvements construction, providing such phasing is approved by the Town Board. The Town reserves the right to control the phasing through limits and sequencing so as to provide for continuity of streets, sewers, water mains, and other necessary public improvements within and between the phases.
(4)	The Town may allow for the reduction of the bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or certified check as work is completed on the project or phases of the project.
(5)	In addition, the following requirements shall apply:
a.	Contracts and contract specifications for the construction of street and utility improvements on dedicated street rights-of-way, as well as the contractors and subcontractors providing such work, shall be subject to the inspection of construction by the Town of Cady or its agent, and approval of the Town Board or its representatives.
b.	Governmental units to which these bond and contract provisions apply may file, in lieu of said contract and bond/security, a letter from officials authorized to act on their behalf agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Section, subject to the approval of the Town Attorney.
(6)	The Subdivision, Condominium or Certified Survey Map Developer (as applicable) shall agree in the development contract to pay all street and sidewalk assessments, specifically all area charges for sanitary sewer mains and all water main assessments (if such services are available), including where the land division abuts existing streets which are not improved within the Town standard street improvements (including, but not limited to, ditches, curb and gutter (where required by Town), local storm sewer (where required by Town), and bituminous  pavement).
(7)	The  time  for  completion  of  the  work  and  phases  thereof  shall  be
determined by the Town Board upon the recommendation of the Town Engineer after consultation with the Developer. The completion date shall be a component of the contract.
(8)	The Developer shall pay the Town for all costs incurred by the Town
for review and inspection of the project. This would include review, and preparation at the Town Board's discretion, of plans and specifications by the Town Engineer, Planner, and Attorney, as well as other administrative and professional costs of a similar nature.
(c)	Phasing.
(1)	Pursuant to Sec. 236.13(2)(a), Wis. Stats., if the project is approved to be constructed in phases,  which approval shall  not be unreasonably withhheld, the security required to be deposited shall be limited to the phase of the project currently being constructed.  The agreement shall
 
provide a reasonable time by which such security  shall be provided, which shall be no sooner than is reasonably necessary before the commencement of the installation of the improvements. The Subdivision, Condominium or Certified Survey Map Developer (as applicable) may elect, with the approval of the Town  of  Cady,  to install the improvements in construction  phases provided that:
a.	The phases are specified in the contract for land division improvements;
b.	The Subdivision, Condominium or Certified Survey Map Developer (as applicable) submits surety in an amount equal to one hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the estimated costs of improvements required for the installation and construction schedules for that phase. Improvements constructed during that phase shall not be accepted nor shall any building  permit  be issued for construction within the completed area of that phase of the land division unless required infrastructure  for that phase has been properly installed pursuant to this Chapter.
c.	The   Subdivision,   Condominium   or   Certified   Survey   Map
Developer (as applicable) records deed restrictions  approved by the Town Attorney which specify that the lots which are included in future construction phases of the land division will not be transferred  or sold unless the Town's approval is obtained;
d.	The   Subdivision,   Condominium    or   Certified   Survey   Map
Developer (as applicable) mm1m1zes grading and other disturbances to lands included in future construction phases in order to prevent erosion; and
e.	Erosion control plans and measures submitted and approved herein shall address the individual phases of construction.
(2)	The time limit for completion of a phased improvement program shall
take into account the needs and desires of the Town and adjacent property owners for street and other improvements to serve lands adjacent to and within the land division.
(3)	As work progresses on installation of improvements constructed as part
of  the  contract,  the  Town  Engineer,  upon  written  request  from  the Subdivision,  Condominium  or  Certified  Survey  Map  Developer  (as applicable) from time to time, is authorized to recommend to the Town Clerk  a  reduction  in  the  amount  of  surety  as  hereinafter  provided. When portions of construction (water, sanitary sewer, street, sidewalk, greenway  or other improvements)  are completed  by the Subdivision, Condominium or Certified Survey Map Developer (as applicable) and determined  acceptable  by  the  Town  Engineer,  the  Town  Clerk  is authorized,  upon   submission   of  lien  waivers  by  the  Subdivision, Condominium  or  Certified  Survey  Map  Developer  (as  applicable)'s contractors, to reduce the amount of surety.  The amount of surety may be reduced at the time all underground utilities are installed and tested. The amount  of  surety  remaining  shall be  equal  to one hundred  and
 
twenty percent (120%) of the estimate of the Town Engineer of costs of work remaining to be completed and accepted and to insure performance  of the one (1) year guarantee as specified in Subsection
(d)  below  against  defects  in  workmanship  and  materials  on  work
accepted.	When  the work on the major components  of construction has  been  substantially  completed,  except  for work  which  cannot  be completed because of weather conditions or other reasons which, in the judgment of the Town Engineer are valid for noncompletion, the Town Clerk, in his/her sole discretion, is authorized to accept a reduction in the  amount  of  surety  to  an  amount  in  the  estimate  of  the  Town Engineer,  sufficient  to  cover  the  work  remaining  to  be  completed, including  performance  of  the  one  ( l) year  guarantee  period  against defects in workmanship and materials.   As a further guarantee that all obligations under contract for work on the development  are satisfied, the  contractor  and  subcontractors  who  are  to  be  engaged  in  the construction  of utilities or street improvements on the street right-of­ way  to be  dedicated  shall be  approved  for such work by  the Town Engineer prior  to commencing  construction.	The Town Board  at its option, may extend the security or additional periods not to exceed two
(2)	years each.



SECTION VI.      REFERENCES AMENDED.


The  reference  in  Section  14-l-32(d) to  "six  (6) months"  shall  be  changed  to  "thirty-six  (36) months".



SECTION VII.   SEVERABILITY.


If any provision of this Ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of this Ordinance to any person or circumstance is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional  provisions  or applications.


SECTION  vm.  CONFLICTING  PROVISIONS  REPEALED.

All Ordinances in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
SECTION IX.	EFFECTIVE DATE.

This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by law.

ADOPTED this	11)1day of--"-Q_c ::;G_. -	"·"'\J -----' 2010.


TOWN OF CADY, WISCONSIN




·	Chairperson


 
Town Clerk


INTRODUCED:	     J 1 ;z o/(J

POSTED: PASSED:
State of Wisconsin: County of St. Croix:


I hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance is a true, correct, anz .complet op of an ordinance duly and regularly passed by the Cady Town Board on the	i_ day of	' 2010,  following
a recommendation  from the  Plan  Commission  and public  hearing  on the proposed  ordinance amendment, and that said ordinance	now in full force  and effect.







Town Clerk
 

ORDINANCE No.	  I J;l -	I


AN ORDINANCE  ESTABLISHING  A  MORATORIUM ON EXPANSION AND CREATION  OF NEW  NONMETALLIC  MINING  OPERATIONS




 
The Board of Supervisors of the Tovvn  of follows:
 
, St. Croix  County,     do	as
 


SECTION I.	TITLE.

The full title of this Ordinance is "An Ordinance Establishing  a Moratorium  on Expansion and Creation of New Nonmetallic Mining Operations Within the Town of Cady".




SECTION II.	AUTHORITY.

The Town of Cady Board of Supervisors has the specific authority:

(1)	To engage in proper planning including, but not limited to, consideration and adoption of amendments to the Town of Cady Comprehensive Plan, pursuant to Sec. 66.1001,
Wis. Stats.; and
(2)	To have  the  specific  authority  granted pursuant  to  Secs. 60. l0(2)(c),  60.22,  60.23,
60.61 and 60.62 Wis. Stats., including, but not limited to, village powers  and town zoning authority.


SECTION  m.   GENERAL  PURPOSE.

The Town of Cady Board of Supervisors finds that substantial areas exist in which the existing planning  and  regulatory  provisions  in  the Town  of  Cady  may  be  inadequate  for  the  special environmental, public welfare, safety, transportation  and farmland preservation concerns created by nonmetallic  mining operations.	Of particular concern is the consistency  of such operations with the provisions of the Town of Cady Comprehensive Plan.  A temporary moratorium on the expansion of existing or creation of new nonmetallic mining operations is deemed necessary to provide the Town of Cady with an adequate opportunity to examine all existing Town ordinances and Comprehensive  Plan provisions  regarding  nonmetallic  mining activities, and determine the regulatory circumstances under which these activities may be permitted  or limited in the Town of Cady.  The Town of Cady Board of Supervisors notes that federal and state courts have upheld the right of local governments to impose temporary moratoriums to properly effectuate planning
 
and regulatory study and development. The purpose of this moratorium is to allow the Town of Cady adequate time to study the possible impacts that nonmetallic mining operations and related processing facilities may have on the health, safety, welfare and planning protections of the residents of the Town of Cady, including, but not limited to:

( J)	Air quality and water quality concerns;
(2) Impacts to and the adequacy of infrastructure of the Town, property values and the local economy;
(3) To determine the advisability  of amending the Town of Cady Comprehensive  Plan; and
( 4)  To review  and consider amending or adopting, pursuant  to police powers conferred on the Town, regulatory and/or licensing ordinances so as to effectively regulate the impacts of nonmetallic mining activities and related processing plants in the Town of Cady, including the new for developer agreements and reclamation plans.



SECTION IV.  MORATORIUM IMPOSED.


The Town of Cady Board of Supervisors hereby prohibits the expansion of any ex1stmg nonmetallic mining operation and related facilities beyond its present legally permitted physical dimensions as  of the date of this Ordinance, and further prohibits the creation of any new nonmetallic mining operations and related facilities in the Town of Cady during the pendency of this moratorium. Further, there is hereby established a temporary stay on the acceptance, review, and approval by Town officials, staff, and/or consultants of any applications for permits of any type for nonmetallic mining operations after the effective date of this Ordinance until the period of moratorium expires. Exempt from the provisions of this moratorium are existing state or county-owned borrow pit sites used exclusively for public purposes, with aggregate not being sold for profit.



SECTION V.   DURATION OF MORATORIUM.

This Ordinance shall be effective for the period of not longer than one year following the date of adoption of this Ordinance by the Town Board, unless recinded or extended sooner by Town Board  action.



SECTION VI.  STUDY AND ACTION GENERALLY DURING THE MORATORIUM PERIOD.

During the moratorium imposed by this Ordinance, the Town of Cady Plan Commission shall study and analyze the impacts of nonmetallic mining activities and shall make final recommendations  to the Town Board.  The Plan Commission shall make such recommendations to the Town Board no later than sixty (60) days prior to the end of the moratorium. The Plan Commission shall make reports to the Town Board as directed by the Town Board; the Plan Commission and Town Board may engage in joint planning meetings during this period. The Plan Commission shall be charged with researching the issues associated with nonmetallic mining
 
operations and  making recommendations to the Town Board regarding regulatory and police powers necessary to protect the public heaith, safety and welfare and to responsibly manage new, existing and/or proposed nonmetallic mining operations. Issues under consideration by the Plan Commission include, but are not limited to:

( l) Regulatory structures including licensing, blasting, bonding, infrastructure protection, groundwater safeguards, reclamation, and public safety ordinances; zoning code amendments; comprehensive plan amendments;  and developer  agreements;
(2)	Environmental  impacts and health concerns;
(3)	Impacts on Town infrastructure;  and
(4)	Fiscal impacts of such activities on the Town.



SECTION VII.        DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions shall be applicable in this Ordinance:

( l) Nonmetallic Minerals. A product, commodity or material consisting principally of naturally occurring, organic, inorganic, nonmetallic, non-renewable material, and includes, but is not limited to, rock, sand, stone, gravel,  asbestos, beryl,  diamond, clay, coal, feldspar, peat and talc.
(2)	Nonmetallic Mining.
a.	Extraction from the earth of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals  for off- site use or sale, including drilling and blasting as well as associated activities such as excavation, grading, dredging, crushing and washing of such materials.
b.	Manufacturing  or processing  operations that may involve the use of equipment
for the crushing, screening, separation, washing, or blending of the mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals obtained by extraction from the mining site or with minerals transferred  from off-site.
c.	Manufacturing processes aimed at producing nonmetallic products for sale or use
by the operator.
d.	Stockpiling of nonmetallic products for sale or use of off-site and stockpiling of waste materials.
Transport of extracted nonmetallic materials, finished products or waste materials
to or from the extraction site.
f.	Disposal of waste materials as defined in this Ordinance.
µ_.      Reclamation  of extraction  sites.
(3)	Physical Dimensions. The external footprint of an existing mine site, quarry, pit, or other excavation areas within which nonmetallic mining or processing operations are occurring  as of  the  effective  date  of this Ordinance.
(4)	Site or Mine Site.  Land from which mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals will
be extracted for sale or use by the land owner or any agent or lessee of the land owner, including all land on which is or will be located  any structures, equipment, storage facilities, washing or screening facilities, private roads or haulage ways associated  with  nonmetallic   mining  operations;  and  all  contiguous  lands  to  the
 
nonmetallic  operation  under  common  ownership  or control  of the owner or his/her agent or lessee.



SECTION Viii.      REVIE'\AI OF EXCEPTIONS.

The Town Board shall be responsible for evaluating any applications for relief from this moratorium. Such relief shall only be granted upon clear evidence of extraordinary  or unique circumstances that would warrant special treatment and relief from the general provisions of this moratorium  Ordinance.


SECTION !X.         PENALTIES.

Any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability corporation, or other legal entity that fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, pay a forfeiture of not less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), plus all applicable surcharges, assessments and costs of legal prosecution for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues constitutes a separate offense under this Ordinance. In addition, the Town of Cady Board of Supervisors may seek injunctive relief from a court of record to enjoin further violations.



SECTION X.           ADOPTION.

This Ordinance adopted by a majority vote of the Town of Cady Board of Supervisors on roll call vote with a quorum present and voting and proper notice having been given, provides for the imposition of a moratorium on the expansion of existing or creation of new nonmetallic mining operations within the Town of Cady, St. Croix County.




SECTION XI.         SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this Ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of this Ordinance to any person or circumstance is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional  provisions  or applications.
 
SECTION XII.         EFFECTIVE DATE.


This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and legal posting pursuant to Sec. 60.80, Wis. Stats. The Town Clerk shall legally post this Ordinance in at least three (3) places as required under Sec. 60.80, \Vis. Stats., and such Ordinance shall be in effect one (i) clay after the date of legal posting. To facilitate public notice of the adoption of this Ordinance, the Town Clerk shall, in addition, publish this Ordinance as a Class I Notice in a newspaper of general circulation in lhe Town of Cady.


 
Town Board on roll call vote with a quorum present and voting and proper  notice  having  been given.



TOWN OF CADY, WISCONSIN




Chairperson



 



Supervisor


 
Attest:  Town Clerk






Legally Posted and/or Published:     	
