Chapter 1
GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Page
1.01 Form of Government 2
1.02 Elected Officials 2
1.03 Appointed Officials 2
1.04 Board of Review 3
1.05 Library Board 3
1.06 Board of Public Works 4
1.07 Plan Commission 4
1.08 Board of Zoning Appeals 4
1.09 Administrative Coordinator 5
1.10 Ward Boundaries 8
1.11 Aldermanic Districts 8
1.12 Annexations 8
1.13 When Polls Open 9
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
2
1.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The City of Chilton, Calumet County, Wisconsin, is
organized and operated under the Mayor-Council system of government, Ch. 62, Wis. Stats.
1.02 ELECTED OFFICIALS.
(1) The elected officials of the City shall be:
(a) Mayor.
(b) Two Aldermen from each aldermanic district.
(2) WHEN ELECTED. All elected officials shall be elected in even-numbered years
except one alderman shall be elected from each aldermanic district annually.
1.03 APPOINTED OFFICIALS. The following appointed officials, the method of selection
and the terms of office shall be as follows:
OFFICER MANNER OF APPOINTMENT TERM
(1) Director of Public Works/ By Common Council Indefinite
(Ord. #810 11/21/95)
(2) City Attorney By Common Council Indefinite
(3) Chief of Police Mayor, subject to Indefinite
Confirmation by Council
(4) Fire Chief Mayor, subject to Indefinite
Confirmation by Council
(5) Building/Plumbing Insp. Mayor, subject to Indefinite
(Ord. #770 4/6/93) confirmation by Council
(6) Assistant Building/ Mayor, subject to Indefinite
Plumbing Inspector confirmation by Council
(Ord. #770 4/6/93)
(7) Emergency Mayor, subject to confirmation 1 year
Management Director by Council
(Ord. #943 12/18/01)
(8) Health Officer (Ord. #1006 1/16/07) Director of Public Works
Director of Public Works is hereby appointed for the purpose of Section 9.03 of the Municipal Code of the
City of Chilton.
(9) Policemen Mayor, subject to Indefinite
(Ord. #694 10/18/88) confirmation by Council
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
3
(10) Clerk/Treasurer (Ord. #834 02/11/97) By Common Council Indefinite
(11) Weed Commissioner The Weed Commissioner shall be appointed
pursuant to Section 66.0517, Wis. Stats.
(12) Assessor Council Contract
(13) Administrative Coordinator Council Indefinite
(Ord. #897 11/15/05)
1.04 BOARD OF REVIEW. (Ord. # 572 4/20/82)
(1) COMPOSITION. The Board of Review shall consist of the Mayor, City Clerk, and
three residents of the City, any one or all of whom may be public officer or public
employee. All members, excepting for the Mayor and City Clerk, shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council.
(2) COMPENSATION. The members shall receive as compensation such sum as the
Council shall determine for each day during which services are actually rendered,
except no officer of the City who is a member of the Board of Review and who is a
full time employee or officer of the City shall receive any further compensation for
services on the Board beyond his regular salary or compensation.
(3) CONFIDENTIALITY. Income and expense information submitted to an assessor
pursuant to activities under Section 70.47(a-f), Stats, shall remain confidential, except
that such information may be used by persons in the discharge of the duties imposed
by law or of the duties of their office by order of a court. The information that is
provided, unless a court determines that it is inaccurate, is not subject to the right of
inspection a copying under Section 19.35(1), Stats. (Ord. #939 11/6/01)
(4) OBJECTING TO PROPERTY TAX ASSESSMENTS. Pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes Section 70.47(7) (c) the Board of Review is authorized to grant a taxpayer a
60-day extension for a hearing related to the taxpayer’s objection submitted under
Section 70.47 provided the taxpayer submits with the objection a request to the board
for an extension and pays the fee specified in Wisconsin Statutes Section 70.47(7) (c).
The Board of Review procedure and extension shall be governed by the terms of
Wisconsin Statutes Section 70.47(7) (c) and 70.47(8) (d) and (j). The City Assessor
shall follow the procedure dictated in Wisconsin Statutes Section 70.47(7) (c).
(Ord. #1032 6/3/08)
1.05 LIBRARY BOARD.
(1) COMPOSITION. (Ord. #967 3/16/04)
(a) The Library Board shall be composed of seven (7) members to be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, pursuant to Section
43.54, Wis. Stats.
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
4
(b) Calumet County Representation on the City Library Board shall be pursuant to
Section 43.60, WI Statute.
(2) COMPENSATION. No compensation shall be paid to members for their services,
but they may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in performing
duties outside the City, if so authorized by the Board.
1.06 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.
(1) HOW CONSTITUTED. The Aldermen of the City of Chilton, the Director of Public
Works and the City Clerk shall constitute the Board of Public Works, and each
member shall have one vote thereon, the Mayor shall be the chairperson and the City
Clerk shall be the secretary thereof.
(2) DUTIES. The Board of Public Works shall perform such duties as are prescribed by
the state statutes, particularly Chapter 62 thereof, and such other duties that the
common council shall impose.
1.07 PLAN COMMISSION.
(1) APPOINTMENT.
(a) The City Plan Commission shall consist of seven members as follows: The
Mayor, who shall be the presiding officer, a member of the Council, the
Director of Public Works and 4 citizen members.
(b) The alderman member of the Plan Commission shall be elected by a 2/3 vote
of the Common Council during April of each year.
(c) The citizen members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation
by the Common Council, annually during April for terms of 3 years, in
accordance with Sec. 62.23(1), Wis. Stats.
(d) All vacancies on the City Plan Commission shall be filled for the un-expired
term in the same manner as the appointment for the full term.
(e) Should a Park Board for the City ever be created, the President of the Park
Board shall succeed to a place on the Plan Commission when the next term of
the annually appointed citizen member shall expire.
(2) STAFF EXPENDITURES. The Plan Commission may employ experts and a staff,
and pay for their services and such other expenses, as may be necessary and proper
not exceeding, in all, the appropriation that may be made for such Commission by the
Common Council. (Ord. #967 3/16/04)
1.08 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five
members appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Common Council, for
terms of 3 years, except that of those first appointed one shall serve for one year, 2 for 2
years and 2 for 3 years. The members shall be removable by the Mayor for cause upon
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
5
written charges and after public hearing. The Mayor shall designate one of the members
chairman. The Board may employ a secretary and other employees. The Mayor shall
appoint an alternate member for a term of 3 years, who shall act with full power only when
a member of the Board is absent or refuses to vote because of interest. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant. (Ord. #991 12/06/05)
1.09 ADMINISTRATIVE COORDINATOR (Ord. #897 11/15/05)
(1) OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE COORDINATOR. In order to provide the City of
Chilton with a more efficient, effective and responsible government under a system of
a part-time mayor and part-time common council (hereinafter referred to as
“council”) at a time when city government is becoming increasingly complex, there is
hereby created the Office of Administrative Coordinator for the City of Chilton
(hereinafter referred to as “coordinator”).
(2) APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE AND REMOVAL. The coordinator shall be
appointed on the basis of merit with due regard to training, experience, administrative
ability and general fitness for the office by a majority vote of the council. The
coordinator shall hold office for an indefinite term subject to removal at any time
through the procedures defined in sec. 17.12 of the Wisconsin Statutes. This section,
however, shall not preclude the council from establishing other employment terms
and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance or the Municipal
Code of the City of Chilton. The position is combined with Clerk/Treasurer.
(3) FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE COORDINATOR. The coordinator, subject
to the limitations defined in resolutions and ordinances of the City of Chilton and
Wisconsin Statutes, shall be the chief administrative coordinator of the City,
responsible only to the mayor and the council for the proper administration of the
business affairs of the City, pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, the ordinances of the City
of Chilton, and the resolutions, board motions and directives of the council, with
power and duties as follows:
(a) GENERAL DUTIES
(i) Carry out directives of the mayor and council that require
administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the mayor and
council any difficulties encountered herein;
(ii) Be responsible for the administrative coordination of all day-to-day
operations of the city government including the monitoring of all city
ordinances, resolutions, council meeting minutes and state statutes;
(iii) Prepare a plan of administration, including an organization chart,
and administrative procedure plan for the City;
(iv) Establish when necessary administrative procedures to increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of city government according to current
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
6
practices in local government, not inconsistent with (ii) above or
directives of the mayor and council:
(v) Act as a nonvoting member of all boards, commissions and
committees of the City, except as specified by the council or
Wisconsin Statutes;
(vi) Keep informed concerning current federal, state, and county
legislation and administrative rules affecting the City and submits
appropriate reports and recommendations thereon to the council;
(vii) Keep informed concerning the availability of federal, state and
county funds for local programs, and assist department heads and the
council in obtaining these funds under the direction of the mayor and
the council;
(viii) Represent the City in matters involving legislative and
intergovernmental affairs as authorized and directed as to that
representation by the mayor and council;
(ix) Act as public information officer for the City with the responsibility
of assuring that the news media are kept informed about the operations
of the City and that all open meeting rules and regulations are
followed: ( Except: Emergency Management Plan)
(x) Establish and maintain procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and city government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations and other matters receive prompt
attention by the responsible official, and to assure that all such matters
are expeditiously resolved;
(xi) Promote the economic well-being and growth of the City through
public and private sector cooperation;
(b) RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE COUNCIL.
(i) Attend all meetings of the council, assisting the mayor and the council
as required in the performance of their duties.
(ii) In coordination with the mayor, the council, and the clerk, ensure that
appropriate agendas are prepared to all meetings of the council, all
council committees, and all other appropriate committees and
commissions of the City, together with such supporting material as
may be required, with nothing herein being construed as to give the
coordinator authority to limit or in any way prevent matters from being
considered by the council, or any of its committees and commissions;
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
7
(iii) Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions as requested
by the mayor or the council, or as needed;
(iv) Keep the mayor and council regularly informed about the activities of
the coordinator’s office by oral or written report at regular and special
meetings of the council;
(c) PERSONNEL
(i) Be responsible for the administrative coordination of all employees of
the City according to the established organization procedures;
(ii) Recommend to the council the appointment, promotion, and when
necessary for the good of the City, the suspension or termination of
department heads;
(iii) Responsible to see that complete and current personnel records,
including specific job descriptions and employee evaluations for all
City employees are kept; recommend salary and wage scales for City
employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements; develop
and enforce high standards of performance by city employees; work
closely with department heads to promptly resolve personnel problems
or grievances. (Fire Department Evaluations: All fire department
evaluations will be at the discretion of the Fire Chief).
(iv) Coordinate the creation, maintenance and implementation of the
Personnel Policy Manual.
(v) Assist in labor contract negotiations and collective bargaining issues;
(d) BUDGETING AND PURCHASING
(i) Be responsible for the preparation of the annual city budget, in
accordance with guidelines as may be provided by the council and in
coordination with department heads and mayor, and pursuant to state
statutes, for review and approval by the council;
(ii) Administer the budget as adopted by the council;
(iii) Report regularly to the council on the current fiscal position of the
City;
(iv) Supervise the accounting system of the City and insure that the
system employs methods in accordance with current professional
accounting practices.
(v) Purchasing procedures established by the council and any limitations
contained in Wisconsin Statutes;
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
8
(4) COOPERATION.
All officials and employees of the City shall cooperate with and assist the
coordinator so that the city government shall function effectively and efficiently.
1.10 WARD BOUNDARIES. The City shall be divided into Five Wards as follows:
(Ord. #1074 6/21/2011)
(1) FIRST WARD. All the territory located within the following blocks as described in
attachment A, shall constitute the First Ward.
(2) SECOND WARD. All the territory located within the following blocks as described
in attachment B, shall constitute the Second Ward.
(3) THIRD WARD. All the territory located within the blocks as described in
attachment C, shall constitute the Third Ward.
(4) FOURTH WARD. All the territory located within the following blocks as described
in attachment D, shall constitute the Fourth Ward.
(5) FIFTH WARD. All the territory located within the following blocks as described in
attachment E, shall constitute the Fifth Ward.
1.11 ALDERMANIC DISTRICTS. The City shall be divided into Four Aldermanic Districts as
follows: (Ord. #555 11/3/81, Ord. #740 7/2/91, Ord. #930 7/17/01, Ord. #1075 8/16/2011)
(1) FIRST ALDERMANIC DISTRICT. All the territory located within Ward One and
the following blocks as described in Attachment 1, shall constitute Aldermanic
District One.
(2) SECOND ALDERMANIC DISTRICT. All the territory located within Ward Two
and Ward Five and the following blocks as described in Attachment 2, shall
constitute Aldermanic District Two.
(3) THIRD ALDERMANIC DISTRICT. All the territory located within Ward Three
and the blocks as described in Attachment 3 shall constitute Aldermanic District
Three.
(4) FOURTH ALDERMANIC DISTRICT. All the territory located within Ward Four
and the following blocks as described in Attachment 4, shall constitute the
Aldermanic District Four.
1.12 ANNEXATIONS.
1974: Ordinance No. 440 (Vogt-Steege Farms, Inc.)
1974 Ordinance No. 442 (Vogt-Steege Farms, Inc.)
City of Chilton Ch. 1 General Government
9
1975: Ordinance No. 449 (Steege Farms, Inc.)
1976: Ordinance No. 463 (Steege Farms, Inc.)
1981: Ordinance No. 553 (Gervase & Kay Hephner)
1984: Ordinance No. 615 (Vogt Farm)
1984: Ordinance No. 618 (Gravesville)
1986: Ordinance No. 645 (Industrial Park)
1989: Ordinance No. 700 (Nennig, Michels, & Hephner
1992: Ordinance No. 758 (Chilton Area Dev. Corp., Vogt, Steege Farms Inc.)
1992: Ordinance No. 764 (Wilbur & Phyllis Schnuell)
1992: Ordinance No. 765 (Kolbe Farm)
1995: Ordinance No. 807 (Hephner/Michels)
1996: Ordinance No. 816 (Steege Farms, Inc.)
1998: Ordinance No. 858 (Geiser/Vogt)
1998: Ordinance No. 867 (Steege Farms, Inc.)
1998: Ordinance No. 872 (Norbert Mallmann)
1999: Ordinance No. 883 (Daniel & Donna Vogt)
2000: Ordinance No. 913 (Steege Farms)
2003: Ordinance No. 955 (Daniel & Donna Vogt)
2007: Amended Ordinance No. 1033, No. 1022 (State of WI – Roadway)
11.13 WHEN POLLS OPEN. (Ord. #993 5/02/06, Ord. #967 3/16/04).
The polls on all election days shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
City of Chilton Ch. 2 The Common Council
Updated 12/2/08
CHAPTER 2
THE COMMON COUNCIL
Page
2.01 Meetings 2
2.02 Council Committees 2
2.03 Special Committees 3
2.04 General Committees Rules 3
2.05 Common Council Rules of Procedure 3
City of Chilton Ch. 2 The Common Council
2
2.01 MEETINGS.
(1) ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING (Ord. #694 10/18/00)
Following a regular City election, the new Council shall first meet on the 3rd Tuesday of
April in each election year.
(2) REGULAR MEETINGS. (Ord. #1036 11/18/08) The regular meetings of the
Common council shall be held at the Council Chambers of the City Hall on the 1st and 3rd
Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. provided however, the Mayor may cancel one of the
two monthly council meeting at his/her discretion, with the approval of the Council
President.
(3) SPECIAL MEETINGS. Special meetings of the Common Council may be called by
the Mayor (or in his absence, by the President of the Council) or 3 or more alderman
filing with the City Clerk in writing a request therefor, stating the purpose of the meeting,
whereupon the City Clerk shall notify all members of the Common Council of such
special meeting and the reason therefore. No other business shall be considered or
transacted at any special meeting other than that for which the special meeting was
called.
(4) ADJOURNMENTS. Any regular or special meeting may be adjourned by a
majority of the members present, but no adjournment shall be made to a time later than
the next regular meeting.
(5) ORDER OF BUSINESS. The business of the Council shall be conducted in the
following order, unless temporarily suspended by unanimous vote:
(a) Call to order by presiding officer.
(b) Roll call.
(c) Reading, correction ad approval of minutes of the previous meeting.
(d) Receiving visitors.
(e) Reports of officers and department heads.
(f) Committee reports.
(g) Unfinished business from previous meetings.
(h) New business, including introduction of ordinances and resolutions.
(i) Communications and miscellaneous business.
(j) Consideration of bills and claims.
(k) Adjournment.
2.02 COUNCIL COMMITTEES. (10/03/06 #998 & #550, 4/21/81 & #704 4/5/89 & #886
8/3/99) The following standing committees of the Common Council shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council, on the 3rd Tuesday of April after each municipal
election or as soon thereafter as may be:
(1) General Government
(2) Public Safety
(3) Public Works
(4) Culture & Recreation Revised 11-08
City of Chilton Ch. 2 The Common Council
3
2.03 SPECIAL COMMITTEES. Select or special committees may be provided for on
motion or by resolution, designating the number and object, and unless otherwise
ordered, shall be appointed by the Mayor or other presiding officer of the Council.
2.04 GENERAL COMMITTEE RULES. The chairman of each committee shall be
responsible for the functioning of the committee. No committee shall have the authority
to bind the Council without express authority in each instance. All committees shall
report and make recommendations to the Council for final approval. On formal
assignments to committees, the report shall be in writing with a definite recommendation
and be signed by a majority of the committee. Any committee may require the
cooperation of any City officer in relation to matters pending before it.
2.05 COMMON COUNCIL RULES OF PROCEDURE.
(1) INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ETC.
(a) All ordinances, resolutions or communications shall be in writing and have
endorsed thereon the name of the person presenting the same, and shall be
delivered to the clerk to be read by him to the Council.
(b) The style of all ordinances shall be: “The Common Council of the City of
Chilton do ordain as follows:”
(2) REFERENCE AND READING OF ORDINANCES. All general ordinances and
every ordinance, resolution, committee recommendation or other matter appropriating
monies of the City shall be referred to a committee and shall receive 2 readings before the
Council. The first reading at its introduction may be by title only, and the second
reading, after the report of a committee thereon, shall be at length.
(3) REPORTS OF COMMITTEES.
(a) The committee to which any matter shall be referred shall report thereon in
writing, at the first regular meeting after such reference, unless there is no
objection by the Council to further time being taken. Action on the report of a
committee shall be deferred until the next regular meeting by the request of 3
Council members present. Committee reports shall be orally except when ordered
by the Mayor that they be in writing.
(b) Members dissenting from a report of a committee shall be so reported when
they request it.
(4) ROLL CALL VOTE.
(a) On all ordinances and resolutions, on any confirmation, and on the adoption
of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing money, or
creating any liability or charge against the City or any fund thereof, the vote shall
be by ayes and nays.
City of Chilton Ch. 2 The Common Council
4
(b) On all other questions, it shall be in order for a member to call for the ayes
and nays.
(c) All roll call votes shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
(5) MEMBERS WHO SHALL VOTE. Every member, when a question is put, shall
vote unless the presiding officer shall, for special cause, excuse him; but it shall not be in
order for a member to be excused after the Council has commenced voting.
(6) VETO BY MAYOR. All acts subject to the veto power of the Mayor shall be
submitted to him by the Clerk and shall be in force upon his approval evidenced by his
signature, or upon his failing to approve or disapprove within 5 days, which fact shall be
certified thereon by the Clerk. If the Mayor disapproves, he shall file his objections with
the Clerk, who shall present them to the Council at its next meeting. A ¾ vote of all
members of the Council shall then make the act effective notwithstanding the objections
of the Mayor.
(7) PUBLICATION OF PROCEEDINGS.
(a) The proceedings of the Council shall be published in the official City
newspaper in such manner as the Council may direct.
(b) All ordinances shall be published in the official City newspaper within 15
days of passage, and shall take effect on the day after publication or at a later date
if expressly prescribed.
(c) All ordinances and resolutions adopted shall be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the Clerk.
(d) The City code of ordinances shall be kept currently to date, and upon passage
of any ordinances, the Clerk shall provide for insertion of the same into the
ordinance code.
(8) RECOGNITION FOR DEBATE. Whenever a member is to speak in debate, or
deliver any matter to the Council, he shall respectfully address himself to the presiding
officer, and confine his remarks to the question under debate, and avoid personalities.
When 2 or more members address the presiding officer at the same time, the presiding
officer shall name the member who is first to speak.
(9) MOTIONS. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has been seconded;
nor shall any motion be withdrawn or amended without the consent of the person making
the same and the person seconding it.
(10) PRECEDENCE OF MOTIONS. When a question is under consideration, no
motion shall be entertained except:
(a) To adjourn.
(b) To lay on the table.
City of Chilton Ch. 2 The Common Council
5
(c) For the previous question.
(d) To postpone to a certain day or time.
(e) To commit to a standing or special committee.
(f) To amend or to substitute.
(g) To postpone indefinitely.
These several motions shall take precedence in their order as they stand in this rule.
(11) MOTIONS DECIDED WITHOUT DEBATE. A motion to adjourn, to lay on the
table and for the previous question, shall be decided without debate.
(12) MOVING THE PREVIOUS QUESTION. Any member desirous of terminating the
debate, may call the previous question, when the question to be announced by the
presiding officer shall be: “Shall the main question now be put?” Such motion shall be
decided without debate. If a majority of the members present vote in the affirmative, the
main question shall be taken without further debate, and its effect shall be to put an end to
all debate, and bring the Council to a direct vote, first upon the pending amendment, if
any, and then upon the main question.
(13) DIVISION OF QUESTION. Any member may call for a division of the question
when the same can be separated into 2 or more distinct propositions.
(14) MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION. It shall be in order for any member who
voted in the affirmative on any question which was adopted, or for any member who
voted in the negative when the number of affirmative votes was insufficient for adoption,
to move a reconsideration of such vote, at the same or next succeeding regular meeting of
the Council. A motion to reconsider having been lost shall not be again in order.
(15) SUSPENSION OF RULES. Any of these rules may be suspended upon pending
measure by a 2/3 vote of the aldermen present. These rules and all amendments or
additions thereto which may hereafter be made shall govern the Council until altered or
repealed as herein provided.
(16) AMENDMENT OF RULES. These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily
suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 2/3 of
the members present.
(17) ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER. The deliberations of the Council shall be
conducted in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in Robert’s Rules of
Order, revised, which is incorporated in this section by reference.
CHAPTER 3
FINANCIAL PROCEDURE
Page
3.01 Preparation of Tax Roll and Tax Receipts 2
3.02 Duplicate Treasurer’s Bond Eliminated 2
3.03 Claims Against City 2
3.04 Fiscal Year 3
3.05 Budget 3
3.06 Transfer of Appropriations 3
3.07 City Funds to be Spend in Accordance with Appropriation 4
3.075 Public Records 4
3.08 Destruction of Public Records 9
3.09 Facsimile Signatures 11
3.10 Volunteer Funds Held by the City of Chilton Fire Dept 11
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
2
3.01 PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS.
(1) AGGREGATE TAX STATED ON ROLL. Pursuant to sec. 70.65(2), Wis. States., the
City Clerk shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the aggregate amount of state,
county, school and local taxes in a single column in the roll opposite the parcel or tract
of land against which the tax is levied, or, in the case of personal property, in a single
column opposite the name of the person against whom the tax is levied.
(2) RATES STAMPED ON RECEIPTS. Pursuant to sec. 74.08(1), Wis. Stats., in lieu of
entering on each tax receipt the several amounts paid respectively for state, county,
school, local and other taxes, the aggregate amount of such taxes shall be combined in
a single column on the tax receipt issued by the City Treasurer. The Treasurer shall
cause to be printed or stamped on the tax receipt the separate proportion or rate of
taxes levied for state, county, school, local or other purposes.
3.02 DUPLICATE TREASURER’S BOND ELIMINATED. (Ord. #1001 12/5/06)
(1) BOND ELIMINATED. The City elects not to give the bond to the County Treasurer
provided for by sec. 70.67(1), Wis. Stats.
(2) CITY LIABLE FOR DEFAULT OF TREASURER. Pursuant to Sec. 70.67(2), Wis.
Stats. The City shall be obligated to pay, in case the City Treasurer shall fail to do so,
all taxes required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County Treasurer.
3.03 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY. (Ord. No.969 4/6/04)
(1) CLAIMS TO BE CERTIFIED. Prior to submission of any account, demand, or claim
to the Common Council for approval of payment, the City Clerk shall refer each
account, demand, or claim to the appropriate committee chairman or department
head for approval who shall refer such to the General Government Committee,
which shall certify, by indicating its approval of each claim, that the following
conditions have been complied with:
(a) That funds are available therefor pursuant to the budget.
(b) That the item or service was duly authorized by the proper official or agency and
has been received or rendered in accordance with the purchasing agreement.
(c) That the claim is accurate in amount and a proper charge against the treasury.
(2) GENERAL GOVERNMENT COMMITTEE REPORT. (Ord. #969 4/6/04) The
General Government Committee shall report to the Common Council the allowance or
disapproval of each account, demand, or claim. Upon adoption of such report by the
Common Council, the accounts, demands, and claims contained therein shall be
allowed or disapproved, as the case may be.
(3) PAYMENT OF REGULAR WAGES OR SALARIES. Regular wages or salaries of
City officers and employees shall be verified by the proper City official, department
head, committee chairperson and filed with the City Clerk in time for payment on the
regular payday.
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
3
3.04 FISCAL YEAR. The calendar year shall be the fiscal year. The fiscal year is defined, as an
accounting year comprised of a twelve (12) month period, which starts January 1.
3.05 BUDGET. (Ord. No.969 4/6/04)
(1) DEPARTMENTAL ESTIMATES.
On or before July 1 of each year, each department and committee shall file with the
City Clerk an itemized statement of detailed estimates of disbursements and the
conditions and management for the disbursements for the succeeding year. Such
statements shall be presented in the form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall be
designated as "Proposed Budget", and shall be as nearly uniform as possible for the
accounts of all departments.
(2) GENERAL GOVERNMENT TO SUBMIT. (a) Budget to Include. On or before
October 28 of each year, the staff consisting of clerk, mayor, director of public works
and department heads in conjunction with General Government Committee shall
submit to the Council a proposed executive budget presenting a financial plan for
conducting the affairs of the City for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall include
the following information:
a. The expense of conducting each department and activity of the City for the ensuing
fiscal year and corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal
year, with reasons for increase and decrease recommended as compared with
appropriations for the current year.
b. An itemization of all anticipated income of the City from sources other than
general property taxes and bonds issued, with comparative statement of the
amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the last
preceding and current fiscal year.
c. An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property taxes,
which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed
expenditures.
d. Such other information as may be required by the Council and by Wisconsin Law.
The City shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget thus prepared
for distribution to the public.
(3) HEARING. The General Government Committee shall submit to the Council at the
time the annual budget is submitted the draft of an appropriation ordinance providing
for the expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the submission of the
proposed appropriation ordinance to the Council, it shall be deemed to have been
regularly introduced therein. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget
and the proposed appropriation ordinance may be changed or amended and shall take
the same course in the Council as other ordinances.
3.06 TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS. Upon written recommendation of the General
Government Committee, the Council may at any time by a 2/3 vote of the entire
membership transfer any portion of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
4
other purpose or object. Notice of such transfer shall be given by publication within 15
days thereafter in the official City newspaper.
3.07 CITY FUNDS TO BE SPENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPROPRIATION.
No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City, nor shall any obligation for the
expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation in the
adopted budget or when changed as authorized by SS3.06 of this Chapter. At the close of
each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the general
fund and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the
Council, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements
or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such
appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which made shall have been
accomplished or abandoned.
3.075 PUBLIC RECORDS. (Ord. No. 586 12/21/82)
(1) DEFINITIONS.
(a) “Authority” means any of the following city entities having custody of a city
record; an office, elected official, agency, board, commission, committee,
council, department or public body corporate and politic created by
constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit of
the foregoing.
(b) “Custodian” means that officer, department head, division head, or employee
of the city designated under sub. (3) or otherwise responsible by law to keep
and preserve and city records or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her
office, or is lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public
records and who is required by this section to respond to requests for access to
such records.
(c) “Record” means any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual
or electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an authority.
“Record” includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or printed pages,
maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including computed tapes),
and computed printouts. “Record” does not include drafts, notes, preliminary
computations and like materials prepared for the originator’s personal use or
prepared by the originator in the name of a person for whom the originator is
working; materials which are purely the personal property of the custodian and
have no relation to his or her office; materials to which access is limited by
copyright, patent or bequest; and published materials in the possession of an
authority other than a public library which are available for sale, or which are
available for inspection at a public library.
(2) DUTY TO MAINTAIN RECORDS.
(a) Except as provided under sub. (7), each officer and employee of the city shall
safely keep and preserve all records received from his or her predecessor or
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
5
other persons and required by law to be filed, deposited or kept in his or her
office or which are in the lawful possession or control of the officer or
employee or his or her deputies, or to the possession or control of which he or
she or they may be lawfully entitled as such officers or employees.
(b) Upon the expiration of an officer’s term of office or an employee’s term of
employment, or whenever the office or position of employment becomes
vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his or her successor all
records then in his or her custody and the successor shall receipt therefor to the
officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with the city clerk. If a vacancy
occurs before a successor is selected or qualifies, such records shall be
delivered to and receipted for by the clerk, on behalf of the successor, to be
delivered to such successor upon the later’s receipt.
(3) LEGAL CUSTODIAN(S).
(a) Each elected official is the legal custodian of his or her records and the records
of his or her office, but the official may designate an employee of his or her
staff to act as the legal custodian.
(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the city clerk or the clerk’s designee shall
act as legal custodian for the Common Council and for any committees,
commissions, boards, or other authorities created by ordinance or resolution of
the Common Council.
(c) For every authority not specified in subs. (a) or (b) the authority’s chief
administrative officer is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer
may designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian.
(d) Each legal custodian shall name a person to act as legal custodian in his or her
absence or the absence of his or her designee.
(e) The legal custodian shall have full legal power to render decisions and to carry
out the duties of an authority under subch. 11 of ch. 19, Stats., and this section.
The designation of a legal custodian does not affect the powers and duties of an
authority under this section.
(4) PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS.
(a) Except as provided in sub. (6), any person to inspect a record and to make or
receive a copy of any record as provided in sec. 19.35(1), Stats.
(b) Records will be available for inspection and copying during all regular office
hours.
(c) If regular office hours are not maintained at the location where records are
kept, the records will be available for inspection and copying upon at least 48
hours advance notice of intent to inspect or copy.
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
6
(d) A requester shall be permitted to use facilities comparable to those available to
city employees to inspect copy or abstract a record.
(e) The legal custodian may require supervision during inspection or may impose
other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access to an original record if the
record is irreplaceable or easily damages.
(f) A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of locating and copying
records as follows:
1. The cost of photocopying shall be $0.10 per page. Said cost has
been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary, and direct
cost of reproduction.
2. If the form of a written record does not permit copying, the
actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic
processing shall be charged.
3. The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and
audio or videotapes, shall be charged.
4. If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall
also be charged.
5. There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual
cost therefor exceeds $50.00, in which case the actual cost shall
be determined by the legal custodian and billed to the requester.
6. The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees
and may require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if
such estimate exceeds $5.00.
7. Elected and appointed officials of the City of Chilton shall not
be required to pay for public records they may reasonably
require for the property performance of their official duties.
8. The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without
charge or at a reduced charge where he or she determines that
waiver or reduction of the fee is in public interest.
(g) Pursuant to sec. 19.34, Stats., and the guidelines therein listed, each authority
shall adopt, prominently display and make available for inspection and copying
at its offices, for the guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of
its organization and the established times and places at which, the legal
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
7
custodian from whom, and the methods whereby, the public may obtain
information and access to records in its custody, make requests for records, or
obtain copies of records, and the costs thereof. Each authority shall also
prominently display at its office, for the guidance of the public, a copy of (sec.
19.31 to 19.39, Stats.) (subs. (4) through (6) of this ordinance). This
subsection does not apply to members of the Common Council.
(5) ACCESS PROCEDURES.
(a) A request to inspect or copy a record shall be made to the legal custodian. A
request shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably described the requested
record or the information requested. However, a request for a record without a
reasonable limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the
record does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally,
but a request must be in writing before an actin to enforce the request is
commenced under sec. 19.37, Stats. Except as provided below, no request may
be refused because the person making the request is unwilling to be identified
or to state the purpose for the request. No request may be refused because the
request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a fee is required under sub.
(4) (f) 6. A requester may be required to show acceptable identification
whenever the requested record is kept at a private residence or whenever
security reasons or federal law or regulations so require.
(b) Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall, as soon as practicable and
without delay, either fill the request or notify the requester of the authority’s
determination to deny the request in whole or in part and the reasons therefor.
If the legal custodian, after conferring with the city attorney, determines that a
written request is so general as to be unduly time consuming, the party making
the request may first be required to itemize his or her request in a manner
which would permit reasonable compliance.
(c) A request for a record may be denied as provided in sub. (6). If a request is
made orally, the request may be denied orally unless a demand for a written
statement of the reasons denying the request is made by the requester within
five business days of the oral denial. If a written request is denied in whole or
in part, the requester shall receive a written statement of the reasons for
denying the request. Every written denial of a request shall inform the
requester that if the request for the record was made in writing, then the
determination is subject to review upon petition for a writ of mandamus under
sec. 19.37 (1), Stats., or upon application to the attorney general or a district
attorney.
(6) LIMITATIONS ON RIGHT TO ACCESS.
(a) As provided by sec. 19.36, Stats., the following records are exempt from
inspection under this section:
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
8
1. Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal law or
authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law;
2. Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law enforcement
purpose if federal law or regulations require exemption from disclosure or if
exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by the state;
3. Computer programs, although the material used as input for a computer
program or the material produced as a product of the computer program is
subject to inspection; and
4. A record or any portions of a record containing information qualifying as a
common law trade secret.
(b) As provided by sec. 43.30, Stats., public library circulation records are exempt from
inspection under this section.
(c) In responding to a request for inspection or copying of a record which is not
specifically exempt from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the city
attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he or she determines that
the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would outweigh the public
interest in full access to the requested record. Examples of matters for which
disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality that were necessary
and given in order to obtain the information contained in them.
2. Records of current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
3. Records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion,
demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline or any city officer or
employee, or the investigation of charges against a city officer or employee, or
the investigation of charges against a city officer or employee, unless such
officer or employee consents to such disclosure.
4. Records concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention.
5. Records of current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of city
property, investing of city funds or other city business whenever competitive or
bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
6. Financial, medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific
persons, which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse
effect upon the reputation of any person, referred to in such history or data.
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
9
7. Communications between legal counsel for the city and any officer, agent or
employee of the city, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with
respect to current litigation in which the city or any of its officers, agents or
employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are
privileged under sec. 905.03, Stats.
(d) If a record contains information that may be made public and information that may
not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information that may
be made public and delete the information that may not be made public from the
record before release. The custodian shall confer with the city attorney prior to
releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of the city attorney when
separating out the exempt material. If in the judgment of the custodian and the city
attorney there is no feasible way to separate the exempt material from the nonexempt
material without unreasonably jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the
entire record shall be withheld from disclosure.
(7) PRESERVATION THROUGH MICROFILM. Any city officer, or the director of any
department or division of city government may, (subject to the approval of the
Common Council) keep and preserved public records in his or her possession by
means of microfilm or other photographic reproduction method. Such records shall
meet the standards for photographic reproduction set forth in sec. 16.61(7) (a) and (b),
Stats. and shall be considered original records for all purposes. Such records shall be
preserved along with other files of the department or division and shall be open to
public inspection and copying according to the provisions of state law and of subs. (4)
through (6) of this ordinance.
(8) SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If a section,
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase shall be adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the validity of this
ordinance.
3.08 DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
(1) FINANCIAL RECORDS.
Officers may destroy the following non-utility records under their jurisdiction after
the completion of an audit by State auditors or an auditor licensed under Ch. 442,
Wis. Stats., but not less than 7 years after payment or receipt of the sum involved in
the applicable transaction:
(a) Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs.
(b) Bonds and coupons after maturity.
(c) Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs.
(d) License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates.
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
10
(e) Payroll and other time and employment records of personnel included under
the Wisconsin Retirement Fund.
(f) Receipt funds.
(g) Special assessment records.
(h) Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting documents
pertaining thereto.
(2) UTILITY RECORDS. Officers may destroy the following records of municipal
utilities subject to regulation by the State Public Service Commission and after an
audit as provided above, but not less than 2 years after payment or receipt of the sum
involved in the applicable transaction:
(a) Water, sewer, electrical stubs and receipts of current billings.
(b) Customers’ ledgers.
(c) Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not included in
plant accounts.
(d) Other utility records after 7 years with the written approval of the State Public
Service Commission.
(3) OTHER RECORDS. Officers are empowered to destroy the following records, but
not less than 7 years after the record was effective:
(a) Assessment rolls and related records, including Board of Review minutes.
(b) Contracts and papers relating thereto.
(c) Correspondence and communications.
(d) Financial reports other than annual financial reports.
(e) Insurance policies.
(f) Justice dockets.
(g) Oaths of office.
(h) Reports of boards, commission, committees and officials duplicated in the
official minutes.
(i) Resolutions and petitions.
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
11
(j) Voter record cards.
(4) NOTICE REQUIRED. Prior to the destruction of any public record described above
at least 60 days’ notice shall be given the State Historical Society.
3.09 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES. The Mayor and the City Clerk may affix their facsimile
signatures in lieu of their personal signatures on all orders, checks, drafts, and order checks
and receipts of the City as defined in Sec. 180.0103 (16), Wis. Stats. (Ord. No.969 4/6/04)
3.10 VOLUNTEER FUNDS HELD BY THE CITY OF CHILTON FIRE DEPARTMENT
(1) Definitions.
(a) “Fire volunteer funds” means funds of a municipality that are raised by volunteers
or by donation to the Fire Department, for the benefit of the municipality’s fire
department.
(b) “Municipality” means any city, village or town.
(c) “Public Depository” has the meaning given in §34.01 (5)
(d) “Volunteer funds” means fire volunteer funds.
(2) Purpose and Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority of the
Wisconsin Statute § 66.0608, for the purpose of authorizing volunteer funds to be held
in the name of the Fire Department. This section is to be interpreted in conformance
with that section as it may be amended from time to time.
(3) Authorization to Deposit Funds. The Common Council of the City of Chilton does
hereby authorize the City of Chilton Volunteer Fire Department to deposit volunteer
funds of their respective department in an account in the name of their department in
any public depository in which other City funds are being held. Such account shall
require four names on the signature card: City Clerk, Deputy City Clerk, Fire Chief
and Treasurer of the Fire Department. Two of the four signatures are required for
withdrawal of all funds. Such funds shall be recorded under the City of Chilton’s
Federal ID Number.
(4) Control of Funds. The Fire Chief/Treasurer is granted exclusive control over the
expenditures of volunteer funds of their department through the adoption of the annual
Department Budget. This authority is granted with limitation as to amount or type of
funds as further defined in the adopted budget. It is subject to the limitations and
requirements hereinafter set forth.
(5) Limitation and Requirements. The following limitations and requirements shall apply
to the handling and disbursement of volunteer funds from the accounts:
City of Chilton Chapter 3 Financial Procedure
12
(a) Expenditures. Expenditures for items approved through the annual department
budget may be paid by the Fire Chief/Treasurer. Expenditures for items not
budgeted for may be paid only upon majority vote of the Fire Department
members present at a regularly scheduled or duly noticed meeting of their
department.
(b) Donations and Self-Generated Funds. The City of Chilton Fire Department is
authorized to accept donations of money or equipment for use by the Department.
The Department is further authorized to conduct fund-raisers for Departmental use.
(c) Accountings. The Fire Chief shall provide the City Clerk with monthly bank
statements at the end of their respective fiscal year. The statements shall be
provided within 30 days after the end of the fiscal year. The statements shall
include a detailed itemization of all receipts, expenditures, and the balance on hand
at the end of the year. The Fire Chief shall also provide the source of all deposited
funds and the identity of the payee for each disbursement.
(d) Audit. Fire Department shall be included in any audit by the City. The Department
shall be responsible for any invoice associated with the audit.
Revised 4/16/2013
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
1
CHAPTER 4
TRAFFIC CODE
Page
4.01 Definitions 2
4.02 Provisions of State Law Adopted By Reference 2
4.03 Operation of Motor Vehicles on Public Premises 3
4.04 Speed Limits 3
4.05 Regulations for Specific Streets 5
4.06 Parking Restrictions 6
4.07 Weight Limitations 10
4.08 Bicycle Registration and Safety 10
4.9 Storage of Motor Vehicles, Truck Bodies, Tractors& Trailers 14
4.10 Abandoned Vehicles 15
4.11 Traffic Control Devices 16
4.12 Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEV) 16
4:13 Penalties 16
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
2
Section 4.01 DEFINITIONS. The words, phrases and terms used in this section shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) Disassembled, Inoperable, Junked or Wrecked Motor Vehicles, Truck Bodies, Tractors,
Trailers.
Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers in such state of physical or mechanical
ruin as to be incapable of propulsion or being operated lawfully upon the public streets or
highways.
(2) Unlicensed Motor Vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers.
Motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors or trailers that do not bear lawful current license
plates, but are required to do so, to be operated upon public streets or highway.
(3) Motor Vehicle. As defined in Wisconsin Statutes 340.01(35)
(4) Junk. Worn out or discarded material of little or no value including, but not limited to,
household appliances or parts thereof, machinery and equipment or parts thereof, vehicles
or parts thereof, tools discarded building material, or any other unsightly debris, the
accumulation of which has an adverse effect upon the neighborhood or City property
values, health, safety or general welfare.
(5) In the open. Land which may be viewed from public streets or adjourning property.
(6) Bicycle means every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals, and having wheels,
any two of which are not less than 14 inches in diameter.
(7) Licensing Authority means the City of Chilton.
(8) Neighborhood Electric Vehicle (NEV) means a self-propelled motor vehicle, excluding
golf carts, that has successfully completed the Neighborhood Electric Vehicle America
Test Program conducted by the Federal Department of Energy and that conforms to the
definition and requirements for low-speed vehicles as adopted in the Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards for Low-speed Vehicle under 49 CFR 571.3(b) and 571.500
and which is defined under Wis. Stat. §340.01 (36r) and authorized under Wis. Stat.
§349.26.
Section 4.02 PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. (#822 6/18/96)
All provisions of Chapters 340 thru 348 and Chapter 941.01of the Wisconsin Statutes
describing and defining regulations with respect to vehicles and traffic for which the
penalty is a forfeiture only, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to the penalties to
be imposed or the punishment for violation of such statutes, are hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be
performed or prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or
prohibited by this chapter. This adoption by reference shall also include any subsequent
additions, modifications or other changes to Chapters 340 thru 348 and Chapter 941.01 of
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
3
the Wisconsin Statutes. Citations issued there under shall be referred to by the prefix
“4.” Followed by the applicable state statute chapter and section number.
Section 4.03 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PREMISES.
(1) No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as to cause the tires thereof to squeal, the
horn to blow excessively or the motor to race excessively.
(2) No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to
travel in an irregular path or the vehicle to unnecessarily sway from side to side as a
result of being driven in an irregular or weaving path or in an unsafe manner.
(3) No person while operating a motor vehicle or motorized cycle shall rapidly or
suddenly accelerate in a manner that result in the wheels spinning at a rapid rate or
the leaving of tire marks caused by said spinning.
(4) Compression brakes prohibited. Except in Emergency no person shall use motor
vehicle brakes within the city limits of the City of Chilton which are in any way
activated or operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or
any unit or part thereof.
Section 4.04 SPEED LIMITS.
The Council hereby determines that the statutory speed limits in the following streets or
portions thereof are unreasonable, unsafe or imprudent and modifies such speed limits
under authority granted by Section 349.11, Wis. Stats.
(1) SPEED LIMITS INCREASED. Speed limits established by Section 346.57(4), (e),
(f), (g), and (h) Wis. Stats., are increased as hereinafter set forth upon the following
streets or portions thereof: (Ord. #759 5/19/92)
(a) The speed limit on E. Chestnut Street from S. Madison Street east to Calumet
Street shall be 30 miles per hour. (Ord. #856 3/17/98)
(b) The speed limit on North Madison Street from Breed Street northerly for 0.13
miles shall be 35 miles per hour.
(c) The speed limit from 0.13 miles north of Breed Street on North Madison
Street to the north City limits shall be 45 miles per hour.
(d) The speed limit on West Main Street from the intersection of Heimann Street
to 1050 ft. West of Intersection of West Main and Quinney Road shall be 35
miles per hour and the speed limit on West Main Street from 1050 ft. West of
the intersection of West Main Street and Quinney Road to the West City
Limits shall be 55 miles per hour. (Ord. #964 7/15/03, Ord. #776 9/7/93)
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
4
(e) The speed limit on Court Street from the driveway at 704 Court Street to the
City Limits to shall be 35 miles per hour. (Ord. #759 5/19/92)
(f) The speed limit on N. State Street from the intersection of Breed and N. State
Street shall be 35 miles per hour extending from that point to the city limits.
(Ord. #887 9/7/99)
(g) The speed limit on E. Breed Street from the intersection of Madison and
Breed Streets shall be 35 miles per hour extending from that point East to the
city limits. (Ord. #888 10/5/99)
(h) The speed limit on Irish Road from the intersection of U.S. 151 and Irish Road
shall be 35 miles per hour extending from that point to the intersection of Irish
Road and Breed Street. (Ord. #888 10/5/99)
(i) The speed limit on M-B Lane from the intersection of M-B Lane and South
Madison Street (C.T.H. G) to the intersection of M-B Lane and East Chestnut
Street (U.S.H. 57/32) shall be 35 miles per hour. (Ord. #958 4/01/03)
(2) SPEED LIMITS DECREASED. The speed limits are decreased as hereinafter set
forth upon the following streets or portions thereof:
(a) The speed limit on all that part of Chestnut Street lying west of Francis Street
shall be 15 miles per hour. (Ord. #534 6/17/80)
(b) The speed limit on Walnut Street shall be 15 miles per hour. (Ord. #767 1/5/93)
(c) The speed limit on East Calumet Street from the intersection of East Chestnut
to four hundred feet (400 ft) east of Opportunity Drive shall be (40) forty
miles per hour. (Ord. #1005 12/19/07)
(d) The speed limit on Chestnut Street from Calumet Street, south on State Trunk
Hwy 57 to the south City limits shall be (40) forty miles per hour. (Ord #934 9/4/01)
(e) School Zone -15 mph. speed limit the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m. when school is in session shall be established as follows:
(Ord. #1047 7/21/09)
(1) On West Main Street (Hwy 151) – 850 feet west of the intersection of
Heimann Street and West Main Street (Hwy 151) and 50 feet west of the
intersection of Quinney Road and West Main Street (Hwy 151)
(2) On Court Street – from the intersection of Heimann Street and Court
Street west to 350 feet east of the intersection of Court Street and Kiesner
Drive
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
5
(3) On Spring Street - from the intersection of Spring Street and East Main
Street, 650 feet north
(4) On Heimann Street - from the intersection of Court and Heimann Street
south to the intersection of West Main Street.
(f) The speed limit on Quinney Road from the intersection of U.S. 151 and
Quinney Road shall be 35 miles per hour extending from that point to the
corporate limits. (Ord. #964 7/15/03)
(g) The speed limit on Irish Road from the intersection of Hwy 151 to the
Corporate Limits shall be (35) thirty-five miles per hour. (Ord. 1155 12/18/2018)
(h) The speed limit on Chestnut Street (Hwy 57) from the intersection of Calumet
Street to the Corporate Limit shall be (35) thirty-five miles per hour.
(Ord. 1155 12/18/2018)
(i) The speed limit on E. Calumet Street (Hwy 151) from the intersection of
E. Chestnut to the Corporate Limits shall be (35) thirty-five miles per hour.
(Ord. 1155 12/18/2018)
Section 4.05 REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC STREETS (Ord #1044 3/17/09)
(1) GENERALLY THROUGH STREETS. Through streets shall be those main traffic
carriers with right-of-way priority, which are designated by the Common Council
and shown on a through street map, which is on file in the office of the Director of
Public Works. The Common Council may make additions or deletions to the
through street map in order to produce adequate through traffic routes as well as
good internal traffic circulation. A through street is one on which all direct
crossings are controlled by a stop sign or signal.
(2) ONE-WAY STREETS. The Common Council may provide that traffic shall move in
only one (1) direction on designated streets and alleys, on file in the office of the
Director of Public Works.
(a) Westerly on School Court between Park Street and Brooklyn Street.
(3) ONLY RIGHT TURN INTERSECTIONS. No operator of a vehicle shall turn left on
the following streets:
(a) Madison Street at Waters Edge Lane, eastbound traffic. Revised 12/18/2018
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
6
Section 4.06 PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
(1) NO PARKING. When signs are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no
person shall park a vehicle longer than the period hereinafter specified either attended
or unattended:
(a) On the south side of Grand Street from the Grand Street east bridge line for a
distance of 67 feet easterly. (Ord. #622 9/18/84 & Ord. #783 4/19/94)
(b) On the south side of Washington Street from the City Hall driveway
to the west property line of 51 West Washington Street.
(c) On the east and west side of East Main Street from the north line of
Commerce Street north for one hundred forty feet.
(d) On both sides of East Chestnut Street from Madison Street to Calumet Street.
(Ord. #803 7/5/95)
(e) On the east side of East Grand Street from its intersection with East Main
Street and running northwesterly a distance of 125 feet. (Ord. #627 11/20/84)
(f) On the south side of East Main Street from Spring Street to Park Street and on
the north side of the E. Main Street Bridge. (Ord. #712 11/21/89)
(g) On any bridge within City Limits
(h) On the north side of Brooklyn Street east and west of School Court a distance
of 30 feet and on the east and west side of School Court a distance of 30 feet from
Brooklyn Street.
(i) On the north side of East Main Street a distance of 45 feet east and west of
Spring Street. (Ord. #538 8/19/80)
(j) On Spring Street a distance of 30 feet from East Main Street northerly on the
east side, and from East Main Street to Lincoln Street on the west side. (Ord. #538
8/19/80)
(k) On the west side of South State Street from the State Street bridge north 40
feet.
(l) On the South side of Manhattan Street commencing 380 feet to 470 feet west
of the curb line of Diane Street. (Ord. # 1059 1/9/2010, Ord. #854 1/6/98)
(m) On the north side of West Main Street a distance of 79 feet East from the
East curb line of North State Street. (Ord. #636 10/1/85)
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
7
(n) On the north side of West Main Street a distance of 79 feet West from the
West line of North State Street. (Ord. #771 5/18/93)
(o) On the south side of East Main Street a distance of 30 feet West from the
West line of Adams Street.
(p) On the north side of Washington Street a distance of 37 feet west from the
west line of Madison Street, and on the south side of Washington Street a distance
of 61 feet west from the West line of Madison Street. (Ord. #538 8/19/80)
(q) On the south side of East Main Street commencing from the West property
line of 457 East Main Street west a distance of 567 feet east. (Ord. #670 9/15/87)
(r) On the south side of Court Street commencing from the corner of Heimann
Street, west to the west property line of 528 Court Street. (Ord. #1054 10/20/09)
(s) On the north side of Columbia Street from the corner of Adams Street
westerly for 105 feet. (Ord. #729 11/6/90)
(t) On the north side of E. Main Street from the corner of Grand Street easterly
for 40 feet. (Ord. #767 1/5/93)
(u) On both sides of Court Street commencing at the East Exit of the Calumet
County Courthouse (206 Court Street) to the West Entrance of the Calumet
County Courthouse. (Ord. #1082 11/1/2011)
(v) On the north side of Court Street commencing from the East property line of
414 Court Street, west to the west property line of 528 Court Street.
(Ord. # 1054 10/20/09)
(w) On the South side of Court Street from a point 185 feet west of the Centerline
of State Street. (Ord. #842 8/19/97)
(x) On Both sides of & except Sundays and public holidays and except for thirty
(30) minutes allowed parking on the west side of Vogt Lane from the north
property line to the south property line of 521 Vogt Lane. (Ord. #868 10/20/98
& Ord. 1013 4/3/07)
(y) South side of West Calumet Street for a distance of 40 feet west from the
inner radius of the intersection of Chestnut and Calumet Streets. (Ord. # 870 11/3/98)
(z) East Side of Adams Street for a distance of 80 feet south from the centerline
of Main Street. (Ord. #875 3/2/99)
(aa) That portion of E. Main Street on the south side commencing 200 feet from
the centerline of Spring Street extending westerly and for a distance of 290
feet. (Ord. #961 7/1/03)
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
8
(bb) Both sides of Irish Road from the intersection of E. Calumet Street (Hwy.
151/Irish Road) north to the intersection of Breed Street (County Trunk Y)
and Irish Road. (Ord. #971 4/20/04)
(cc) Both sides of MB Lane from the intersection of S. Park Street and MB Lane
east 600 feet, except Sundays and Public holidays. (Ord. #974 6/15/04)
(dd) East side of South Park Street from the intersection of S. Park Street and MB
Lane south 600 feet, except Sundays and Public holidays. (Ord. #974
6/15/04)
(ee) On both sides of Madison Street from Chestnut Street north to the City limit.
(Ord. #978 11/16/04)
(ff) On the south side of Waters Edge Lane from the intersection of South
Madison Street east to the intersection of South State Street. (Ord #1140 8/1/17)
(2) TWO HOUR PARKING. No person shall park any vehicle for more than 2 hours
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and public holidays and
from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Friday except if a public holiday falls on a
Friday, on the following streets where parking is permitted: (Ord. #733 12/18/90)
(a) On Main Street from the West property line of 203 West Main Street east to
the east Center Street.
(b) On the East Side of North State Street from West Main Street north of the
108 North State Street.
(c) On both sides of School Street from North Madison Street west to North State
Street. (Ord. #1080, 8/2/11)
(d) On Main Street both sides 35 E. Main Street from State Street easterly to the
east property line of the on East Main Street.
(e) On the West side of State Street from West Main Street to School Street.
(3) PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
(a) No person shall park any vehicle or leave standing any vehicle or equipment
between 2:30 A.M. and 6 A.M. in the City owned Parking Lots located off Main
Street and School Street. (Ord. No. 1098 12/4/2012)
(b) No person shall permit any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home
in his custody to park or remain unattended on any street, alley, municipal parking
lot, park or any other public place in the City in excess of 48 hours. Any such
vehicle parked or left standing on any street, alley, municipal parking lot, park or
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
9
public place in the City in violation of this section may be removed by or under
the direction of the Chief of Police and the expense of the removal charged to the
owner of the motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home. (Ord. # 1108
10/7/2014, Ord. #543 11/5/82)
(c ) On the north side of Waters Edge Lane 80 feet from the west right-of-way of
Madison Street and 80 feet from the east right-of-way of State Street. (Ord. #1140
8/1/17)
(d) ) 24 hour parking is allowed on the west side of the city-owned parking lot,
which has an entrance off Main Street and exit to School Street. (Ord. #1145
2/16/2018)
(4) E. BROOKLYN STREET PARKING. No person shall park any vehicle for more
than 2 hours any day between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on the north side of E.
Brooklyn Street from the corner of Memorial Drive easterly to the end of the
street. (Ord. #778 12/7/93)
(5) WINTER PARKING RESTRICTIONS. (Ord. #1048 7/21/09)
The following restrictions are placed on any vehicle between November 1 and
extending to April 15:
(a) No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle or equipment upon any of
the streets or alleyways of the City between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b) Alternate parking is required for vehicles in residential areas only.
Alternate parking means on even numbered calendar days a vehicle must be
legally parked on the side of the street with even house numbers; on odd
numbered calendar days a vehicle must be legally parked on the side of the
street with odd house numbers.
(6) POST OFFICE PARKING. (Ord. #962 7/1/03)
No person shall park any vehicle for more than 10 minutes on that portion of E. Main
Street on the south side of Main Street commencing 135 feet west from the centerline
of Spring Street extending westerly 200 ft., except for Sundays and Holidays.
(7) MOVING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES. Whenever any police officer finds
a vehicle standing upon a street in violation of a prohibition, limitation or restriction
on stopping, standing or parking, he shall move such vehicle or require the operator in
charge thereof to move such vehicle to a position where parking is permitted, and the
cost of moving such vehicle shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle. Sec.
349.13(3), Wis. Stats., is by reference made a part of this chapter.
(8) HANDICAP PARKING ZONES. (Ord. #564 12/15/81 & Ord. #682 6/7/88)
State Statutes Adopted. The Statutory provisions of 346.505 describing and defining
regulations with respect to stopping, standing or parking prohibited in parking spaces
reserved for vehicles displaying special registration plates or special identification
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
10
cards are hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as if fully set
forth herein.
Section 4.07 WEIGHT LIMITATIONS. (Ord. #694 10/18/88)
All City Streets and alleys are designated Class "A" highway and are subject to
weight limitations established in Section 348.15, Wis. Stats.
Section 4.08 BICYCLE REGISTRATION AND SAFETY.
(1) REGISTRATION AND LICENSING.
(a) Applicability. No person, who resides within the City of Chilton, shall ride or
propel a bicycle on any street unless such bicycle has been registered and a
current registration sticker is attached thereto as provided herein. This section
shall not apply to the use of a newly purchased bicycle during the 10-day period
immediately following the purchase of the bicycle. This section shall apply to all
residents of the City of Chilton and to such nonresidents who operate bicycles
upon the streets of the City of Chilton habitually or frequently. It shall not apply
to casual travelers or tourists passing through the City of Chilton.
(b) Applications. (Ord. #781 3/1/94) Application for a bicycle registration
sticker shall be made upon a form provided by the licensing authority. The
registration fee shall be $5.00 and be a permanent license for the bicycle. All
bicycles must be registered, except that newly purchased bicycles and bicycles
brought into the City shall be registered within 10 days of arrival or purchases.
(c) Issuance. (Ord. #781 3/1/94)
(1) The licensing authority upon receiving proper application and
registration fee therefore is authorized to issue a bicycle registration.
(2) The licensing authority shall not issue a registration for any bicycle
when it is believed that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the
possession of such bicycle.
(3) The licensing authority shall keep a record of the number of each
registration, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom
issued, the serial number of the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and
a record of all bicycle registration fees collected. Registration forms and
registration stickers shall be serially numbered to coincide with each other.
(4) If a bicycle does not have a serial number, and if ownership can be
proven, the licensing authority shall assign one to said bicycle.
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
11
(d) Registration Sticker. (Ord. #781 3/1/94)
(1) The licensing authority, upon issuing a bicycle registration, shall also
issue a registration sticker bearing the registration number assigned to the
bicycle and the name of the City.
(2) At the time of the issuance of any registration sticker, the applicant
shall immediately upon issuance attach such sticker to the bicycle, as
hereinafter provided.
(3) Each registration sticker shall be placed on the side of and at the top of
the seat tube just below the opening provided for the seat post in such a
manner so as to be visible from the left hand side of the bicycle.
(4) No person shall remove a registration sticker from a bicycle, except in
the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street
in the City of Chilton, in which event the registration is canceled. (Ord.
#781 3/1/94)
(5) No bicycle shall be considered registered until a registration sticker
shall be affixed to the frame of such bicycle, as herein before specified,
which shall remain so affixed unless removed by the licensing authority
for cause. (Ord. #781 3/1/94)
(6) In the event that an owner shall lose his registration sticker, or the
same is destroyed, stolen or defaced, the owner shall immediately report
the same to the licensing authority, which shall then issue to such owner a
new registration sticker according to the provisions herein.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or counterfeit any
registration sticker issued under this ordinance.
(e) Transfer of Ownership. Within 10 days after any registered bicycle has
changed ownership, the new owner shall report such transfer to the licensing
authority, together with such information as such authority requires to complete
the change of registration.
(f) Inspection. The licensing authority or any person assigned such
responsibility, shall inspect each bicycle before registering the same and shall
refuse registration for any bicycle determined to be in an unsafe condition.
(g) Abandoned Bicycles. Any abandoned, unclaimed or unidentified bicycle
remaining in the possession of the licensing authority for 30 days may be sold by
such authority at public auction.
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
12
(2) TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
(a) General. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to
all duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under the laws of the State of
Wisconsin and the traffic code for the City of Chilton, except as to those
provisions which by their nature have no application.
(b) Special Rules. Every person operating a bicycle on the streets, sidewalks
or other public ways in the City shall comply with the special regulations under
this section and the special rules applicable to bicycles under state law. (ss.
346.79-81, Wisconsin Statutes)
(c) Sidewalks. Bicyclists exercising due care may operate a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, except for the following sidewalks:
(1) Madison St. – between School Street and Main Street
(2) Main St. – between State Street and Spring Street and Main Street
between Mill Street and Adams Street
(d) Passengers. No bicycle except a tandem shall be used to carry any person
except the operator, unless equipped with a child’s seat, in which case the
following conditions and regulations must be met:
(1) The operator shall be sixteen (16) years of age or older.
(2) The passenger shall not exceed 50 lb. In weight and shall be seated on
the child’s seat.
(3) The child’s seat shall be fastened securely to the bicycle and shall be
located behind the operator’s seat, shall be so designed and manufactured
for this specific purpose and be equipped with safety belt, arm rest, back
rest, foot and spoke protection, have a firm seat and back, and shall be
attached to the frame at 3 points with bolts or nuts, 2 of which are at either
side of the wheel axle or the frame adjacent to the rear axle.
(4) Only one (1) child’s seat shall be attached to a bicycle.
(e) Careless Riding.
(1) No person shall operate a bicycle upon a street or walk in the city
carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in
a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, the property or
person of others, or in such a manner so as to interfere with the free
passage of the public.
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
13
(2) No person operating a bicycle upon a public street or sidewalk shall
participate in any race, speed or endurance contest, unless such race or
endurance contest has the written permission of the Chief of Police and is
conducted under the supervision of the police department.
(3) No person riding or operating a bicycle shall perform, or attempt to
perform, any acrobatic, fancy, or stunt riding upon any public streets or
sidewalks.
(f) Stopping, Turning, and Signaling. In the event any other traffic may be
affected by such movement, no bicycle operator shall stop, slow down, or turn
without giving an arm signal required by state law for the operation of motor
vehicles.
(1) Stopping: No person may stop or suddenly decrease his speed without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in s. 346.35, Wis.
Stats., to the operator of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is
opportunity to give such signal. This subsection does not apply to the
operator of a bicycle approaching an official stop sign or traffic control
sign.
(2) Turning: Every person riding or operating a bicycle intending to run
to the right at an intersection, alleyway or driveway shall approach the
turning point in the line of traffic nearest the right hand curb of the street.
Any bicycle driver, in turning left at an intersection, shall pass to the left
of the center of the intersection before turning, unless otherwise directed
by markers or signs. At intersections where traffic is moving in opposite
directions, if it is not safe for bicycles to make turns as mentioned above,
the bicycle driver shall stay in the right lane and ride to the opposite
corner, then dismount and walk the bicycle to the left hand corner and
proceed. Crosswalks shall be used when walking a bicycle through an
intersection.
(g) Right-of-Way. The operator of a bicycle shall, in all cases, yield the right-ofway
to all pedestrians while riding across a sidewalk, and to all motor vehicles
while riding across a private drive or alleyway.
(h) Age Requirement. No person under 8 years of age shall operate a bicycle on
City streets, except persons 6 and 7 years of age may operate a bicycle on City
streets during daylight hours if accompanied by an adult.
(i) Towing Prohibited. The operator of a bicycle shall not tow, drag or cause to
be drawn behind his bicycle any coaster, sled, toy vehicle, person on roller
skates or any other type of conveyance.
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
14
(j) Parking.
(1) No person shall park any bicycle on a sidewalk the width of which is
less than 5-1/2 feet.
(2) On sidewalks with a width of 5-1/2 feet or more, bicycles shall not be
parked:
(a). On the main traveled portion of the sidewalk;
(b). Against or adjacent to windows
(c) . Or in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians,
traffic or property.
(3) Bicycle racks are to be used for parking where provided. Bicycles are
not to be parked on the sidewalk if a bicycle rack is available within
300 feet and accessible without crossing the street.
Section 4.9 STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES, TRUCK BODIES, TRACTORS AND
TRAILERS.
(1) No person shall accumulate, store or allow any disassembled, junked, inoperable or
wrecked motor vehicles, truck bodies, tractors, trailers in the open upon any public or
private property in the City for a period exceeding 10 days.
(2) No person shall accumulate, store or allow any unlicensed motor vehicle, truck body
or trailer in the open upon any public or private property in the City for a period
exceeding 10 days.
(3) EXCEPTIONS. Section 2 shall not apply to the following:
(a) Any business engaged in the sale, repair or storage of such unlicensed vehicles
in a properly zoned district.
(b) Garden tractors and mowers may be stored in the rear yard not less than 10
feet from any property line.
(4) REMOVAL. Whenever the Chief of Police shall find any such vehicle as set forth in
sub. (1), he may such vehicle to be removed and stored on municipal property for 30
days, at the end of which time the City may dispose of such vehicle unless previously
claimed by the owner. Before removing any such vehicle from private property in the
City, the Chief of Police shall notify the owner of the property upon which such
vehicle is located of the intent of the City to remove such vehicle. If such vehicle is
not removed within 7 days after notice, the Chief of Police shall enter such property
and cause such vehicle to be disposed of. The cost of administering this subsection
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
15
shall be charged against the property owner upon which such vehicle is located and if
not paid shall be entered as a special charge against the property in the tax roll.
Section 4.10 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
(1) ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED. No person shall leave unattended any motor
vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or mobile home on any public street or highway or public
or private property, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the
vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. When any such vehicle has
been left unattended on any City street or highway or on any public or private
property within the City without the permission of the owner for more than 72 hours,
the vehicle is deemed abandoned and constitutes a public nuisance.
(2) REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. Any vehicle
in violation of this section shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of
under sub. (3), except if the police chief or his duly authorized representative
determines that the cost of towing and storage charges for the impoundment would
exceed the value of the vehicle, the vehicle may be junked by the City prior to
expiration of the impoundment period upon determination by the police chief or his
duly authorized representative that the vehicle is not wanted for evidence or other
reason.
(3) DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
(a) 1. If the police chief or his duly authorized representative determines that
the value of the abandoned vehicle exceeds $100, he shall notify the
owner and lien holders of record by certified mail that the vehicle has been
deemed abandoned and impounded by the City and may be reclaimed
within 15 days upon payment of accrued towing, storage and notice
charges, and if not so reclaimed shall be sold.
2. If an abandoned vehicle exceeds $100 in value and is not reclaimed
within the period and under the conditions as provided above, it may be
sold at public sale.
3. After deducting the expense of impoundment and sale, the balance of
the proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the City treasury.
(b) Any abandoned vehicle, which is determined by the police chief or his duly
authorized representative to have a value of less than $100 may be disposed of
by direct sale to a licensed salvage dealer upon determination that the vehicle
is not reported stolen.
(4) OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR IMPOUNDMENT AND SALE COSTS.
The owner of any abandoned vehicle, except a stolen vehicle, is responsible for the
abandonment and all costs of impounding and disposing of the vehicle. Costs not
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
16
recovered for the sale of the vehicle may be recovered in a civil action by the City
against the owner.
(5) NOTICE OF SALE OR DISPOSITION. Within 5 days after the sale or disposal of a
vehicle as provided in sub. (3), the police chief or his duly authorized representative
shall advise the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, Division of Motor
Vehicles, of such sale or disposition on a form supplied by the Division. A copy of
such form shall also be given to the purchaser of the vehicle. A copy shall also be
retained on file in the City.
Section 4.11 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
(1) The Public Works Director shall procure, place and maintain traffic control devices
according to 349.065 Wisconsin Statutes.
(2) REMOVAL OF UNOFFICIAL SIGNS AND SIGNALS. The Public
Director shall have the authority granted by Section 349.09.
Section 4.12 NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES (NEV) (Ord. 1034 10/7/08, Ord. 1130 8/2/2016)
(1) Except as herein provided, a NEV may be operated in any city street with a speed
limit of 25 miles per hour or less. Such operation shall not be allowed on the
following city streets:
Madison Street/Highway 57 (from Chestnut Street north to the city limits)
Highway 151
Irish Road
E. Breed Street
Highways 57 and 151 may be crossed in a perpendicular fashion only at the following
intersections:
Highway 57: Grand St., Maple St., Park Street, Washington Street
Highway 151: State Street, Diane Street, Maple Street, Park Street
(2) All operators of neighborhood electric vehicles shall conform to all regulations
contained in this chapter, including the provisions of the state motor vehicles laws
incorporated herein, except those provisions, which by their express terms have no
application to a neighborhood electric vehicle.
(3) All operators of neighborhood electric vehicles shall have valid WI drivers license.
Section 4.13 PENALTIES. (Ord. 1034 10/7/08 Ord. 1023 11/6/07)
(1) Except for Section 4.06 (6), All Night Parking, the penalty for violating Section 4.06
Parking Restriction, shall be $10.00. Failure to pay such forfeiture within five (5)
days of such violation by traffic citation or otherwise shall double the forfeiture.
Failure to pay within thirty (30) days after written notice will result in court action
with a penalty of up to $75.00 plus costs.
City of Chilton Ch. 4 Traffic Code
17
(2) The penalty for violating Section 4.06(6) All Night Parking shall be $25.00 for each
violation. Failure to pay such forfeiture within five (5) days of such violation shall
double the forfeiture. Failure to pay within thirty (30) days after written notice will
result in court action with a penalty of up to $120.00 plus costs and towing fees.
(3) The penalty for violating section 4.02 shall be those penalties established in TRANS
305, WI Administrative Code, which are incorporated by reference.
(4) The penalty for violating any other provision of this chapter shall be as provided in
Section 20.04 of this Municipal Code.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
1
CHAPTER 5
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Page
5.01 Street and Sidewalk Grades 2
5.02 Official Street Map 2
5.03 Sidewalk Installation 3
5.04 Privileges in Streets 5
5.045 Access to City Streets 6
5.05 Placing Building Materials in Streets 10
5.06 Snow and Ice Removal 11
5.07 Uniform Building Numbering System 12
5.08 Tree Planting, Pruning and Removal 14
5.081 Snowmobiles 18
5.09 Penalty 19
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
2
5.01 STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES.
(1) ESTABLISHMENT. The Director of Public Works shall establish the grade of all
streets, alleys and sidewalks. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be worked until the
grade thereof is established. The grades of all streets having curb and gutter on the
effective date of this code are established at the levels then existing.
(2) ALTERING GRADE PROHIBITED. No personal shall alter the grade of any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof unless authorized and instructed
to do so by the Director of Public Works.
5.02 OFFICIAL STREET MAP.
(1) ESTABLISHMENT. There is established an Official Map of the City showing the
location and width of streets, highways and parkways as laid out, adopted and
established. Such Official Map consists of 2 sheets: Sheet 1 of 2 (Street
Development Plan), showing the location and width of streets within the City limits
and adjacent thereto; and Sheet 2 of 2 (Street Extension Plan), showing the location
and width of the extension of the major street system of the City into the adjacent
unincorporated area over which the City can exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction in
accordance with Sec. 62.23 (6), Wis. Stats.
(2) PLAT APPROVAL. No land subdivision plat shall be approved unless such plat
conforms to the Official Map.
(3) PERMITS. For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map, no
building shall be erected or located within the bed of any street, highway or parkway
shown on the Official Map unless a permit therefor shall first have been applied for
and issued in accordance with sec. 62.23 (6), (d), (e), (f) and (g), Wis. Stats. The
applicant for such a permit shall submit to the Building Inspector with his application
an accurate plot plan, certified by a qualified surveyor, showing the location of the
proposed building with reference to any street, highway or parkway shown on the
Official Map.
(4) CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. The Common Council may, whenever and as
often as it may deem it for the public interest, and after a public hearing as provided
in sec. 62.23 (6) (b), Wis. Stats., change or add to the Official Map of the City so as
to establish the exterior lines of planned new streets, highways and parkways or to
widen, narrow, extend or close existing streets, highways or parkways.
(5) REGISTRATION. The City Clerk shall file with the Register of Deeds of Calumet
County a certificate showing that the City has established an Official Map and shall
do likewise as to any changes or additions.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
3
5.03 SIDEWALK INSTALLATION. (Ord. #957 2/18/03)
(1) POLICY. It is policy of the City that safe pedestrian traffic requires sidewalks on
certain streets in the City. Such streets include arterial and collector streets, and
streets bordering or providing routes to schools, parks, churches, health care
facilities, commercial businesses, day cares and other institutional uses. All
sidewalks shall be installed by the City to maintain uniformity and maintenance.
(2) GUIDELINES FOR INSTALLATION. Consistent with this policy, the following
guidelines will be followed in determining where sidewalks shall be installed:
(a) Existing, Improved Streets. In areas where streets have been fully improved
with curb and gutter but lack sidewalk, the Common Council may order the
installation of sidewalk in order to provide safe pedestrian traffic. This may
only involve installation on one side of the street.
(b) Existing, Unimproved Streets. In areas where existing streets have not been
improved with curb and gutter, at the time of installation of the curb and
gutter, sidewalk shall also be installed on both sides on those streets where
safe pedestrian traffic requires. This would include the types of streets
described in paragraph (1), plus cul-de-sacs in excess of 500 feet in length.
(c) New Subdivision and Streets. Sidewalks shall be installed on all streets (both
sides) except for cul-de-sacs under 500 feet in length. Such installation shall
occur on each street once 70% of the lots abutting on such street are occupied.
The plat or certified survey map shall show the location of such required
sidewalks. (Ord. #976 7/20/04)
(d) Narrow Streets. Sidewalks shall not be required along streets where the rightof-
way is three rods (49.5 feet) or less. (Ord. No. 997 10/3/2006)
(3) COST. The cost of new sidewalk installation shall be borne by the abutting property
owner or the developer in the case of a new subdivision. The City shall proceed to
construct the sidewalk and assess the cost thereof to the abutting owner pursuant to
either Section 66.0703 or 66.0907 of the Wisconsin Statutes. (Ord. #1009 2/6/07,
Ord. #957 2/18/03)
(4) SPECIFICATIONS. New sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
following specifications:
(a) Width. Sidewalks shall have a width as prescribed by sec. 17.03(4) (c) of the
Municipal Code.
(b) Longitudinal Grade. The grade of all sidewalks shall conform to the
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
4
established grade ordinances and plan for the street on which the sidewalk is
to be constructed. The Director of Public Works must approve any deviation
from the grade ordinance in writing.
In no case shall the longitudinal grade deviate no more than ¾” per foot from
the established grade for such walk. Any change in the longitudinal grade
shall be constructed in such a manner as to be smooth and pleasing in
appearance. Abrupt breaks in grade shall be avoided.
(c) Transverse Grade. Sidewalks shall slope from the lot line towards the street
in order to provide adequate drainage. This slope shall in general be a
minimum of ¼” and a maximum of ½” per foot.
(d) Thickness and Mix. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 4” nominal thickness
with the exception of a driveway section and approaches, which shall have a
minimum thickness of 6”. Concrete mix shall be 5 ½ Portland cement per
cubic yard of concrete. There shall be 2” thick sand or crushed gravel base
provided for all sidewalks, where necessary, and compacted to the
specifications of the Director of Public Works.
(5) REPAIR OF EXISTING SIDEWALK. The City shall undertake and pay for the
repair and replacement of existing sidewalks, where due to age and deterioration
such action is necessary. It has been past practice and will continue to be the
practice of the City to evaluate one ward each year for repair and replacement where
needed. However, where safety requires, repairs and replacement can be done
anywhere. Where repair or replacement is required because of damage or conditions
caused by the abutting property owner or that owner’s invitees or agents, then the
cost and responsibility for such repair or replacement shall be borne by the abutting
property owner. The procedures described in paragraph (3) will be followed.
(6) EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES. A property owner who is required to install
sidewalk may seek an exception or variance from the City where topography or other
conditions exist that create a hardship or result in an impracticality, or where
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance result in an unreasonable hardship or
impracticality. Any exception or variance granted shall not compromise the stated
policy of safe pedestrian traffic. The property owner must petition for a variance or
exception within 30 days after being notified by the City to install the sidewalk. The
Public Works Committee shall hear the petition and make a recommendation to the
Common Council. The Council will make the final determination as to whether or
not an exception or variance is granted. Provided, however, the City reserves the
right to revoke an exception or variance where subsequent circumstances require the
installation of sidewalk in compliance with this ordinance.
Also, in areas where the property owner has extensively landscaped, graded or
improved the abutting property in such a way as to substantially increase the cost of
installing sidewalk, and such work was done in reliance upon direction from the City
in the past that installation of sidewalk would not be required in the future, then in
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
5
that instance the City will underwrite part or all of the cost of re-landscaping, grading
and relocation of improvements which are over and above what would be considered
normal and customary.
5.04 PRIVILEGES IN STREETS.
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. The privilege for an obstruction or excavation beyond the lot
line or within any street in the City shall be granted only as provided in this section.
No person shall obstruct or excavate within any street right-of-way unless such
person has first secured a permit from the Department of Public Works, excepting for
sidewalk installation required under section 5.03.
(2) EXCAVATIONS: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERMIT HOLDER.
The privilege of excavating within the street right-of-way shall be granted only on
condition that the permit holder assumes the following responsibilities: (Ord. #879
5/4/99)
(a) The Applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its employees
and its agents, from any liability arising out of the issuance of exercise of this
permit.
(b) The permit holder shall file an appropriate performance bond with the
Director of Public Works in the amount of $10,000.00 running to the City, and
such third parties as may be injured, to secure the performance of these
conditions: This requirement may be waived by the Public Works Director if
applicant provides other satisfactory proof of financial responsibility as
determined by the Public Works Director; or if Public Works Director
determines that the circumstances do not merit the filing of such bond.
(Ord. #583 10/5/82)
(c) The permit holder shall not open cut the entire street at any one time so as to
prohibit vehicular traffic, excepting that the Director of Public Works may
grant an exception to this condition upon a determination that such opening
would not adversely affect public health or safety, and that it is in the best
interest of the City.
(d) Upon completion of the necessary work and before any backfilling is
commenced, the permit holder shall notify the Department of Public Works to
allow for the necessary inspections.
(e) The permitted facilities shall, if necessary, be altered at the expense of the
Applicant to permit alteration, improvement, or maintenance of the highway
as may hereafter be ordered. The entire cost of constructing and maintaining
the permitted facilities shall be the obligation of the Applicant unless a
contract for such costs has been executed.
(f) No open cutting for a crossing will be allowed where the pavement is too
narrow to maintain one-way traffic at all times, unless the City has granted
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
6
permission. Wherever the pavement is opened, the soil shall be hauled away
and the trench shall be backfilled and compacted in layers with materials
meeting the City’s specifications. The pavement removed for a road crossing
shall be replaced as per the City specifications.
(g) When one-way traffic or a detour is used, the Applicant shall provide ALL
NECESSARY SIGNS, FLAGMEN AND LIGHTS required according to the
“Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices”. When detour is allowed, City
Police Chief or County Sheriff shall be notified by the Applicant in advance
of the work being started.
(h) All disturbed areas shall be returned to their present condition or better,
subject to the satisfaction of the City. Access to all private drives and public
street intersections shall be maintained and all disturbed areas completely
restored.
(i) Any trenching, tunneling, or excavating shall be performed in accordance with
the requirements of OSHA and the State of Wisconsin and any applicable
local regulations.
(j) All open excavation shall be barricaded for public safety and all excess
excavation material shall be removed from the right-of-way by the permit
holder.
(k) Terrace openings may be filled with excavated material.
(l) A copy of this approval, along with any plans and special provisions, shall be
on the job site.
(m) Upon completion of the work, the Applicant shall file a written notice with
the City.
(3) SCHEDULE OF FEES. Compensation for the special privilege of obstructing or
excavation within the right-of-way shall be paid into the general fund. The fee for
such privilege shall be established by the Public Works Director. All fees must be
paid before a permit is issued. (Ord. #976 7/20/04)
(4) GENERAL CONDITIONS. The permit holder shall be obligated to remove any
obstruction or excavation upon 10 days written notice by the Department of Public
Works.
5.045 ACCESS TO CITY STREETS
(1) APPLICABILITY. This Ordinance shall be applicable to all existing accesses to City
Streets, including driveways whether a permit was issued in the City of Chilton prior
to the date of enactment of this Ordinance.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
7
(2) PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the safe
and efficient ingress and egress to City streets in the interest of public safety by
assuring that driveways accessing to City streets meet certain engineering safety
requirements; to reduce accidents caused by frequent and poorly designed driveways;
to reduce soil erosion adjacent to City streets; to promote the balanced use of land for
the mutual protection of landowners, motorists and citizens of the City of Chilton;
and to enhance the appearance of City streets so as to make street travel more
pleasant.
(3) SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not
be affected thereby.
(4) COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCE. Any property owner seeking to construct,
reconstruct or change the use of a driveway with access upon a City Street within the
City of Chilton shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(5) DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or phrases used
herein are defined as follows:
(a) Access – a recognized point of vehicular entry on to a street where evidence of
use has been clearly established.
(b) Agricultural Driveway – A point of access to highway for purposes of
utilization of natural resources for the purpose of raising and selling basic
food stuffs, but not including the extensive processing of raw goods. This
shall also cover any real estate used for grazing.
(c) Commercial Driveway – A point of access to a City Street for purposes of
commerce, including dwellings designed for occupancy of more than two
families'.
(d) City of Chilton Director of Public Works – The City of Chilton Director of
Public Works and his designees (herein after referred to as the “Director”).
(e) Public Works Committee – The Public Works Committee of 3 individuals
appointed by the Mayor for a one-year term expiring in April of each year.
(f) Driveway – A point of access to a street.
(g) City Street – A street or road, primarily for access to residence, commercial,
or other abutting property.
(h) Intersection – A place where two streets intersect.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
8
(i) Residential driveway – A point of access to a street for purposes of serving a
building designed for or occupied exclusively for one to two families.
(6) PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONSTRUCT OR RECONSTRUCT DRIVEWAY.
(a) No entrance upon or departure from a City Street within the City of Chilton
may be constructed reconstructed or have a change in use without the property
owner first obtaining a permit from the Director. This shall include the
blacktopping and concreting of existing driveways. The person applying for
an access permit shall complete an application and submit all fees as
established by resolution to the City of Chilton before the permit is issued.
(Ord. No. 1087, 4/17/12)
(b) Applications for permits shall be obtained from the City of Chilton Director,
42 School Street, Chilton, WI 53014.
(c) The Director shall approve or deny the permit in accordance with the
standards of Sections (8) thru (11) of this Ordinance within 30 days of receipt
of the application and fee.
(d) An access permit shall expire 90 days from the date of issuance if evidence of
use has not been established within that time.
(e) When a violation of this ordinance occurs, the Director may revoke any
access permit(s), which is the subject of the violation.
(f) In addition to the permit application, an applicant may be required to submit
sufficient information including, but not limited to scale drawing, engineering
data, traffic generation, property lines, topography, streams, lakes and ponds,
marshes and the location of existing and proposed buildings and structures etc.
as a condition for approval.
(g) Permits shall be issued only in the name of the owner of the property upon
which driveway construction, reconstruction or change of use is to occur.
(h) A non-refundable charge shall be assessed by the City Clerk to those making
application for the issuance of a permit for the construction or reconstruction of
an entrance or departure upon a City Street. A charge shall also be assessed for
the removal of an illegally placed driveway (actual costs incurred). Said fee shall
cover the cost of inspection and review only.
(7) TEMPORARY PERMITS.
(a) The Director may designate a private access point as “temporary” and submit
to periodic review. In the interest of public safety, convenience and general
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
9
welfare, the Director may revoke a “temporary” access permit or it may
require modifications to remedy a problem situation.
(b) A City Street or highway shall not be opened into or connected with a
designated controlled access street without the approval of the Director.
(c) No access point shall be converted to a City Street or highway unless
approved by the Director.
(8) LOCATION, DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
The location, design and construction of an entrance upon or departure from a
City Street shall be in accordance with the following policies and limits, which in
no case shall be exceeded unless specific written authorization is obtained from
the Director.
(a) A driveway shall have a minimum of 10 ft. (10’) and a maximum top width of
(24) feet for residential or agricultural and a maximum driveway top width of
thirty-five (35) feet for commercial. The entire driveway roadway and its
appurtenances shall be contained within the frontage along the street of the
property served unless otherwise approved by the Director.
(b) All driveways shall be constructed so as to ingress and egress the City Street
at an angle of ninety (90) degrees to the City Street, unless otherwise
approved by the Director.
(c) A driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from a City Street
intersection, and shall be no less than 30 feet (30’) from end of corner radius
where curb and gutter is installed and 30 feet from the intersecting right-ofway
on streets with no curb and gutter.
(d) All driveways shall be constructed of solid load bearing material. The top
surface of the driveway shall consist of at least six inches of gravel upon the
traveled portion.
(e) Concrete approaches or aprons shall be required within the street right-of-way
in curb and gutter areas.
(f) Driveways shall not obstruct or impair drainage in highway side ditches or
roadside areas. A culvert shall consist of a corrugated metal culvert pipe with
apron end walls. The culvert length shall be determined by the Director. The
culvert and apron endwalls shall be furnished by the property owner.
(g) All driveways, in open ditch streets shall be constructed or reconstructed to
have sloped sides, unless the streets have curb and gutter. Such construction
shall be accomplished using only soil materials. The side slopes of the
driveway shall be sloped at no more than a length to height grade ratio of 4:1.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
10
All slopes shall be seeded or sodded by the property owner. Culvert size shall
be a minimum of 18”.
(h) The restricted area between successive driveways may be filled in or graded
down only if the following requirements are fully complied with:
(1) The filling in or grading down shall be to grades approved by the
Director except where street drainage is by means of curb and gutter,
in which case water drainage of the area shall be directed away from
the street roadbed in a manner approved by the Director.
(i) The City of Chilton Public Works Director may impose any other
requirements deemed necessary with regard to the construction of any
driveway so as to promote the safe and efficient ingress and egress to the
Street and to protect the public investment in the street.
(9) CHANGE IN USE. In the event the property owner changes the use of the driveway
from residential to commercial and/or agricultural, the property owner shall apply for
a permit for such change of use as required in this ordinance. The Director may
require modification to the access to comply with this ordinance or may revoke or
disallow the change of use of the access.
(10) VARIANCES. Any person or any office or department aggrieved by an order,
requirement or interpretation made by the Director of Public Works may petition for a
variance under section 10.03(9) of the Municipal Code. (Ord. #1016 6/5/07)
(11) VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
(a) Any property owner violating any provisions of this section of the Code,
shall, upon adjudication of guilt as to such violation, be subject to a penalty of
not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each violation. In addition, the City
shall be entitled to injunctive relief.
(b) In addition, the City of Chilton may take corrective action to eliminate the
violation. The reasonable cost to be assessed against the abutting property or
the access where the violation is occurring.
5.05 PLACING MATERIALS IN STREETS. No person shall place or cause to be placed any
materials in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public square without written permission
from the Director of Public Works. (Ord. No. 1069 1/18/2011)
(1) Materials Defined. Materials deemed unlawful by this section shall consist of any
matter foreign to the surface on which it is placed or which has not been placed thereon
by direction of the Director of Public Works or which is not placed thereon by action of
the elements. These materials may consist of, but are not confined to, earth, stone,
masonry materials, snow, ice, vegetable matter or debris of any nature.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
11
(2) Removal Required. Any person depositing Material on any street, sidewalk, alley,
parking lot and other city owned property in violation of this section shall remove such
material within eight (8) hours of being ordered by the Director of Public Works and/or
Police Department. In the event if such order is not complied with to such violator shall
be responsible for actual cost of removal of Material and/or subject to a penalty in
Section 20.04 of the Municipal Code.
5.06 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL. (Ord. No. 1069 1/18/2011)
(1) The owner of any lot or lots abutting a sidewalk in the City right-of-way shall keep the
same clear of snow and ice to the width of such sidewalk at all times at the owner’s
expense. It shall be the judgment of the Director of Public Works or designee whether
or not the sidewalk is considered to be adequately cleared. (Ord. No. 767 1/5/93)
(2) Residents of the City of Chilton shall be required to remove snow or ice within 36
hours after a snowfall, sleet or succession of drifting. If the owner has not cleared the
sidewalk within 36 hours, the Director of Public Works or designee shall have the
sidewalk cleared at the owner’s expense. The expense thereof shall be paid by the
property owner at a cost established by the Department of Public Works per lineal foot
of lot frontage, per cleanup. The clerk shall invoice each property owner. If the invoice
remains unpaid then the provisions in (3) shall apply. (Ord. #523 12/4/79, Ord. #546
1/20/81, Ord. #569 3/3/82 & Ord. #1012 4/3/07)
(3) The Director of Public Works shall, pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes, Sec. 66.0907(5)
keep an accurate account of the expenses of clearing or removing such snow and ice in
front of each lot or parcel of land, and shall report the same to the City Treasurer who
shall annually prepare a statement of the expense so incurred in front of each lot or
parcel of land and report the same to the City Clerk, and the amount therein charged to
each lot or parcel of land shall be by such Clerk entered in the tax roll as a special tax
against said lot or parcel of land, and the same shall be collected in all respects like
other taxes upon real estate.
(4) Removal of snow and ice from public sidewalks or private property by the owner
thereof shall not create a hazard to traffic by being deposited on the City streets.
It shall be the sole discretion of the Chief of Police and Director of Public Works
whether or not a hazard to traffic exists by such a deposit. Upon written complaint of
the Chief of Police filed with the Director of Public Works that such a hazard to traffic
exists, the Director of Public Works shall have the authority to clear the area of the
hazard. The expense thereof shall be paid by the property owner at the actual cost of
the removal.
(5) The owner of any such lot may, no late than November 15 of each year, apply to the
Director of Public Works on forms provided for such purpose, for an exemption from
the removal of snow and ice upon such property for the forthcoming winter season.
The Director of Public Works may, upon a showing of sufficient cause, including but
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
12
not limited to, dead-end sidewalks, sidewalks not contiguous with abutting sidewalks
and sidewalks not frequented by pedestrians, grant the exemption for the term of the
forthcoming winter season. An exemption is valid only for the season granted and must
be applied for each new winter season.
(6) In the event of a snow emergency and it becomes physically impractical to clear walks
because of large amounts of snow, the Director of Public Works has authority to extend
the 36 hour time limit in (2) above.
(7) The owner of any lot or lots abutting a sidewalk in the City shall take proper measures
by way of sanding, salting or otherwise to insure that slippery or icy sidewalks are safe
for pedestrian travel. A reasonable amount of sand may be procured from the City
Garage for such purpose.
(8) The Council empowers the Director of Public Works to employ his authority at his
discretion to eliminate any and all dangerous conditions and safety hazards. In the
absence or inability of the Director of Public Works to so act, it shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police to enforce this ordinance; in the absence of both; the Mayor shall
appoint a proper City official or employee for this purpose.
(9) Notice of the provisions of this ordinance shall be published in the first yearly
November edition of the City official newspaper, and no other notification shall be
made to owners who are in violation of the ordinance.
5.07 UNIFORM BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM.
(1) There shall be a uniform system of numbering houses and buildings fronting all
streets, avenues and public ways in the city and all houses and buildings shall be
numbered in accordance with this section.
(2) Main Street shall constitute the base line for numbering along all streets running north
and south, and Madison Street shall constitute the base line for numbering along all
streets running east and west.
(3) The numbering for each street shall begin at the base line. The numbers within the
first block shall be from 10 to 99, the second block shall be 100 to 199, the third
block shall be from 200 to 299, etc. There shall be assigned 100 numbers to each
block, square or space that would be one block or square, if streets each way were so
extended as to intersect each other, and one number shall be assigned to each 25 feet
of frontage. In blocks or equivalent space longer than 1,250 feet, which is not
intersected by a street, the total length of space divided by 50 shall be used to
determine the feet of frontage assigned to each number.
(4) All lots and houses on the south and west side of all streets shall be numbered with
odd numbers, and all lots and houses on the north and east side of all streets shall be
numbered with even numbers, each commencing with the hundred assigned to that
block, and shall increase from the base line, one number for each 25 feet of frontage
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
13
or fraction thereof, except as provided in subsection (3). Where any building has
more than one door serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned
to each door serving a separate occupant, providing the building is 25 feet or more in
width. If the building is not 25 feet or more in width and the entrances are not that far
apart, the next consecutive number shall be marked fractional. Buildings fronting on
2 or more streets shall have a number assigned only to the main entrance, unless other
entrances serve different occupants.
(5) All streets not extending through to the base line shall be assigned the same relative
numbers as if the said street had extended to the said base line.
(6) (a) The Common Council has caused a survey to be made and there is assigned to
each house and building located on any street, avenue, alley or highway, its respective
number under the uniform system provided for in this section, as shown on the housenumbering
map made a part of this section. The owner, occupant, or agent shall place
or cause to be placed upon each house or building controlled by him the number or
numbers assigned under the uniform system provided for in this section.
(b) The cost of such number or numbers shall be paid for by the property owner, and
the numbers used shall be not less than 3 inches in height.
(c) The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side
of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen plainly from
the street. Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the street
line, the number of such building shall be conspicuously displayed in an
appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk.
(7) Where only one number can be assigned to any house or building, the owner,
occupant or agent of such house or building, who shall desire distinctive numbers for
the upper and lower portion of any such house or building, or for any part of such
house or building fronting on any street, may use the suffix “A”, “B”, “C”, etc. as
may be required.
(8) For the purpose of facilitating correct numbering, a copy of a map showing the proper
numbers of all lots or houses fronting upon all streets, avenues, or highways, shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. This map shall be open to inspection by
all persons during the office hours of the Clerk.
(9) The City Clerk shall inform any party applying therefor of the number or numbers
belonging to or embraced within the limits of said lot or property as provided in this
section. In case of doubt as to the proper number to be assigned to any lot or
building, the Clerk shall determine the number of such lot or building.
(10) Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or located in the City, the
owner shall procure the correct number or numbers so assigned upon the building as
provided by this section. No permit shall be issued for any house; building or
structure until the owner has procured from the Clerk the official number of the
premises.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
14
(11) All police officers shall report the violation of this section.
(12) If the owner or occupant of any building required to be numbered by this section
shall neglect for more than 30 days to duly attach and maintain the proper number on
such building, the City Clerk shall cause to be served upon him a notice requiring
such owner or occupant to properly number the same, and if he neglects to do so for
10 days after the service of such notice, he shall be deemed to have violated this
section.
(13) If the owner of any building fails to properly number said building or portion thereof
as required by this Section, then the building inspector shall have the building
properly numbered by the best means available and shall charge to the owner of said
building or portion thereof $20.00 for each unit so numbered. (Ord. #646 6/17/86)
5.08 TREE PLANTING, PRUNING AND REMOVAL. (Ord. #782 4/19/94)
(1) PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the intent of this code to promote and protect the
public health and safety by regulating tree planting, pruning and removal.
(2) DEFINITIONS. The following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this
section.
(a) Person. Any individual or entity.
(b) Public Area. Land owned, controlled, or leased by the City of Chilton,
including but not limited to, road right-of-way, terraces, and park lands.
(c) Public Nuisance.
1. Communicable Disease. Any potentially fatal disease infecting trees
growing on either public or private property that is capable of infecting
other trees within the City.
2. Hazardous Trees. Any tree that displays a loss in structural integrity,
limbs and/or trunk, so as to represent a danger to the general public.
3. Insect Infestations. Existing insect populations that severely threaten the
life of the tree(s) and have the potential to spread and cause damage to
other trees within the City.
(d) Terrace. The area between the sidewalk and street or where there is no
sidewalk, the area between the right-of-way line and street.
(e) Tree. Any woody plant which reaches a mature height taller than 15 feet.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
15
(3) TREE BOARD. (Ord. #1117 5/19/2015)
(a) Composition. The Chilton Tree Board shall be comprised of members of the
Culture and Recreation Committee.
(b) Duties and Responsibilities. The Chilton Tree Board will be responsible for
reviewing and making recommendations on urban forestry management
policies, urban forestry budgets, and community education and awareness
programs.
(4) CITY FORESTER. The Director of Public Works shall serve as City Forester
(a) Responsibilities.
1. The City Forester will be responsible for the administration of all
maintenance activities, including planting of all trees growing in public
areas and the administration and enforcement of this section.
2. The City Forester shall keep and maintain and make available copies of the
City’s Tree Ordinances, Tree Maintenance Manual, and Comprehensive
Planting Plan.
3. The City Forester shall issue and administer permits for the pruning,
removal, and planting of trees on public areas by the adjacent property
owner.
(5) PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT. The City shall have the right in the interest of
public health and safety and pursuant to its police power, to abate public nuisances as
defined in this section as follows:
(a) Abatement Order. Upon investigation and determination by the City Forester
that a tree constitutes a public nuisance, the City Forester shall cause to be
served upon the property owner a written abatement order detailing the
nature of the nuisance; the particular tree or trees affected; the method or
manner of abatement (including wood disposal): and the date by which such
abatement must take place.
(b) Appeal. If a property owner disputes the Abatement Order, such owner may
appeal the order by filing with the City Clerk a written request to appeal the
Order. Such request shall be filed within 10 days of service of the Abatement
Order and shall state the basis for the appeal. The appeal shall be heard within
30 days by the Street, Sidewalk & Lighting Committee. Written notice of the
date and time of the appeal hearing shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the
property owner at least 10 days before the hearing. The property owner shall
present his or her basis for the appeal. The City Forester shall also appear to
respond to the appeal as necessary. The committee shall affirm, reverse or
modify the Abatement Order. Such decision shall be final and binding upon
the property owner. Revised 5/19/2015
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
16
(c) Noncompliance. If a property owner fails to comply with the Abatement
Order, or the decision of the committee upon appeal, then the City may enter
upon the property, or contract with a third party to enter upon the property to
abate the nuisance by removing part or all of the affected tree or trees. The
cost of such removal and disposal shall be assessed against the property on
which was located the public nuisance.
(6) TREE MAINTENANCE.
(a) Publicly Owned Trees.
1. Except as provided in subsection (7), the City shall maintain any tree
growing on public areas.
2. The City shall utilize those standards for pruning of trees on public
property as detailed in the Tree Maintenance Manual.
3. The City shall routinely monitor and maintain adequate clearance for
sidewalk and vehicular travel, traffic signs, lights and other structures.
4. The City shall routinely survey and remove, or cause to be removed, those
limbs of sufficient size to cause either bodily harm or property damage,
that are dead, dying, or broken.
5. Utility Companies shall notify the City Forester prior to the pruning of any
tree on a public area for the purpose of maintaining utility line clearance.
All pruning shall comply with accepted arboricultural standards for line
clearance and the Tree Maintenance Manual.
6. No person shall prune more than 20% and/or remove any tree on a public
area without a permit, issued free of charge by the City Forester. All
pruning shall comply with the Tree Maintenance Manual.
7. Any person pruning or removing any tree on a public area shall be held
liable to public property as the result of such pruning and/or removal.
(b) Privately Owned Trees. Persons who own property adjacent to public areas
shall prune and/or remove any tree so as to maintain adequate clearance for
sidewalk and vehicular travel, traffic signs, lights and other publicly owned
structures.
(7) TERRACE TREE PLANTING POLICIES.
(a) No person or entity shall plant a tree in the terrace without first obtaining a
permit, free of charge, from the City Forester and shall follow the following
procedures.
(b) No tree shall be planted in a terrace with a width of less than 6 feet.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
17
(c) No tree shall be planted closer than 60 feet from the nearest road intersection.
(d) No tree shall be planted closer than 15 feet from the adjacent properties
approach drive.
(e) No tree shall be planted within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(f) No tree shall be planted within 15 feet of a utility pole.
(g) Only tree species listed in the Comprehensive Planting Plan shall be planted
in the terrace.
(h) Upon receiving a planting permit, the property owner agrees to assume the
responsibility of maintaining and caring for the trees planted and agrees to
enter into a maintenance agreement with the City. Tree maintenance
includes, but is not limited to, maintaining adequate clearance defined in
Section 6.
(i) The length of the maintenance agreement is for the life of the tree(s) planted
within the terrace, including the eventual removal.
(j) “The obligation of the property owner to obtain a planting permit and assume
the responsibility and maintenance of caring for the trees described above
shall apply to any trees planted by the Tree Board, a utility, a service
organization, or other entity involved in a tree planting project. Prior to the
planting of any trees in a terrace by such an entity, such entity shall inform
the adjacent property owner of the obligation to obtain a permit and assume
responsibility for maintenance and care of the trees in the terrace.” (Ord.
#901 4/2/2000)
(8) REMOVAL, DESTRUCTION AND INJURY OF TREES IN PUBLIC AREAS. No
person shall remove, destroy or injure a tree on a public area, other than in conformity
with this section.
(9) TERRACE MAINTENANCE
(a) PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the intent of this section to promote and
protect public health and safety by the maintenance of terraces.
(b) DEFINITIONS.
(1) Person. Any individual or entity.
(2) Terrace. The area between the sidewalk and street, or where there is
no sidewalk, the area between the right-of-way line and
street.
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
18
(c) MAINTENANCE OF TERRACE. In addition to other obligations placed
upon a person who owns land abutting upon a road right-of-way, including the
removal of obstructions, the planting of trees and other such maters described
in the Municipal Code, such owner of abutting property shall be responsible
for the maintenance of the terrace, including existing trees. Unless approval is
obtained from the Director of Public Works for an alternate type of surface,
such maintenance shall be consistent with the balance of the property owner’s
lawn. Where, due to terrain or the size of the terrace a grass lawn is
impractical or undesirable, in the discretion of the Director of Public Works,
then said director may permit the abutting owner to utilize an alternate surface
that is more compatible with the terrace conditions. Examples of such
alternatives would be blacktop or concrete where the terrace is narrow or
ground cover where the terrace is steep.
(d) FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. Any person who fails to maintain the terrace as
provided above and such failure continues more than 10 days after a person is
sent written notice by the City to affect maintenance of the terrace, then in that
event the owner shall be liable for the expense incurred by the City in doing
the maintenance. Such amount shall be placed upon the tax roll and become a
lien on the abutting property as a special charge.
(10) VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 20.04 of this code. In
addition, any person who violates subsection (8) shall also be liable for the
replacement value of the subject tree, such replacement value to be determined by
using the Eight Edition of the International Society of Arboriculture's Tree Appraisal
formula.
5.081 SNOWMOBILES.
(1) STATE SNOWMOBILE LAWS ADOPTED. (#976 7/20/04)
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the statutory provisions
describing and defining regulations with respect to snowmobiles in Sections 350.02 to
350.05, 350.07 to 350.107, 350.11, 350.12, 350.13, 350.135, 350.15 to 350.17,
350.19, 350.99, and Sections 346.02(10) and 346.02(11) of the Wisconsin Statutes
are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this section as if fully set forth
herein. Acts required to be performed or prohibited by such statutes are required or
prohibited by this section.
(2) For purpose of definition, all references to “snowmobile” within this section, and any
other section of the Municipal Code, shall include all terrain vehicles (ATV). (#588
2/15/83)
(3) SNOWMOBILE ROUTES AND TRAIL S DESIGNATED.
(a) Except as provided in sec. 350.02 and 350.045, Wis. Stats., or for
snowmobile events authorized in accordance with sec. 350.04, Wis. Stats., no
person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right of way, in any
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
19
public park, or on any other public municipal property in the City except
upon the following designated snowmobile routes and trails.
1. Streets and Highways. (#732 12/4/90, #954 12/3/02) All those streets and
shoulders of highway(s) as indicated on a map submitted by the
snowmobile club and approved by the Council for that winter season.
2. Parks and Recreational Areas. (#590 3/1/83) Operation of snowmobiles is
authorized in Hobart Park in designated areas or on marked trails, and in
the Calumet County Fair Grounds (subject to approval of Fair
Association).
(b) No person shall fail to obey any route or trail sign, marker or limit erected in
accordance with this section.
(4) ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
a) Speed. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public right of way or
highway within the City at a speed in excess of that permitted or posted for
other motor vehicles or in any public park or area.
b) Hours of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public
highway or other public property, in any public park or recreational area, lake
or upon any private premises open to public for snowmobiling within the City
limits between 2:30 a.m to 7:00 a.m.
c) Unattended Vehicles. No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile owned or
operated by him to remain unattended on any public highway or public
property while the motor is running or with the starting key left in the ignition.
d) Operation on Sidewalks or Malls Prohibited. No person shall operate a
snowmobile on any sidewalk, pedestrian way or mall within the City.
e) Operation on Private Premise Restricted. No person shall operate a
snowmobile on any private property not owned or controlled by him within
the City without the permission of the owner.
f) Operation on Icebound Waters. No person shall operate or ride upon a
snowmobile on the Manitowoc River at any time or place without permission
from the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is directed and authorized to
procure, erect and maintain signs giving notice that such restrictions are in
effect at all public access points to such river.
(5) PENALTY.
Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties described in
Sec. 350.11, Wis. Stats.
5.09 PENALTY. (Ord. #976 7/20/04)
City of Chilton Ch. 5 Streets & Sidewalks
20
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulations
adopted hereunder shall, in addition to other prescribed penalties, be subject to a penalty
as provided in Section 20.04 of this Code.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
1
CHAPTER 6
LICENSES AND PERMITS
Page
6.01 Intoxicating Liquor and Fermented Malt Beverages 2
6.02 Direct Sellers 8
6.03 Auctions 13
6.04 Taxicabs 14
6.05 R-MH Mobile Home District 14
6.06 Penalty 20
6.07 Dog License Tax 20
6.08 Bed and Breakfast Establishment 20
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
2
6.01 INTOXICATING LIQUORS AND FERMENTED MALT BEVERAGES.
(1) STATE STATUTES ADOPTED
The provisions of Wisconsin Statutes, Chapter 125, including the penalty provisions,
are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein
verbatim, including any amendments to said Chapter 125 subsequent to the enactment
of Section 6.01. ((Ord. No. 1091 6/19/12, Ord. #1071 3/15/11, Ord# 1058 1/19/2010,
#578 7/6/82, #617 6/19/84, #755 2/4/92, #756 3/17/92)
This section shall allow dry night as defined in Statute 125.07(3) and (8) for an underage
person(s) who enter or remain in a room on Class "B" or "Class B" licensed premises
separate from any room where alcohol beverages are sold or served, if no alcohol
beverages are furnished or consumed by any person in the room where the underage
person is present and the presence of underage persons is authorized under this
subdivision. An underage person may enter and remain on Class "B" or "Class B"
premises under this subdivision only if the City of Chilton issued the Class "B" or "Class
B" license adopts an ordinance permitting underage persons to enter and remain on the
premises as provided in this subdivision and the Law Enforcement Agency, the Chilton
Police Department is responsible for enforcing the ordinance issues to the Class "B" or
"Class B" licensee a written authorization permitting underage persons to be present
under this subdivision on the date specified in the authorization. Before issuing the
authorization, the Chilton Police Department shall make a determination that the presence
of underage persons on the licensed premises will not endanger their health, welfare or
safety or that of other members of the community. The licensee shall obtain a separate
authorization for each date on which underage persons will be present on the premises.
(2) LICENSE FEES. (Ord. #1027 3/18/08, Ord. #10/16/79)
(a) Enumerated. The following fees shall be chargeable for licenses issued by the
Council for the sale of intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages
within the City:
1. Class A fermented malt beverage: $100.00 per year.
2. Class B fermented malt beverage: $100.00 per year.
3. Class A intoxicating liquors: $200.00 per year.
4. Class B intoxicating liquors: $200.00 per year.
5. Class B picnic licenses: $10.00 for each day or meeting
but not to exceed $10.00. (Ord. #970 3/16/0, Ord. #578 7/6/82)
6. Fermented malt beverage wholesaler: $25.00 per year.
7. Clubs and lodges: $50.00 per year. (Ord. #578 7/6/82) Revised 3/15/11
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
3
8. Pharmacist: Deleted. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
9. Operator’s License: $15.00 per year. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
10. Outdoor Consumption $100.00 per year. (Ord. # 1058 1/19/2010)
11. Reserve Combination Class B Beer/Liquor License. (Ord. #1058 1/19/2010)
(a) Initial License. The initial license fee for a Reserve Class B
License shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in addition to
the annual Class B license fee, except that the fee for an initial
issuance of a Reserve Class B License to a bona fide club or lodge
situated and incorporated in the state for at least six (6) years shall
be determined under the procedure describe in Section 1 above.
Applicants and holders of a Reserve Class B License shall be
subject to the same policies and procedures in this chapter relating
to Class B License applicants and holders.
(b) Grants for Certain Reserve Class B Licenses.
(1) The City of Chilton hereby finds that businesses such as
restaurants, hotels, and taverns important contributions to the
City’s economy. These establishments serve important
public purposes including increasing the City’s property tax
base, providing employment opportunities, attracting tourists
and generally enhancing the economic and cultural climate of
the community.
(2) After the granting of any new Reserve Class B license and
payment of the ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) initial
issuance fee, the applicant may file an application for an
economic development grant of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) with the City Clerk. Upon application, the
Common Council may provide a grant to the licensee in an
amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
Prior to awarding such grant, the Common Council shall
make such findings and establish such conditions to assure
that any funds awarded there under further the important
public purpose indentified herein.
(c) Renewal. The annual renewal fee shall be determined by the
procedure used for Class B Licenses.
12. Change of Agent Fee $25.00 per occurrence. (Ord. # 1068 12/21/10)
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
4
13. Request for Expansion of Alcohol Beverage License for Special Event
$25.00 per request. (Ord. # 1068 12/21/10)
14. Request for Underage Authorization Permit $20.00 per occurrence.
Reference Section 6.01. (Ord. # 1071 3/15/11)
(b) Fees to be Paid at Time of Issuance. All fees imposed hereunder shall be paid
before the City Clerk issues the license. The fee required hereunder for the
issuance of an operator’s license shall be paid at the time of application for the
license is made to the City Clerk. (Ord. #522 12/4/79)
(3) DELINQUENT DEBT(S) OWED TO THE CITY.
(a) Denial of Annual License or Permit. No annual license or permit authorized
or required by the Code of General Ordinances of the City of Chilton shall be
granted or issued:
1. To any person(s) who owes any unpaid, delinquent personal property
tax, real estate tax, special assessment, municipal court forfeiture,
charges for false fire alarms or parking ticket, sewer or water bill,
inspection fee, and loan payments to the City of Chilton such as
Community Development Block Grant, Tax Incremental Financing
(TIF) Loan and Non-Tax Incremental Financing (Non-TIF) Matching
Fund Loan.
2. For any premises for which real estate taxes, sewer or water bills, or
special assessments owed to the City are delinquent and unpaid.
3. For any premises containing personal property upon which a personal
property tax owed to the City was assessed and the personal property
tax remains unpaid and delinquent.
(b) This paragraph (a) does not apply to annual dog licenses. In this subsection,
an "annual license or permit" is a license or permit having a 12-month term
or longer. An "annual license or permit" does not lose its status as such
merely because it is issued after the beginning of the term or because the
license or permit fee is prorated for the remainder of the term. "Person"
includes a natural person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, association, cooperative or any other entity making
application for a license in the name of that entity. In this subsection, loan
payment is delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days of the due date specified
in the loan agreement. No annual license or permit shall be denied if a
payment becomes delinquent after fully completed, together with any
required application fee, has been filed with the City Clerk.
(c) Bankruptcy. Paragraph (a) of this subsection does not apply to a person
whose personal liability for payment of a delinquent tax or other charge has
been discharged by order of a U.S. Bankruptcy Court or other court of
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
5
competent jurisdiction. Paragraph (a) does not apply to a bankrupt or a
bankrupt's premises covered by an automatic stay issued by a U.S.
Bankruptcy Court or other court of competent jurisdiction while the
automatic stay is in effect.
(d) Notice of Denial; Appeal. If the grant or issuance of an annual license or
permit is denied for nonpayment of delinquent taxes or charges, the person or
department responsible for the issuance of the annual license or permit, shall
notify the applicant in writing that the license or permit will not be granted or
issued because of the unpaid delinquent taxes or charges. The notice shall be
mailed to the applicant, by first class mail, at the address indicated by
applicant on the application form. The notice shall advise the applicant that
he/she may appeal the denial of the license or permit to the City Council by
filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days of the date
of the notice. The City Council shall afford the applicant an opportunity to be
heard after which the City Council shall grant or deny the license.
(4) CONDITIONS OF LICENSE. All retail Class A and B licenses granted hereunder
shall be granted subject to the following conditions and all other conditions of this
section, and subject to all other ordinances and regulations of the City applicable
thereto:
(a) Search of Premises. Every applicant procuring a license thereby consents to
the entry of police or other duly authorized representatives of the City at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection and search, and consents to the
removal from such premises of all things and articles there had in violation of
City ordinances or State laws, and consents to the introduction of such things
and articles in evidence in any prosecution that may be brought for such
offense.
(b) Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. Each licensed premises shall at all times be
conducted in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or indecent
conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
(c) View of Premises Required. All windows in the front of any licensed
premises shall be of clear glass, and the premises shall be so arranges as to
furnish a clear view of the entire premises from the sidewalk, except as such
view may be obstructed by the sides of booths as hereinafter set forth. There
shall be no partition, box, stall, screen, curtain or other device which shall
obstruct the view of such room from the general observation of persons and
provided, however, a retail Class “B” license shall entitle the holder thereof to
serve such beverages in a separate room at banquets or dinners, and there shall
at no time be curtains or obstructions of any kind obstructing the view to
booths within the premises.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
6
(5) CLOSING HOURS. (Ord. No. 1094 9/18/12, Ord. No. 1091 6/19/2012)
1. Between Midnight and 6:00 A.M. no person may sell fermented malt
beverages, pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes 125.32(3)
2. Between 9:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. no person may sell intoxicating liquor,
pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes 125.68(4)
(6) OUTDOOR CONSUMPTION LICENSES REQUIRED FOR OUTDOOR
CONSUMPTION AT “CLASS B”, CLASS "B" AND/OR “CLASS C” LICENSE
PREMISES. (Ord. #1077 8/2/11, Ord. #1056 1/19/10)
(a) DEFINITIONS. The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this
ordinance shall be interpreted as herein defined.
(1) Outdoor Consumption Area - is defined as an open air, roofed or
unroofed area adjacent or accessory to a "Class B", Class “B” and/or
“Class C” licensed premises, where beer and other alcoholic beverages
are served or consumed. (Ord. #1077 8/2/11)
(2) Enclosed Place – an enclosed place is defined as a structure or area
that has a roof and more than two substantial walls.
(3) Substantial Wall – is a wall with an opening that may be used to allow
air in from the outside that is less than 25 percent of the wall’s surface.
(4) Patio - A terrace extending not more than six inches above the
average level of the ground at its margins; provided that no fixed walls
or roof shall be erected on or over any patio or similar structure that is
located in a required yard.
(5) Structure - Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground; or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground. This shall include signs.
(6) Fence – A structure intended to enclose an open space for purposes of
security, confinement or aesthetic ornamentation.
(b) APPLICATION. Application for an outdoor consumption license shall be
made in writing on the form prescribed by the City and filed with the City
Clerk. New applicants and those making alterations to an existing outdoor
consumption license will have their permit reviewed by the Plan Commission
and approved by the Common Council. Applicants who are renewing a license
and are not altering an existing outdoor consumption license will submit their
application to the City Clerk and approved by the Common Council.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
7
(c) REQUIRED FOR OUTDOOR CONSUMPTION. No licensee shall permit
the consumption of alcohol beverages on any part of the licensed premises not
enclosed within the building, except under a license granted by the Common
Council. The licenses are a privilege in which no rights vest and therefore
may be revoked by the Common Council pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
Chapter 125, or shall otherwise expire on June 30 of each year. No person
shall consume or have in his or her possession alcohol beverages on any
unenclosed part of a licensed premise which is not described in a valid
outdoor consumption license.
(d) LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF BEER GARDEN LICENSES. Each
applicant for an outdoor consumption license shall accurately describe the
area intended for use for outdoor consumption and must include a map or
diagram that particularly describes the outdoor consumption area. The
applicant shall indicate the nature of fencing or other measures intended to
provide control over the operation of the outdoor consumption.
(1) The outdoor consumption area shall be completely enclosed with a
fence, wall or screen not less than four (4) feet in height. The outdoor
premises shall not be closer to the street than the principal building and
shall not protrude on the front and abutting street. (Ord. 1133 11/15/2016)
(2) Amplified sound or music is permitted within the enclosed licensed
premises only, not within the outdoor consumption area.
(3) All service in the outdoor premises (beverage and food) shall stop at
least one half hour prior to the closing time of the establishment, with
the outdoor premises promptly vacated by closing time except for the
owner and regular employees of the licensed premises and then only
for the purpose of cleaning up.
(4) Bartenders shall be responsible for policing the outdoor consumption
area at all times it is open for operation.
(5) Access to the outdoor consumption area shall be through the main
(indoor) entrance to the premises. The Beer Garden shall be equipped
with a locking system on a fire exit that meets fire codes.
(6) Lighting of the area must be shielded and not be of intensity or
brilliance to create glare which is distracting to adjoining property
owners or can become a hazard or danger to vehicular traffic.
(7) No open flames, inclusive of uncontained candles, table decorations,
fire pits or any other type of objects emitting an open flame are
allowed. (Revised 11/15/2016)
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
8
(8) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to daily clean up adjoining
property of all debris that originates from the outdoor premise/beer
garden.
(7) AFTER HOURS OCCUPANCY. (0rd. #1060 6/1/2010)
No customer shall remain in any establishment issued a license for the sale of
intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages after the closing hours as set
forth in sub. (5). “Customer” shall include any individual who is employed by the
establishment unless that employee is at the premises for a valid business reason,
such as cleaning up the establishment or doing book work.
(8) VIOLATIONS: REVOCATION. (Ord. #578 7/6/82)
(a) A violation of this section by a duly authorized agent or employee of a
licensee or permit holder shall constitute a violation by the licensee or permit
holder.
Whenever the holder of any license or permit under this section violates any
portion of the section or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, proceedings
for the revocation of such license or permit may be instituted in the manner
and under the procedure establishing by Section 125.12(2)(a) – (c) & (3) Wis.
Stats., and the provision therein relating to renewing a license shall likewise
be applicable.
(b) Whenever any license shall be revoked, at least 6 months from the time of
such revocation shall elapse before another license shall be granted for the
same premises, and 12 months shall lapse before any other license shall be
granted to the person whose license was revoked.
6.02 DIRECT SELLERS.
(1) REGISTRATION REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage
in direct sales within the City of Chilton without being registered for that purpose as
provided herein.
(2) DEFINITIONS: In this ordinance:
(a) “Direct seller” means any individual who, for him-herself, or for a
partnership, association or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales
orders for the later delivery of goods, at any location, other than the
permanent business place or residence of said individual, partnership,
association or corporation, and shall include but not be limited to,
peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods
includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of
goods by a donor or prospective customer.
(b) “Permanent merchant” means a direct seller who, for at least one year
prior to the consideration of the application of this ordinance to said
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
9
merchant, 1) has continuously operated an established place of
business in this city, or 2) has continuously resided in this city and
now does business from his-her residence.
(c) “Goods" shall include personal property of any kind, and shall include
goods provided incidental to services offered or sold.
(d) “Charitable organization” shall include any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or
corporation, or one purporting to be such.
(e) “Clerk" shall mean the city clerk.
(3) EXEMPTIONS. The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this
ordinance:
(a) Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to
regular customers on established routes.
(b) Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods.
(c) Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown.
(d) Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from
the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such
merchant within this county and who delivers such goods in their regular
course of business.
(e) Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being
sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has
initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by, said person.
(f) Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had, a
prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the
prospective customer.
(g) Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or
offering for sale of goods.
(h) Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any
person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
(i) Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization who engages in
direct sales for or on behalf of said organization, provided that there is
submitted to the clerk proof that such charitable organization is registered
under Sec. 440.41, Stats. Any charitable organization not registered under
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
10
Sec. 440.41, Stats. or which is exempt from that statute’s registration
requirements, shall be required to register under this ordinance.
(j) Any person who claims to be a permanent merchant, but against whom
complaint has been made to the clerk that such person is a transient merchant;
provided that there is submitted to the clerk, proof that such person has leased
for at least one year, or purchased, the premises from which he-she is
conducting businesses, or proof that such person has conducted such business
in this city for at least one year prior to the date complaint was made.
(4) REGISTRATION.
(a) Applicant for registration must complete and return to the clerk a registration
form furnished by the clerk, which shall require the following information:
(1) Name, permanent address and telephone number and temporary
address, if any.
(2) Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association,
or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or
whose merchandise is being sold.
(4) Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be
conducted, if any.
(5) Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods
offered, and any services offered.
(6) Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable.
(7) Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his-her business.
(8) Last cities, villages, and towns, not to exceed three, where applicant
conducted similar business.
(9) Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after
leaving this city.
(10) Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or
ordinance violation related to applicant’s transient merchant business
within the last five years; the nature of the offense and the place of
conviction.
(b) Applicants shall present to the clerk for examination:
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
11
(1) A driver’s license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably
required.
(2) A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of
weights and measures where applicant’s business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state’s authorities.
(3) A state health officer’s certificate where applicant’s business involves
the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under
state law; such certificate to state that applicant is apparently free from
any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior
to the date the application for license is made.
(c) At the time the registration is returned, a fee of $20.00 shall be paid to the
clerk to cover the cost of processing said registration. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
The applicant shall sign a statement appointing the clerk his-her agent to
accept service of process in any civil action brought against the applicant
arising out of any sale or service performed by the applicant in connection
with the direct sales activities of the applicant, in the event the applicant
cannot, after reasonable effort, be served personally.
Upon payment of said fee and the signing of said statement, the clerk shall
register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry. Said registration
shall be valid for the current calendar year or any remaining portion thereof,
subject to subsequent refusal as provided in Section 5 (b) below. (Ord. No.
996 6/20/06)
(5) INVESTIGATION.
(a) Upon receipt of each application, the clerk may refer it immediately to the
Chief of Police who may make and complete an investigation of the
statements made in such registration.
(b) The clerk shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to
the investigation above, that: the application contains any material omission or
materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been
received against the applicant by authorities in the last cities, villages and
towns, not exceeding three, in which the applicant conducted similar business;
the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance
violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to
the applicant’s fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to
comply with the applicable provision of Section 4(b) above.
(6) APPEAL. Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Common Council, or, if none
has been adopted, under the provisions of Secs. 68.07 through 68.16, Stats.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
12
(7) REGULATION OF DIRECT SELLERS.
(a) Prohibited Practices.
(1) A direct seller shall be prohibited from: calling at any dwelling or
other place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except by
appointment; calling at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the words “No Peddlers”, “No Solicitors” or words
of similar meaning; calling at the rear door of any dwelling place; or
remaining on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner,
occupant or other person having authority over such premises.
(2) A direct seller shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive or
misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of
any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his-her visit, his-her identity
or the identity of the organization he-she represents. A charitable
organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the
sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the
charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Said
portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
goods.
(3) No direct seller shall impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by
pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all
traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.
(4) No direct seller shall make any loud noises or use any sound
amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable
of being plainly heard outside a one-hundred foot radius of the source.
(5) No direct seller shall allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around
the area in which he-she is conducting business.
(b) Disclosure Requirements.
(1) After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a
prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his-her
name, the name of the company or organization he-she is affiliated
with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he-she offers to sell.
(2) If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the
later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the
right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of credit or
is a cash transaction of more than $25.00, in accordance with the
procedure as set forth in Sec. 423.203, Stats.: the seller shall give the
buyer two copies of a typed or printed notice of that fact. Such notice
shall conform to the requirements of Secs. 423.203(1) (a) (b) and (c),
(2) and (3), Stats.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
13
(3) If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, heshe
shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a
written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the amount
paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made,
the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee of warranty is provided
and, if so, the terms thereof.
(8) RECORDS. The Chief of Police shall report to the clerk all convictions for violation
of this ordinance and the clerk shall note any such violation on the record of the
registrant convicted.
(9) REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
(a) Registration may be revoked by the Common Council after notice and
hearing, if the registrant made any material omission or materially inaccurate
statement in the application for registration, made any fraudulent, false,
deceptive or misleading statement or representation in the course of engaging
in direct sales, violated any provisions of this ordinance or was convicted of
any crime or ordinance or statutory violation which is directly related to the
registrant’s fitness to engage in direct selling.
(b) Written notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the registrant at
least 72 hours prior to the time set for the hearing; such notice shall contain
the time and place of hearing and a statement of the acts upon which the
hearing will be based.
(10) PENALTY. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this ordinance
shall forfeit not less than $10.00 or more than $100.00 for each violation plus costs
of prosecution. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(11) SEVERANCE CLAUSE. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be
severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for
any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
ordinance; they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this
ordinance shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
6.03 AUCTIONS.
(1) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall, within the City, engage in the business of
auctioneer by selling any goods, wares, merchandise or other property at public
auction unless said the Common Council shall license person. This section does not
include sales of livestock such as cattle, horses, mules, etc.; sales of household goods
which have been used as such by the person making the sale; sales made by virtue of
a chattel mortgage, or of a rule, order or judgment of the court, or of some law of the
State or of the United States respecting the collection of some tax or duty; sales in
consequence of a general assignment of property or effects for the benefit of
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
14
creditors; sales made by or on behalf of any executor or administrator; sales made of
his farm property or on behalf of a farmer resident in the City whose property to be
sold is located therein and who has paid the taxes lawfully levied on such property; or
sales made by a resident merchant for the purpose of closing out his business who has
paid the taxes lawfully levied on the property to be sold.
(2) APPLICATION AND FEE. Application for such license shall be made to the City
Clerk who shall grant such license for one or more days upon payment of a license
fee of $20.00 per day. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
(3) TIME OF SALE. No sale shall be held between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. No person
selling or offering for sale at public auction any goods, wares or merchandise shall
misrepresent the same as to character, quantity, kind or description.
6.04 TAXICABS.
(1) LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall maintain or operate in the City a taxicab or
other motor vehicles for the transportation of persons for hire without first obtaining a
license therefor from the Common Council of the City.
(2) APPLICATION. Any person desiring to provide such service WITHIN the City
shall first make written application for license therefor to the Common Council and
shall attach to such application the license fee of $50.00. Such application shall state
the type and nature of transportation to be provided and such further information
relating to the character, financial responsibility and the public necessity intended to
be met as may be required by the Chief of Police. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
(3) ISSUANCE. Upon the Common Council being satisfied that the applicant is a
proper person to exercise such privilege and upon the Council being satisfied that the
public convenience will be served by the granting of such license, such license shall
be directed to be issued by the City Clerk upon motion of record in the minutes of the
Common Council.
(4) RENEWALS. Such license shall be renewable annually for a fee of $20.00.
(#970 3/16/04)
6.05 R-MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT. (#614 5/1/84)
(1) USE. In the Mobile Home District, no building or premises shall be used or
structurally altered except for use in connection with a mobile home park. Permitted
uses include all permitted uses in R-1 zoning area per City of Chilton Municipal
Code, Chapter 16. (#970 3/16/04)
(2) DEFINITIONS: As used in this ordinance.
(a) Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under the provisions of this ordinance. Person means any individual,
firm, trust, partnership, association, or corporation.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
15
(b) Mobile Home means a manufactured transportable, single-family dwelling
unit suitable for year-round occupancy and meeting residential building codes
(HUD) Federal Housing and Urban Development. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
(c) Dependent Mobile Home is a mobile home without inside toilets, bath, is less
than 10 feet in width, and is prohibited in a mobile home park as defined in
this ordinance.
(d) Mobile Home Park means a parcel of land which has been developed for the
placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust,
partnership, public or private association or corporation.
(e) Mobile Home Lot or Site means a parcel of land for the placement of a single
mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
(f) Permittee means any person to whom a special permit is issued to construct,
alter, or extend a mobile home park under the provisions of this ordinance.
(g) Issuing Authority means the Common Council of the City of Chilton.
(h) Unit means mobile home dwelling unit.
(3) PERMITS.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile
home park within the limits of City of Chilton unless he holds a valid permit
issued by the issuing authority in the name of such person for the specific
construction, alteration or extension proposed.
(b) All applications for permits shall contain, and after issuance, be subject to the
following:
(1) Names and address of applicant.
(2) Location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(3) A complete plan of the park in conformity with the requirements of
this ordinance, City of Chilton.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park.
(5) Proposed rules and regulations for the management of the mobile
home park.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
16
(c) Application for initial mobile home park license shall be filed with the Clerk
and be subject to approval by the permit issuing authority. The application
shall be in writing, signed by the applicant.
(4) LICENSE FEES.
(a) The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be $100.00 for each 50
spaces or fraction thereof. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
(b) The fee for transfer of a license shall be $10.00.
(c) A fee equal to 10% of the monthly parking permit shall be paid to the City as
specified in Wis. Statutes Sec. 66.0435(3) of Wisconsin Statutes. (Ord. #970
3/16/04)
(5) APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, TRANSFER, OR RENEWAL.
(a) Upon application in writing by a licensee for renewal of a license and upon
payment of the annual license fee, and upon review, the issuing authority shall
issue a certificate renewing such license for another year.
(b) Upon application in writing for transfer of a license and payment of the
transfer fee, the issuing authority shall issue a transfer if the transferee is
approved pursuant to Section 6.02; (5) (a), (b).
(6) LOCATION. Mobile home parks may be located only in a District zoned Mobile
Home (R-MH). Where any boundary of a park directly abuts property which is
improved with a permanent residential building located within 25 feet of such
boundary or directly abuts unimproved property which may under existing laws and
regulations be used for on-site residential construction, a fence, wall or hedge may
be required along such boundary by the permit issuing authority.
(7) MOBILE HOME PARK PLAN/CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. Mobile home
parks shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) The construction of mobile home parks shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 17 of the MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF CHILTON
excepting the following sections: 17.03;(2)(1), (2)(m), (2)(n), (7)(b), (8)(b),
and (9)(a).
(b) The park shall be located on a well-drained property, properly graded to
insure rapid drainage and free from stagnant pools of water, except where
storm water retention basins are required.
(c) Each site shall be clearly defined or delineated. Each site shall have an
average area of not less than 8,000 square feet, and the average width of each
site shall be not less than 60 feet and the unit shall not occupy in excess of
20% of the area of site. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
17
(d) Recreational space must be provided as part of the Mobile Home Park Plan.
A minimum of 11,000 sq. ft. per 30 mobile home sites shall be provided.
(e) The units shall be so located that there shall be at least a minimum of 20 foot
total side yard, with 8 feet as a minimum on any one side. No unit shall be
located closer than 20 feet from the property line abutting a public street, or
50 feet from trunk Hwy., thoroughfare or such other distance as may be
established by ordinance or regulation as a front yard or set-back requirement
with respect to permanently erected buildings in the Mobile Home district in
which the mobile home park is located.
(f) All sites shall abut upon a street of not less than 32 feet in width, which shall
have unobstructed access to a public street or highway.
(g) All streets shall be in compliance with chapter 17 of the Municipal Code.
(h) An electrical service supplying at least 110-120/220-240 volts, 100 amperes
shall be provided for each mobile home site. Such services shall be equipped
with a disconnect and conform to the Wis. Public Service Corp. Standards.
(i) Each mobile home site shall be provided with two off street parking spaces
and one side on-street parking for guests and residents only for occasional
purposes shall be allowed subject to Municipal Code City of Chilton
regarding on-street parking Section 4.05 and 16.19(5).
(8) WATER SUPPLY: (Non-utility) Each site shall be provided with a cold water tap,
located to be accessible from the side of the unit. Water meters may be located
either in an approved meter pit, or inside of each individual mobile home. Due to
the nature of the installation, outside registers for water meters shall be mandatory.
(9) SEWAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL: (Non-utility)
(a) Each mobile home site shall be provided with a sewer service lateral 4” in
diameter, which shall be connected to receive the waste water of the mobile
home harbored on such site. The sewer in each site shall be connected to
discharge the mobile home waste into a public sewer system in compliance
with applicable municipal ordinances. Each service lateral shall be located so
as to be accessible from side of unit.
(b) Garbage containers shall conform to Chapter 9 of Municipal Code.
(Ord. #970 3/16/04)
(10) SITE FACILITIES:
(a) Each site shall be provided with 2 concrete foundation runners, each a
minimum of 24” wide and 6” thick. Runners shall begin a maximum of 22’
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
18
behind the R.O.W. line, and extend a minimum of 75’ towards the rear of the
lot.
(b) Tie down eyes shall be cast in the concrete of the runners and be installed in
accordance with the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association Specifications.
(c) Garages and accessory buildings shall be permitted under the same conditions
and standard as permitted in the R-1 District. (#970 3/16/04)
(d) After installation, all mobile homes shall be skirted with a semi-opaque or
opaque material, and provided with an access panel at the location of the
utility services on the home.
(11) LANDSCAPING: Each site and all areas fronting the park and any buildings or
recreation areas shall be attractively landscaped.
(12) SERVICE BUILDING:
(a) Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be permanent structures
complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings,
including electrical installations, plumbing, and sanitation systems.
(b) The service buildings shall be well-lighted at all times of the day and night,
shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of such
moisture-proof material, which may be painted woodwork, as shall permit
repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a temperature of at
least 68 degrees Fahrenheit during the period from October 1st to May 1st. The
floors of the service buildings shall be of water impervious material. Washing
and drying machines may be installed according to needs of the park.
(c) All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean,
sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of
any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance, and shall be equipped with a
public phone with emergency numbers clearly posted.
(13) FIRE PROTECTION:
(a) Service buildings shall be equipped with fire extinguishers. Water hydrants of
such type, size and number and so located within the park to comply with the
City of Chilton Water Department rules and the regulations of the fire
department shall be provided.
(b) Recreational fires in compliance with Section 14.06 of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. #970 3/16/04)
(14) SUPERVISION. The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or
caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities
and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
19
and the licensee or permittee, shall jointly be subject to prosecution for violation of
the provisions of this ordinance.
(15) MANAGEMENT:
(a) In every mobile home park, there shall be located, the office of the person in
charge of said Mobile Home Park.
(b) It is the duty of the mobile home park owner or operator, together with any
attendants or persons in charge of a mobile home park, to:
(1) Keep a register of all occupants of mobile homes. Said register to be
open at all times to inspection by federal, state and local officials.
(2) Maintain the mobile home park in a clean, orderly and sanitary
condition at all times.
(3) Report presence of dogs or any other animals running loose in the
park.
(4) Report to the County health officer all cases of persons or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable
disease. (Ord. #970 3/16/04)
(5) Post copies of their rules and regulations in one or more conspicuous
places in the mobile home park where they can be easily seen by the
mobile park residents and visitors.
(6) Obtain signed application form, stating year in which mobile home
was new, together with size and make, last prior address and current
employer, plus name and ages of children in family.
(16) REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR SPECIAL PERMIT: The permit issuing
authority may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park when the licensee
has been found by the issuing authority, after a hearing, of violating any provisions
of this ordinance. After such revocation, the license may be re-issued if the
circumstances leading to revocation have been remedied and the park is being
maintained and operated in full compliance with this ordinance.
(17) POSTING OF LICENSE AND PERMIT: The license certificate or special permit
shall be conspicuously posted in the office of, or on the premises of the mobile
home park at all times.
(a) A permittee and/or licensee shall be permitted to sell, transfer, or convey a
mobile home lot or site and/or a mobile home to a transferee and such
transferee shall be assessed and be liable for payment of real estate taxes on
the lot and the improvements thereon being the mobile home and garage and
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
20
accessory buildings. These assessments shall be in lieu of the monthly
parking permit fee per (d) 3 of such ordinance. In addition, such transferee
shall be liable for sewerage and water services and charges to such lot. (Ord.
#631 5/21/85)
(18) SEPARABILITY OR PROVISION: Should any section or provision of this
ordinance be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this ordinance.
6.06 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in Sec. 20.04 of this Code, provided the maximum
forfeiture for a violation of Sec. 6.05(12)(b) shall be $25.00.
6.07 DOG LICENSE TAX. (Ord #548 1/3/81)
(1) REQUIREMENT. The owner of a dog more than five months of age on
January 1 of any year, or five months of age within the license year, shall
annually, on or before the date the dog becomes five months of age, pay the
dog license tax provided in Sec. 174.05, Wisconsin Stats., and obtain a
license from the Treasurer.
(2) TAX. The dog license tax shall be $3.00 for a neutered male dog, or spayed
female dog, upon presentation of evidence that the dog is neutered or spayed,
and $8.00 for an unneutered male dog or unspayed female dog, or one-half of
these amounts if the dog become five months of age after July 1 of the
license year. (#747 11/19/91)
(3) LICENSE YEAR. The license year commences January 1 and ends on the
following December 31.
(4) LATE FEES. The Treasurer shall assess and collect a late fee of $5.00 from
any owner of a dog five months of age or over, if the owner fails to obtain a
license prior to April 1 of each year, or within 30 days of acquiring ownership
of a licensed dog, or if the owner fails to obtain a license on or before the dog
reached licensable age. All late fees received or collected shall be retained by
the Treasurer as revenue of the City.
(5) IMMUNIZATION REQUIREMENT. In addition to payment of the required
dog license tax, the Treasurer shall require the owner to present evidence that
the dog is currently immunized against rabies before issuing to the owner a
license for the dog.
6.08 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. (Ord. #643 5/6/86)
No person shall operate or carry on a Bed and Breakfast Establishment without
obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Inspector after approval by the City
Council.
City of Chilton Ch. 6 - Licenses and Permits
21
(1) DEFINITIONS. (a) Bed and Breakfast Establishment. Bed and Breakfast
establishment shall mean a place of lodging that provides a maximum of two
(2) rooms for rent in a personal residence occupied by the owner at the time of
rental, and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast.
(2) REGULATONS. All bed and breakfast establishments and licensees shall be
subject to and comply with Wisconsin Administrative Code HSS 197,
Sections HSS 197.01 through HSS 197.11, excepting HSS 197.03(3), which
are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. Each bed and
breakfast establishment shall provide a register and require all guests to
register their true names and addresses before being assigned sleeping
quarters. The Building Inspector shall keep the register intact and available
for inspection for at least one year.

















City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
1
Public Nuisance
Page
8.01 Public Nuisance Prohibited 2
8.02 Definitions 2
8.03 Chronic Nuisance Premises 6
8.04 Invasive Species 8
8.05 Air Pollution 8
8.06 Abatement of Public Nuisances 9
8.07 Cost of Abatement 10
8.08 Disposition of Waste Material 10
8.09 Regulation of Smoking 10
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
2
8.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED. No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue,
maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance with the City.
8.02 DEFINITIONS.
(1) PUBLIC NUISANCE. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use
of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
(a) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety
of the public;
(b) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
(c) Offend the public morals or decency;
(d) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or
render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of
water or other public way or the use of public property.
(2) PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared public health nuisances
coming within the definition of subsection (1) of this section:
(a) All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or
offered for sale to the public.
(b) Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human consumption or
food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner
within 24 hours after death.
(c) Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting
lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material whatsoever in
which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may
breed.
(d) All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply.
(e) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight.
(f) All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation. Defined as "any
species of plants, either annual, biennial, or perennial, reproduced by seed,
root, underground stem, or bulblet, which when established is or may become
destructive and difficult to control by ordinary means of cultivation or other
farm practices." The main differences between a common weed and a noxious
weed are: the noxious weed's high capacity for destruction and the extreme
difficulty in controlling or eradicating the invading species.
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
3
A noxious weed is a plant that has been defined as a pest by law or regulation.
The U.S. government maintains lists of plants that are considered threats to
the well being of the state or the country.
(g) ANIMALS IN THE CITY: (#864 7/21/98) No person who owns, harbors,
keeps, or has under his or her control a dog, cat, horse, cow, sheep, swine,
reptile, any fowl, or any other animal shall: permit the same to run or fly at
large in the City at any time. Each person of such animal or fowl shall
confine it within the limits of his or her premises except when it is attended by
some person, and fastened securely by a suitable leash not more than 10 (ten)
feet in length. For the purposes of this section, the phrase “running at large”
includes all places within the City except the owner’s premises.
(h) IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS. (#864 7/21/98) Any Police Officer
finding any dog, cat, horse, cow, sheep, swine, reptile, any fowl, or any other
animal running at large within the City, shall take and confine it at any
approved animal shelter. The owner of the animal or fowl shall pay costs for
containment of the animal at the usual and customary fees of the shelter.
(i) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or other body
of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
(j) Any use of property, substances or things within the City emitting or causing
any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, gases,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary
persons, which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the City.
(k) All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use.
(l) Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome liquid
or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or public
place within the City.
(3) PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY. The following
acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not
be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming
within the definition of subsection (1) of this section:
(a) All houses, buildings and structures used for prostitution or gambling.
(b) All gambling devices and slot machines.
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
4
(c) All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold,
possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit
or license as provided for by the ordinances of the City.
(d) Any place or premises within the City where City ordinances or State laws
relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly,
continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
(4) PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to
be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within
the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.
(a) All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near
streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so
situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
(b) All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the City in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the City, relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures within said district.
(c) All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or maintained
upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing which purport to
be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device, railroad sign or
signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or manner of
operation interferes with the effectiveness of any such device, sign or signal.
(d) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions, which prevent persons
driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear
view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
(e) All limbs of trees, which project over and less than 10 feet above the surface
of a public sidewalk or street or other public place.
(f) All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the State of
Wisconsin and as provided in Section 7.03.
(g) All buildings or structures so old dilapidated or out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
(h) All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds, which are, strung less than 18
feet above the surface thereof.
(i) All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any kind as
provided in Section 7.07.
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
5
(j) All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations
in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the City or
which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose
thereof has been accomplished.
(k) All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely
accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(l) All abandoned refrigerators, iceboxes or other containers which have air-tight
doors from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or which
are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside.
(m) Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street,
alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large
crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or
sidewalks.
(n) Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the City or laws of the
State of Wisconsin relating to the storage of flammable liquids.
(o) All snow and ice not removed as provided in section 5.06 of this Code.
(p) Harboring certain animals prohibited. No person shall own, harbor, or keep
any dog, cat, horse, cow, sheep, swine, reptile, any fowl, or any other animal
which habitually makes noise to the annoyance of 2 (two) or more individuals
residing in separate households. (Ord. # 864 7/21/98)
(q) The construction or maintenance of barbed wire or other similarly hazardous
fences in a residentially zoned and developed area as defined in Chapter 16.
(r) No owner or keeper of any dog shall harbor such dog if it becomes vicious. A
vicious dog is defined herein as any dog who has bitten any person and whose
bite has penetrated or lacerated the skin of such person. Proof of notice to the
owner or keeper of such dog or knowledge by him that his dog is vicious shall
not be necessary. (Ord. #648 8/6/86)
(s) No owner or occupant of a residential or commercial premises shall
accumulate or store rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, appliance, or any
other material or furniture designed for interior use when it is exposed to the
weather for longer than 24 hours in such a manner that may be unsightly to,
incompatible with, or repugnant to the residential or commercial
neighborhood. (Ord. #839 8/5/97)
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
6
(t) Control of Animal Excretion. No person will walk, ride, lead, or control any
dog, cat, horse, cow, sheep, swine, reptile, any fowl, or any other animal on
any street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, unless the person is
carrying a proper container to dispose of excreted animal waste and picks up
and properly disposes of any animal waste which may be excreted by the
animal or fowl. Proper container shall be interpreted to be a pail, bag, box or
other object of non-porous material suitable for holding animal waste.
(Ord. #864 7/21/98)
8.03 CHRONIC NUISANCE PREMISES. (Ord. No. 1090 6/19/12)
(1) The Chief of Police or his designated Lieutenant are responsible to enforcement
action arrest, the issuance of a citation, the issuance of a written or verbal warning.
(2) DEFINITION OF NUISANCE ACTIVITY.
Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct whenever engaged in by
property owners, operators, tenants, occupants, or persons associated with the
premises.
(a) An act of harassment is defined in 947.01(3) of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(b) Disorderly Conduct as defined in 947.01 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(c) Crimes of violence as defined in Chapter 940 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(d) Obstructing or resisting an officer as defined in 946.41 of the Wisconsin State
Statutes
(e) Crimes against sexual morality as defined in Chapter 944 of the Wisconsin
State Statutes
(f) Any gambling crimes as defined in Chapter 945 of the Wisconsin State
Statutes
(g) Animal violations as defined in Chapter 8 of the City of Chilton Municipal
Codes
(h) Theft as defined in 943.20 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(i) Receiving stolen property as defined in 943.34 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(j) Damage to property as defined in 943.01 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(k) Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances or related
offenses as defined in Chapter 961 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(l) Trespassing as defined in 943.13 and 943.14 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
7
(m) Noise violations as defined in Chapters 4 and 7 of the City of Chilton
Municipal Codes
(n) Alcohol violations as defined in Chapter 6 of the City of Chilton Municipal
Codes and Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(o) Loitering and curfew violations as defined in Chapter 7 of the City of Chilton
Municipal Codes
(p) Reckless driving as defined in 346.62 of the Wisconsin State Statutes
(q) The execution of arrests and search warrants at a particular location
(r) Violations of the Public Nuisance Ordinances as contained in Chapter 8 of the
City of Chilton Municipal Codes
(s) Contributing to the delinquency of a child as defined in 948.40 of the WI State
Statutes. (Ord. No. 1103 1-21/14)
(3) OWNER. The owner of the premises and his or her agents.
(4) EXCEPTION. Any offense that may be listed under this section which is determined
to be a domestic violence event as described under 968.075 shall not be considered a
nuisance activity for purposes of this section.
(5) PERSONS ASSOCIATED WITH. Any person who, whenever engaged in a public
nuisance activity enters, patronized, visits, or attempts to enter or visit a property
including any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or independent contractor
of a property owner, tenant, or occupant.
(6) PROPERTY. Any residentially zoned or residentially used parcel of land or
structure.
(7) VERIFIABLE EVENT. An event that is initially observed by a police officer or a
call for service that is reported to the police department by a known person who can
be identified to support the event or the call for service that is reported to the police
department. If the event is substantiated by a police officer or witness.
(8) PROCEDURE.
(a) Whenever the Chief of Police determines that two or more nuisance activities
have occurred at a property address on separate occasions or on the same date,
but two separate incidents, the Chief of Police shall notify the property owner
that the property owner is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property.
Revised 1/21/14
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
8
(b) Whenever the Chief of Police determines that three nuisance activities have
occurred at a property during a calendar month or six nuisance activities have
occurred at a property address during a 12-month period and said nuisance
activities are verifiable events, the Chief of Police shall notify the property
owner in writing that the property is a chronic nuisance property and any
further violations within said month or 12-month will be a violation.
(9) PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalty provided by Sec. 20.04 of this Code.
8.04 INVASIVE SPECIES (Ord. No. 1097 11/20/12)
(1) PUBLIC NUISANCE. No person shall permit any of the following public nuisances
to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him or her within the City:
(a) Any living, dying, or diseased infested foliage recognized by state or federal
agencies is deemed a public nuisance.
(b) Any transportation of diseased infested foliage shall follow state and federal
agency guidelines.
(c) The City Forester or designee has the right to enter the property and inspect
any foliage that may be diseased, infested or hazardous.
(2) COST OF ABATEMENT. If the property owner does not take care of the diseased
or infested foliage the City has the right to take care of the cause with the entire cost
of abating any such public nuisance or part thereof chargeable to and assessed against
the parcel or lot abutting on the street, alley, or parkway upon or in which such
foliage is located, or the parcel or lot upon which such tree stands. The cost of
abating any such nuisance, which is located in or upon any park or public grounds,
shall be borne by the City.
8.05 AIR POLLUTION.
(1) PUBLIC NUISANCE. The emission or escape into the open air of such quantities of
smoke, ash, dust, soot, cinders, acid or other fumes, dirt or other material or noxious
gases in such place or manner as to cause injury, detriment or nuisance is a public
nuisance and prohibited.
(2) INSTALLING SMOKE PRODUCING DEVICES. Any person who shall construct,
alter or repair any steam stationary plant boiler or furnace, or the stack or chimney
used in connection therewith, in the City shall make application at the office of the
City Clerk for a permit for that purpose, and shall furnish a written statement giving
the style and dimensions of such steam plant, boiler or furnace, together with the
height and size of any stack or chimney and the device or method to be used to
prevent the escape or emission into the open air of such quantities of smoke, ash,
dust, soot, cinders or noxious fumes, or gases in such manner as to cause injury,
detriment or nuisance; and if such application and the statements therein be approved
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
9
by the Common Council, the Clerk shall issue a permit for such construction,
alteration or repair. Revised 11/20/12
(3) ACCIDENTS TO BE REPORTED. All accidents to stationary steam boilers,
furnaces and smoke preventing devices, shall be reported to the City Clerk in writing,
giving the nature of the accident and the time required to repair the same.
8.06 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(1) ENFORCEMENT. The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Building Inspector shall enforce those provisions of this Chapter that come within the
jurisdiction of their offices and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections
upon complaint to insure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be
taken under this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have
inspected or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist
and have satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist.
(2) SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
(a) Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public
nuisance exists within the City and that there is great and immediate danger to
the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Mayor may direct the
Chief of Police to serve notice on the person causing, permitting or
maintaining such nuisance or upon the owner or occupant of the premises
where such nuisance is caused, permitted or maintained and to post a copy of
said notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance or the owner or occupant of the
premises to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that
unless such nuisance is so abated, the City will cause the same to be abated
and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
(b) Abatement by City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or
if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the
officer having the duty of enforcement shall cause the abatement or removal
of such public nuisance.
(3) ABATEMENT BY COURT ACTION. If the inspecting officer shall determine that
a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not
such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his findings with the Mayor, who,
upon direction of the Common Council, shall cause an action to abate such nuisance
to be commenced in the name of the City in the Circuit Court in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 823, Wis. Stats.
(4) OTHER METHODS NOT EXCLUDED. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the City or its officials in
accordance with the laws of the State of Wisconsin.
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
10
8.07 COST OF ABATEMENT. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this Chapter for the
erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost
of abating a public nuisance by the City shall be collected as a debt from the owner,
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if notice to abate
the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the real
estate as a special charge.
8.08 DISPOSITION OF WASTE MATERIAL. (Ord. #711 11/21/89)
(1) PUBLIC NUISANCE. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership,
or other type of organization, to deposit “waste” on lands in the city unless the
provisions of this ordinance are complied with. It shall be unlawful for the “property
owner” upon whose land such disposal of waste occurs to store or stockpile such
waste delivered to the property.
(2) DEFINITIONS.
(a) “Waste” shall mean garbage and other organic wastes including any and all
liquid animal manure and turkey manure. Excluded from this definition is
solid cow manure commonly used by farmers for fertilizer.
(b) The “property owner”, for the purposes of this ordinance, is defined as being
any person, partnership, corporation, or other type of organization owning,
renting, or otherwise using or controlling the use of lands within the
boundaries of the City of Chilton, Calumet County, Wisconsin.
(3) STORAGE AND DISPOSITION. The storage and disposition of solid cow manure
commonly used by farmers for fertilizer shall not be regulated by this ordinance.
However, the application of liquid animal manure and turkey manure commonly used
by farmers for fertilizers, when applied to lands, the “property Owner” shall work
such manure into the soil within the time limits as may be prescribed by any
regulations by the DNR of the State of Wisconsin, but in no event shall liquid manure
or turkey manure be on the property longer than forty-eight (48) hours without being
worked into the soil after the same has been applied.
8:09 REGULATION OF SMOKING (Ord. #1058 1-19-2010, Ord. # 1035 11/18/08)
(1) FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
(a) The Common Council of the City of Chilton hereby finds that:
It is recognized that smoking of cigarettes and tobacco products is hazardous
to an individual’s health and may affect the health of nonsmokers when they
are involuntarily in the presence of smoking.
Numerous scientific studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major
contributor to indoor pollution.
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
11
Reliable scientific studies, including studies conducted by the Surgeon
General of the United States, have shown that breathing side stream or
secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard to nonsmokers; particularly
to children, elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and
individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those
with obstructive airway disease.
Health hazards induced by breathing side stream or secondhand smoke
include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory function,
decreased exercise tolerance, bronchial constriction and bronchial spasm.
Reliable scientific studies assessed by the California Environmental Protection
Agency have found that side stream and secondhand tobacco smoke is a
leading cause of premature death and disability among nonsmokers.
Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and irritant.
Smoking results in serious and significant physical discomfort to
nonsmokers.
(b) This ordinance is adopted for the purpose of protecting the public health,
safety, comfort and general welfare of the people of the City of Chilton,
especially recognizing the rights of nonsmokers who constitute a majority of
the population.
(2) STATUTORY ADOPTION.
Section 101.123, Wisconsin Statutes including any subsequent amendments
thereto, is adopted by reference as if more fully set forth herein.
(3) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS. The following definitions are in addition to those
described in Sec. 101.123 of the Wisconsin Statutes:
(a) Indoor Municipal Places – Means all City-owned buildings and pavilions;
include buildings or pavilions owned by the city and leased to others.
(b) Vehicle – Means a car, truck snowplow, police squad, and any type of
automobile or motor vehicle owned or leased by the City.
(4) ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS. Smoking is prohibited in the following locations,
facilities and property, in addition to the prohibitions described in Sec. 101.123(2)
of the Wisconsin Statutes:
(a) All Indoor Municipal Places and Vehicles
(b) Morrissey Park Playground
City of Chilton Ch. 8 Public Nuisance
12
(c) Morrissey Park in its entirety, during all public school functions, e.g. football
games, track meets and other athletic events and school ceremonies.
(5) PENALTIES. The penalty provisions described in Sec. 101.123(8) of the Wisconsin
Statutes, adopted by reference in paragraph (2) above, shall apply rather than Sec.
20.04 of the Municipal Code.
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
1
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Page
9.01 Solid Waste Disposal 2
9.02 Recycling 3
9.03 Human Health Hazards 9
9.04 Compulsory Connection to Sewer or Water 10
9.05 Penalty 10
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
2
9.01 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL.
(1) DEFINITIONS. (Ord. #746 9/17/91, Ord. #793 12/6/94)
(a) Garbage – Any solid waste not defined as a recyclable, yard waste, brush,
building debris or hazardous waste, which waste can be land filled under
applicable Wisconsin law.
(b) Building Debris – All waste resulting from construction, repair or demolition
of structures or buildings, exclusive of recyclables.
(c) Solid Waste Generator – Any person, organization or entity that generates
solid waste, including both owners, tenants, or other occupants of residential,
commercial, industrial or other property within the City of Chilton.
(d) Automated Containers – Containers provided by the City of Chilton for use in
curbside collection of garbage.
(2) GARBAGE DISPOSAL. Garbage shall be disposed of in one of the two following
described methods:
(a) AUTOMATED CONTAINERS. (Ord. #754 1/7/92) The City will provide
weekly curbside collection of garbage. Any solid waste generator who desires
to use curbside collection must subscribe to an approved container provided
by the City. A user fee shall be paid by the subscriber to the City, the method
and amount of billing to be determined by the City. Only garbage may be
placed in the automated containers and all garbage to be disposed of through
curbside collection must be placed in the automated containers. The
automated containers will be emptied once per week by the City’s licensed
waste hauler. The automated container shall be placed at the curb line in the
direction indicated on the container after 2:00 p.m. on the day before
collection and before 5:00 a.m. on the collection day and all containers and
unacceptable materials shall be removed from the street right-of-way on the
same day of collection. Automated containers and unacceptable materials
shall be removed from the street right-of-way prior to 12:00 midnight the day
of collection. If the subscriber has not removed the container or unacceptable
materials, the Director of Public Works shall contact the property owner to
inform him/her that if the materials are not removed within 24 hours, the
Director of Public Works shall have the materials relocated or removed at the
owner’s expense. If the owner is so notified once during any given year, no
further notification shall be required upon subsequent occurrence and the
Director of Public Works shall have the container and/or materials relocated
or removed within 24 hours after the pickup date. The expense thereof shall
be paid by the owner at a rate of $25.00 per incident. If for any reason the
cost thereof exceeds the revenues realized at such rate, the rate shall then be
the actual cost to the City for removal and disposal of such materials. The
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
3
Director of Public Works shall, keep an accurate account of the expenses for
relocating and/or removing containers or unacceptable materials and shall
report the same to the City Clerk/Treasurer, who shall annually prepare a
statement of the expense so incurred which shall be entered in the tax roll as a
special tax against said property and the same shall be collected in all respects
like other taxes upon real estate.
(b) PRIVATE CONTRACT. Any solid waste generator may contract directly
with a licensed waste hauler for the disposal of garbage. Disposal of garbage
through the use of dumpsters shall be by private contract.
(c) No person shall dump any garbage or debris on any public or private property
without the permission of the property owner. (Ord. #1096 11/6/12)
(3) GENERAL PROHIBITION. No solid waste shall be disposed of in any manner
other than as prescribed in this chapter.
9.02 RECYCLING. (Ord. #793 12/6/94, Ord. #1127 1/19/16)
(1) PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote recycling, composting, and
resource recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program, as
provided in Wisconsin Statutes Sec. 287.11 and Chapter NR 544, Wis.
Administrative Code.
(2) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules,
regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
However, whenever this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
ordinance shall apply.
(3) INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where any
terms or requirements of this ordinance may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more
restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of this
ordinance is required by Wisconsin Statutes, or by a standard in Chapter NR 544,
Wis. Administrative Code, and where the ordinance provision is unclear, the
provision shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes and the Chapter NR
544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance, or in effect on
the date of the most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
(4) SEVERABILITY. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional
or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall
not be affected.
(5) APPLICABILITY. The requirements of this ordinance apply to all persons within
the City of Chilton.
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
4
(6) ADMINISTRATION. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the
City of Chilton Public Works Director.
(7) DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this ordinance:
(a) “Bi-metal container” means a container for carbonated or malt beverages that
are made primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
(b) “Container board” means corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of
shipping containers and related products.
(c) “Foam polystyrene packaging” means packaging made primarily from foam
polystyrene that satisfies one of the following criteria:
1. Is designed for serving food or beverages.
2. Consists of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container.
3. Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
(d) “HDPE” means high-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPD code #2.
(e) “LDPE” means low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPE code #4.
(f) “Magazines” means magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
(g) “Major appliance” means a residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven, oven,
refrigerator, furnace, boiler dehumidifier, water heater or stove.
(h) “Multiple-family dwelling” means a property containing 5 or more residential
units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
(i) “Newspaper” means a newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
(j) “Non-residential facilities and properties” means commercial, retail, industrial
and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not include
multiple family dwellings.
(k) “Office paper” means high-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
non-residential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
5
(l) “Other resins or multiple resins” means plastic resins labeled by the SPI
Code #7.
(m) “Person” includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local
governmental unit, as defined in Wisconsin Statutes Sec. 66.0131 state agency
or authority or federal agency.
(n) “PETE” means polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI code #1.
(o) “Plastic container” means an individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar
or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a product
that is the subject of a retail sale.
(p) “Post consumer waste” means solid waste other than solid waste generated in
the production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in Wisconsin Statutes
289.01, waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Wisconsin
Statutes 289.01.
(q) “PP” means polypropylene, labeled by the SPI code #5.
(r) “PS” means polystyrene, labeled by SPI code #6.
(s) “PVC” means polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI code #3.
(t) “Recyclable materials” includes lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste
oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container
board; foam polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper;
office paper; rigid plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE,
PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers;
waste tires; and bi-metal containers.
(u) Solid waste” has the meaning specified in WI Statute 895.517 (1) (e)
(v) “Solid waste facility” has the meaning specified in WI Statute 895.517 (1)(d)
(w) “Solid waste treatment” means any method, technique or process which is
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of solid waste. “Treatment” includes incineration.
(x) “Waste tire” means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
(y) “Yard waste” means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and
brush, including clean woody vegetative material no greater than 6 inches in
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
6
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root
balls.
(z) Recycling Container – Containers provided by the City of Chilton for use in
curbside collection of recycling. (Ord. #1127 1/19/16)
(8) SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Occupants of single family and
1 to 3 unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and non-residential facilities and
properties shall combine the following materials from post consumer waste:
(a) Lead acid batteries
(b) Major appliances
(c) Waste oil
(d) Yard waste
(e) Aluminum containers
(f) Bi-metal containers
(g) Corrugated paper or other container board
(h) Foam polystyrene packaging
(i) Glass containers
(j) Magazines
(k) Newspaper
(l) Office paper
(m) Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS, and
other resins or multiple resins
(n) Steel containers
(o) Waste tires
(9) EXEMPT PROPERTY. The separation requirements of section (8) do not apply to
the following:
(a) Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties that send their post
consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources that recovers the materials specified in s. (11) from solid
waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible.
(b) Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than
30% of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as
supplemental fuel.
(c) A recyclable material specified in s. (e) through (o) for which a variance has
been granted by the Department of Natural Resources under s.159.11(2m),
Wis. Stats., or s. NR 544.14, Wis. Administrative Code.
(10) CARE OF COMBINED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. To the greatest extent
practicable, the recyclable materials combined in accordance with s. (11) shall be
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
7
clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or product residue, oil or grease,
or other non-recyclable materials, including but not limited to household hazardous
waste, medical waste, and agricultural chemical containers. Recyclable materials
shall be stored in a manner which protects them from wind, rain, and other
inclement weather conditions.
(11) MANAGEMENT OF LEAD ACID BATTERIES, MAJOR APPLIANCES,
WASTE OIL, YARD WASTE, AND TIRES. (Ord. #1038 12/2/08)
Lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil, yard waste, and tires are banned
from the landfill. Occupants of single family and 2 to 4 unit residences, multiplefamily
dwellings and non-residential facilities and properties shall manage lead acid
batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard waste as follows:
(a) Lead Acid Batteries shall be disposed of properly. Disposal costs are the
responsibility of the generator.
(b) Major appliances shall be disposed of properly. Any major appliance
containing Freon (refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, etc.) must have the
Freon removed by a responsible vendor. Microwave ovens must have the
capacitor removed and then can be disposed of in the landfill. Pickup and
disposal costs are the responsibility of the generator.
(c) Waste Oil shall be disposed of properly. Disposal costs are the responsibility
of the generator.
(d) Yard waste shall be recycled on site where generated (i.e., composting or
chipping) or disposed of by using one of the following two methods:
1. Drop-Off Center. Generators of yard waste may take them to the
designated area at the city garage located on Maple Street. Yard waste
must be emptied from all containers, and the containers, including
bags, removed. Nothing other than yard waste may be disposed of
behind the city garage at the drop-off center.
2. Curbside Collection. Generators of brush that are unable to transport it
to the city garage drop-off site may call City Hall for curbside pickup
before 10:00 a.m. on Mondays. If a holiday falls on a Monday, the
curbside collection will be done on the succeeding workday. (Yard
waste is no longer collected)
(e) Tires shall be disposed of by hauling them to a responsible vendor or
arranging for a pickup. Pickup and disposal costs are the responsibility of the
generator.
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
8
(12) PREPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
Recyclable materials shall be co-mingled for curbside collection. Recyclables are
subject to the same curbside placement and removal provisions as provided in 9.01.
(13) RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
(a) Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the
following to recycle the materials specified in section. (11)(e) through (o):
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the dwelling
and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling
program.
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling
facility.
4. Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste, which
materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet
the processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and
hours of operation, and a contact person or company, including a
name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated
agents of multiple-family dwellings if the post consumer waste generated
within the dwelling is treated at a processing facility licensed by the
Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling the materials
specified in section. (11)(e) through (o) from solid waste in as pure a form as
is technically feasible.
(14) RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF NONRESIDENTIAL
FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES.
(a) Owners or designated agents of non-residential facilities and properties shall
do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in section. (11) (e)
through (o).
1. Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials.
2. Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling program.
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
9
3. Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the
materials to a recycling facility.
4. Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle,
which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to
meet the processing requirements, collection methods or sites,
locations and hours of operation, and a contact person or company,
including a name, address and telephone number.
(b) The requirements specified in (a) do not apply to the owners or designated
agents of non-residential facilities and properties if the post consumer waste
generated within the facility or property is treated at a processing facility
licensed by the Department of Natural Resources that recovers for recycling
the materials specified in section (11) (e) through (o) from solid waste in as
pure a form as is technically feasible.
(15) PROHIBITIONS ON DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COMBINED
FOR RECYCLING.
No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a solid waste
treatment facility any of the recycling materials defined in this chapter 9.02 (7).
(16) ENFORCEMENT.
(a) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance, any authorized officer, employee or representative of the City of
Chilton may inspect recyclable materials combined for recycling, postconsumer
waste intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities,
collection vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwelling and nonresidential
facilities and properties, and any records relating to recycling
activities, which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect
proprietary information. No person may refuse access to any authorized
officer, employee or authorized representative of the City of Chilton who
requests access for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate
credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper, or interfere with such an
inspection.
9.03 HUMAN HEALTH HAZARDS.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City under sec. 254.58 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
the provision of sec. 254.59 of the Wisconsin Statutes providing for the abatement or
removal of human health hazards on private premises is incorporated herein by reference.
City of Chilton Chapter 9 Health and Sanitation
10
9.04 COMPULSORY CONNECTION TO SEWER OR WATER
(1) All buildings used for human habitation in the City and located adjacent to a sewer
and water main, or in a block through which the systems extend, shall be connected to
the City water and sewer system in the manner prescribed by the Director of Public
Works.
(2) If any person fails to comply for more than 10 days after notice in writing to connect
onto the City system, the City may cause connection to be made, and the expense
thereof shall be assessed as a special tax against the property, pursuant to WI Statute
281.45.
9.05 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
provided by Sec. 20.04 of this Code.













City of Chilton Chapter 11 Plumbing Code
1
Chapter 11
PLUMBING CODE
Page
11.01 Plumbing Defined 2
11.02 State Code Adopted 2
11.03 Duties of Plumbing Inspector 2
11.04 Applications, Permits and Records 2
11.05 Permit Required 2
11.06 Permit Fees 2
11.07 Covenant Required 3
11.08 Inspections 3
11.09 Returns 3
11.10 Report of Existing Unsanitary Installations 3
11.11 Rain and Storm Water Drains 3
11.12 Adequate Flush for Drains 4
11.13 Street Openings 4
11.135 Cross Connection Control 4
11.14 Penalty 5
Revised in its entirety Ord. 1015 6/5/07
City of Chilton Chapter 11 Plumbing Code
2
11.01 PLUMBING DEFINED.
Plumbing for the purpose of this chapter is hereby defined as follows:
(1) As defined in sec. 145.01(10) Wis. Stats.
(2) The construction, connection to or alteration of any drain, soil or waste pipe
to carry domestic sewage, storm water or industrial waste from the foundation
walls of any building to the sewer lateral at the curb or other disposal terminal
including the private sewage disposal or treatment plant. This definition does not
include minor repairs to faucets and the removal of stoppages in soil or waste
pipes.
11.02 STATE CODE ADOPTED.
The provisions and regulations of Wisconsin State Statutes, chapter 145 and COMM 81-
87 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code are hereby made a part of this chapter by
reference, and shall extend over and govern the installation of all plumbing installed,
altered or repaired in the City of Chilton, Wisconsin.
11.03 DUTIES OF PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
The Plumbing Inspector shall have control of the supervision and inspection of plumbing
and shall faithfully enforce all laws, ordinances and rules in relation thereto. He shall see
that the construction, reconstruction and alteration of all plumbing and plumbing
ventilation hereafter installed in all structures in the City shall conform to the laws and
ordinances of the City and the rules and regulations of the State Board of Health and shall
make all inspections required thereby and in the manner therein set forth.
11.04 APPLICATIONS, PERMITS AND RECORDS.
The Plumbing Inspector shall prepare suitable forms for the application and permits
required, and shall keep in his office a proper daily record of all of the transactions of his
office and annual report covering the same with the Common Council.
The annual report shall cover the period closing December 31 of each year, and be filed
on or before April 1 next thereafter, and shall show the total amount of plumbing fees
collected, and a summary of the work of his office during said period.
11.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No plumbing, except for the repairing of leaks or stoppages, shall be done in the City
without first obtaining a permit therefore from the Plumbing Inspector. Application for a
permit shall be submitted to the Inspector for approval, and before approving the
Inspector may require the applicant to file, with such application, detailed plans and
specifications of the work to be done.
11.06 PERMIT FEES.
(1) PERMIT ISSUANCE. (Ord. #1087 4/17/12)
City of Chilton Chapter 11 Plumbing Code
3
The person applying for a plumbing permit shall complete an application
and submit all fees as established by resolution to the City of Chilton before
the permit is issued. Failure to obtain a plumbing permit before
commencing with work will result in doubling the permit fee.
(2) FEES PAID TO CITY CLERK.
All moneys received for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be paid into
the City treasury for use in the general fund. The City Clerk shall keep an
account of same and make a report thereof once a year to the Common
Council.
11.07 COVENANT REQUIRED.
No permit for the laying of any plumbing in any of the streets in the City shall be issued
unless the applicant, and the principal contractor, if any, in their application for such
permit, shall covenant and agree that they will make and refill the necessary excavations
therefore in the manner required by this chapter and that they will indemnify the City for
and save it harmless from any and all claims for damage arising from such work until the
same shall have been inspected and accepted in writing by the Plumbing Inspector.
11.08 INSPECTIONS.
No person shall interfere in any way with the work of inspection or permit any plumbing
to be used until it has been inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector, unless
special permission therefore is given by the Common Council.
11.09 REPORTS.
All plumbers/home owner shall make a full report for all work completed under any
permit granted therefore. This report shall be made by the plumber/home owner who
obtained the permit within 48 hours after the completion of the work and shall be filed in
the office of the Inspector.
11.10 REPORT OF EXISTING UNSANITARY INSTALLATIONS.
Whenever it shall be reported to the County Health Officer by the Plumbing Inspector
that the plumbing in any building is contrary to the ordinances of the City, or is of faulty
construction and liable to breed disease or sickness, or is a menace to health, or when
upon complaint made to the County Health Officer by any person that the plumbing in
any building is defective as aforesaid, the County Health Officer shall direct the
Plumbing Inspector to examine all the plumbing in the building and report his findings in
writing suggesting such changes as are necessary to put the same in proper sanitary
condition. The County Health Officer thereupon shall direct such changes to be made, as
he deems necessary, and fix a time for doing the same. Any person refusing to comply
therewith shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
11.11 RAIN AND STORM WATER DRAINS.
No person shall connect any storm or surface water drain to the sanitary sewer.
City of Chilton Chapter 11 Plumbing Code
4
11.12 ADEQUATE FLUSH FOR DRAINS.
No person shall connect any water closet with any drain or sewer unless means are
provided and employed for the abundant and adequate flushing of the same with clear
water every time it is used. Every such closet or similar appliance shall be connected
with the City or adequate supply system.
11.13 STREET OPENINGS.
See Section 5.04 of Municipal Code.
11.135 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL. (#544 1/6/81)
(1) A cross connection shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the City of Chilton water system, and the other, water from a
private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases, or
chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the
direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems.
(2) No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection
shall be established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City of Chilton may
enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the City and by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources in accordance with Section NR 811.09 (2),
Wisconsin Administrative Code.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to cause inspections to be made
of all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with
the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re
inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by
the Common Council and as approved by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources.
(4) That upon presentation of credentials, the plumbing inspector shall have the
right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any property served by a
connection to the public water system of the City of Chilton for cross connections.
If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a special inspection warrant
under s. 66.0119 Wisconsin Statutes. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant
of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
(5) The City of Chilton is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water
service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this ordinance
exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service
City of Chilton Chapter 11 Plumbing Code
5
shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing
under Chapter 68, Wisconsin Statutes, except as provided in subsection 6. Water
service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has
been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(6) If it is determined by the City of Chilton that a cross connection or an
emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and requires immediate
action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with the clerk of the City of
Chilton and delivered to the customer’s premises, service may be immediately
discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing under Chapter
68, Wisconsin Statutes, within 10 days of such emergency discontinuance.
11.14 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in 20.04 of this Code.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
1
CHAPTER 12
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
Page
12.01 Municipal Waterworks, Rules and Regulations 2
12.02 Water Rates 7
12.03 Private Wells 7
12.04 Sewer Use & Wastewater Treatment Service Rates 9
12:05 Penalty 30
(Revised in its entirety Ord. 1010 6/5/07)
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
2
12.01 MUNICIPAL WATERWORKS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(1) APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE.
The owner shall make all applications for water service to the Director of Public Works,
or the occupant with a written consent of the owner, upon blanks provided for that
purpose by the Director.
The application must be accompanied by a sum equal to the average current cost of
carrying the water to the inner curb line. Such application must fully set forth the
purposes for which the water is to be used.
(2) INSTALLATION.
(a) If no objections appear upon the filing of the application, the Director shall
authorize the Water Department to tap the main, insert the corporation cock,
connect the service pipe and install the service cock and service cock cover. The
service cock shall be located in line with the fire hydrants, or the inner side of the
curb line.
(b) On application duly made for water main extensions and water service, no
objections thereto appearing to the Director of Public Works, the Director shall
authorize the Department to extend the water main. Special assessments to pay
the cost thereof shall be levied by the Common Council under sec. 66.0703 Wis.
Stats.
(c) The service pipe shall not run from one lot to another in streets where mains
are laid, but water must be taken from the main in front of the premises or some
point adjacent to the same. Each service pipe shall be at least 6 feet below the
established street grade.
(d) Any person other than the City, or its agent, installing water mains or laterals
shall obtain a permit from the Director of Public Works and all work and
materials shall meet city specifications.
(3) PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS.
The system of plumbing in any building shall be subject to the inspection of the
Plumbing Inspector who shall have free access to the premises connected and shall be
allowed to enter the same at all reasonable hours for the purpose of ascertaining the
condition and location of all pipes and fixtures connected therewith. If there be a defect
in a private pipe beyond the service pipe, the Director of Public Works or the Plumbing
Inspector shall give a notice in writing of such fact to be left at the premises and the
occupant shall be allowed 24 hours to repair the same before the water shall be cut off.
(4) EXTENSIONS OR NEW ATTACHMENTS.
Whenever extensions are desired or new attachments are to be made, permits must be
obtained in the usual manner, and the tapper must be notified to draw the old tap and
insert the new if necessary.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
3
(5) RESTRICTING THE USE OF WATER.
The Director of Public Works may suspend the use of fountains and hose for sprinkling
streets, yards, gardens and all other service whenever in his opinion the public safety may
require it.
(6) INTERMITTENT USERS.
Parties desiring water for cisterns, tanks, or other intermittent supply, will be charged at
regular rates as per schedule, provided, however, that all expense incurred in furnishing
such service shall be paid by the applicant.
(7) INJURY TO WATER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
(a) No person except a member of the Water Department, the Director of Public
Works or the Chief of the Fire Department, in case of fire or in training the
members of the department, or the duly authorized person shall open or in any
manner tamper with any public or private hydrant, plug, drawcock, hose or any
other attachment without first obtaining a permit and conforming to such
conditions as the Director of Public Works may impose.
(b) No person shall willfully deface, mark, place any obstruction around or in any
way injure or meddle with the hydrants, valves or other parts of the waterworks of
the City. In addition, no person shall attempt to work on them without proper
authorization.
(8) DISCONTINUING SERVICE.
(a) Any consumer desiring to discontinue the use of water must give notice
thereof in writing on or before the water rent is due or he will be charged with the
rent until the next rent day.
(b) No lease of water will be made for a shorter period than one year except
where water is used for purposes purely temporary and upon special terms.
(9) CLAIMS AGAINST CITY PROHIBITED.
No claims shall be made against the City by reason of the breakage of any main
pipe, service pipe or cock or for an interruption of the supply of water or by
reason of the breakage of machinery, or the stoppage for necessary repairs.
(10) STATE PLUMBING LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall be allowed to do any plumbing connection with the water system
without obtaining a permit and shall conform to such regulation as imposed by the
Director of Public Works or his duly authorized representative and shall do the
work subject to his approval and in accordance with this section.
(11) VIOLATION OF RULES OR NONPAYMENT OF RENT.
(a) Refer to Public Service Commission Water Ruling Docket No. 1100-WR-102
Dated 12-15-03.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
4
(b) No person shall supply water to a service pipe from which the supply has
been turned off without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Public
Works.
(c) Any damage which a meter may sustain, resulting from the carelessness of the
owner of the premises, his agent or tenant, or from neglect of either of them to
properly secure and protect the same including any damage that may result from
allowing the meter to become frozen or to be injured from hot water, or steam
setting back from a boiler, shall be paid to the Water Department by the consumer
of the water or the owner of the premises.
(12) METERS.
(a) If any meter fails to register for any cause, the amount charged during such
period shall be estimated and based on the average amounts registered during a
like period.
(b) No person, unless properly authorized by the Director of Public Works shall
connect, remove, repair or disturb any water meter.
(c) If a consumer requests that a test be made of his meter in addition to the
periodic or installation test, no test shall be made unless the consumer or his agent
witnesses the test. Meters shall be repaired and maintained at the sole expense of
the City.
(d) WATER DEDUCT METERS. (#634 7/16/85) Any user of a deduct water
meter which is used for obtaining sewer service charge credits shall transfer
ownership of such water meter to the City of Chilton and the City of Chilton shall
be responsible for measuring such sewer service credits.
1. If a user does not transfer their present water deduct meter to the City
of Chilton, then the City of Chilton shall provide such user with a deduct
water meter.
2. The City of Chilton shall be responsible for all maintenance and
replacements of all such deduct meters.
3. The sewer service credit charges shall be based on the City of Chilton
rate charges. A quarterly charge, based on meter size, shall be charged to
user to cover costs of maintenance, repair, or replacement of the meter,
which rate is set by the State of Wisconsin Public Service Commission.
(13) NOTICE OF ALTERATION OR EXTENSION.
No alteration or extension shall be made in any water pipe or fixtures, without
first giving notice of such proposed alteration or extension, and receiving a permit
from the Director of Public Works authorizing the same, and the work must be
done by a competent licensed plumber.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
5
(14) SERVICE LINE MAINTENANCE. (Ord. No. 1160 8/20/2019)
Each property owner shall maintain the service line from the curb stop to the point
of metering or use. If an owner fails to so repair a leaking or broken service pipe
within such times as may appears reasonable to the water utility after notification
has been served on the owner by the Director of Public Works, the water shall be
shut off and not turned on again until the repairs have been completed.
(a) Intent and purpose. The water utility commission of the city that it is in the
public interest to establish a comprehensive program for the removal and
replacement of lead pipe water service lines in use within both the city utilities
water system and in private systems and, to that end, declares the purpose of this
section to be as follows:
(1) To ensure that the water quality at every tap of utility customer meets the
water quality standards specified under the federal law.
(2) To reduce the lead in city drinking water to meet the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) standards and ideally to a lead contaminant level of
zero in city drinking water for the health of city residents;
(3) To eliminate the constriction of water flow caused by mineral rich water
flowing through lead water service pipes and the consequent buildup of
mineral deposits inside lead pipes;
(4) To meet the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resource (WDNR)
requirements for local compliance with the Lead and Copper Rule (see 56 56
CFR 6460, 40 CFR parts 141.80 – 141.90 and Wis. Admin. Code §§ NR
809.541 – 809.55).
(b) Replacement requirement. The privately owned portion of a lead water
service line shall be replaced at the owner’s expense as determined by the city
water utility whenever any of the following occurs:
(1) A leak or failure has been discovered on either the privately owned or utility
owned portion of the service line.
(2) The utility-owned portion of the line is replaced on either a planned or
emergency basis.
(c) Water system reconstruction.
(1) Inspection required. The utility water manager or his/her designee shall
inspect all private connections to the public water mains within a project area
at the time that the utility system is to be reconstructed:
a. Lead piping is declared to be no longer an approved material for water
supply laterals pursuant to this section.
b. Prior to the actual reconstruction of the water main and lateral system,
each property owner shall be given written notice of the project. Such
notice shall be made not less than 30 days prior to commencement of the
actual work.
c. As the reconstruction progresses, the utility water manager or his/her
designee shall inspect each private water lateral connection for the
presence of lead or, in the event inspection had been made previously,
determine the condition of the private water connection from inspection
records.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
6
d. In the event that the private water lateral does not contain lead, the city
shall reconnect the same to the utility system at an appropriate point near
the right-of-way line.
e. In the event that the private water lateral is found to contain lead, the
utility water manager or his/her designee shall immediately notify the
owner in writing of that fact.
(2) Owner to replace lead service. The owner shall, at the owner’s expense,
replace the lead service. In all cases, the city shall supply appropriate
connection point as part of its work. The owner may elect to:
a. Contract with licensed contractor to complete the replacement. All work
needed to accomplish the replacement shall be done at the expense of the
owner. Within 30 days of the giving of notice of deficiency under
subsection (c) (1)e. of this section, proof of arrangements for replacement
shall be provided to the utility water superintendent or his/her designee
and within 30 days of the giving of notice the replacements shall be
completed.
b. Have the city contractors, if available, complete the replacement.
(1) The city may, as part of any project, request unit bid prices for the
calculation of the cost of making appropriate replacement to the
private building water laterals.
(2) If available, and should the owner select this option, the owner will be
charged the entire cost of making the replacement incurred by the city.
(15) FROZEN SERVICES. (Ord. No. 1156 6/4/2019)
The property owner will be notified by letter when it is necessary to run their
water due to cold weather and frost conditions to prevent freezing of their
water service. A second notice will be given to the property owner when to
discontinue running the water.
Frozen services shall be thawed out by and at the expense of the City except
where the freezing was caused by contributory fault or negligence on the part of
the consumer such as reduction of the grade or undue exposure of the piping in
the building or on consumer’s property. After thawing such services, the City
shall issue instructions as may be necessary to prevent the re-freezing of the same
service. No charge will be made for the re-thawing of the same service. No
charge will be made for the re-thawing if the instructions are followed. In the
case that it is necessary to allow the water to run to prevent re-freezing, the
consumer must make provisions for proper disposal of the waste water.
For the period in which the water is allowed to run, the consumer will be allowed
a credit in an amount to be determined by the Director of Public Works who shall
take into consideration consumption in similar quarters in previous years. A new
consumer shall be charged the average bill for other consumers of the same class
receiving service under comparable conditions.
Revised 8/20/2019
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
7
(16) SURREPTITIOUS USE OF WATER.
When the City has reasonable evidence that the consumer is obtaining his water in
whole or in part by means of devices or methods used to stop or interfere with the
proper meter of the utility service, the City reserves the right to estimate and
present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such interference
with the proper meter of the utility service and such bill shall be payable subject
to a 24 hour disconnection service.
(17) COMPREHENSIVE CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM.
Ord. No. 1070 3/1/2011)
(a) The City of Chilton adopts Wisconsin Administrative Rule Comm 82.41
Cross Connection Control Program in its entirety.
(b) The Director of Public works or his designee is responsible for
implementation of the program by the City o f Chilton Water Department.
12.02 WATER RATES. (Ord. #690 9/6/88)
(1) Public Service Commission of Wisconsin Ruling Docket No. 1100-WR-102 dated,
12-15-03 in its entirety is adopted as rates and rules of the City Water Department as
to the service referred to in said docket. Said docket shall be on file at the Office of
the City Clerk and at all offices and stations within the City of Chilton.
(2) WATER SERVICE LATERAL – CONNECTION CHARGE. (#690 9/6/88)
The utility or contracted service will furnish and install the initial water service lateral
from the main through the curb stop and box, for which the following charges will be
made to the property owner:
¾-inch or 1-inch copper water service - Actual Cost
Larger sized services - Actual Cost
12.03 PRIVATE WELLS.
(1) PURPOSE. (Ord. No. 1093 8/7/12, Ord. No. 983 5/03/05, Ord. No. 676 1/5/88)
Regulation is required to prevent unused, unsafe and non-complying wells from
acting as vertical conduits for aquifer contamination or as sources of unsafe water that
could enter the public water system through cross connections.
(2) WELL PROHIBITION.
(a) No person shall dig, drill, bore or construct any water well or water supply system
within the City where the City's municipal water system is available.
(b) No person shall dig, drill, bore or construct any water well or water supply
system where the City's municipal water system is not available within the City
without first obtaining a Well Operating Permit from the City.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
8
(3) PERMITTED PRIVATE WELLS.
Only those private wells for which the City has granted a Well Operating Permit shall
be permitted to exist. A Permit is valid for up to five years. On or before the 5-year
expiration, the Permit must be renewed. Any person who demonstrates a need for
continued current use of a private well must have a current Well Operating Permit. A
permit is obtainable by the following:
(a) One safe sample shows the water is bacteriologically safe (as defined by DNR
rules then in effect);
(b) There are no cross connections between the private water supply system and the
City's municipal water system
(c) The private water supply system is found to be safe and in compliance with
Chapters NR 810 and 812 of the Wis. Adm. Code
(d) The well and pump system must be evaluated by a licensed well driller or pump
installer and certified to comply with Chapter NR 812, sub-chapter IV, prior to
issuing the initial permit and no less than every 10 years afterward
(4) ABANDONMENT.
All private wells and water supply systems for which a Well Operating Permit has not
been issued or has expired, is found not to comply with Chapters NR 811 or 812, or
the water is not bacteriologically safe, shall be abandoned in accordance
with Chapter NR 811 by an established date which may not extend beyond one year
from the date of connection to the City's municipal water system. The property owner
shall pay the cost of abandonment. The well abandonment must be observed by the
Director of Public Works or his authorized agent.
(5) INSPECTIONS, REPORTS AND APPLICATIONS.
(a) All inspections shall be done by inspectors qualified to do so under Chapter NR
812.
(b) Reports done in compliance with this ordinance and Chapter NR 812 shall be filed
with the City and the DNR.
(c) Applications for a Well Operating Permit shall be available from the Director of
Public Works. A fee prescribed by the Director of Public Works shall be paid at
the time the application is filed.
(6) COVENANT.
The property owner shall sign a recordable private water well covenant describing
the requirement for the use and operation of the private well. The City shall be
responsible for recording the agreement and the property owner shall be responsible
for payment of the recording fee.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
9
(7) PENALTIES.
Any property owner who violates any provisions of this section shall be subject to
forfeiture established in 20.04 of this Municipal Code. Each 24-hour period during
which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
12.04 SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT SERVICE RATES (#815 3/5/96)
(1) DEFINITIONS
(a) ACT shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the
Clean Water Act and the Water Quality Act of 1987, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
(b) APPROVING AUTHORITY shall mean the Director of Public Works
and Board of Public Works (or other designated Official) of the City of
Chilton, or their duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
(c) BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days at 20
degrees Centigrade, expressed as milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination of
BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
(d) CITY shall mean the City of Chilton.
(e) COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS shall mean biochemical oxygen demands,
suspended solids, pH, fecal coli form bacteria, chemical oxygen demand, total
organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen
compounds, and fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin.
(f) COMBINED SEWER shall mean a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
(g) CHLORINE REQUIREMENTS shall mean the amount of chlorine, in
milligrams per liter, which must be added to sewage to produce specified residual
chlorine content in accordance with procedures, set forth in “Standard Methods”.
(h) EXCESSIVE shall mean in such magnitude that, in the judgment of the
Superintendent, it will cause damage to any facility, will be harmful to the
Wastewater Treatment Plant to the degree required to meet the requirements of
the Act, can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, and/or which can
constitute a public nuisance.
(i) GARBAGE shall mean the putrescible organic solid wastes from the domestic
and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the
handling, storage, and sale of meat, fish, food, fruit, vegetable, and condemned
food.
(j) GROUND GARBAGE shall mean the residue from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will
be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers with no particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
10
(k) INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT shall mean any pollutant which is not defined
as a “Compatible Pollutant” in this section.
(l) INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL WASTE shall mean any solid, liquid, or
gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial
or commercial manufacturing process, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
(m) MAY is permissive; (see “Shall”).
(n) NATURAL OUTLET shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water.
(o) PARTS PER MILLION shall be a weight to weight ratio, the parts per million
value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
(p) PERSON shall mean any and all persons, including any individual, firm,
company, municipal or Private Corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
(q) pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter.
(r) PHOSPHORUS shall mean total phosphorus, which is all of the chemical element
phosphorus present in a sample, regardless of form, expressed as milligrams per
liter. Quantitative determination of phosphorus shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
(s) PUBLIC SEWER shall mean any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction
of the City of Chilton. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharges into the City
sanitary or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with City funds.
(t) RECEIVING WATERS shall mean any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake,
aquifer, or other body of surface or sub-surface water receiving discharge of
sewage.
(u) REPLACEMENT shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful
life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which
such works were designed and constructed. The term operation and maintenance
includes replacement.
(v) SANITARY SEWAGE shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilets and/or sanitary plumbing facilities, together with
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
11
such ground, surface, and storm waters as may have inadvertently entered the
sewerage system. Sanitary sewage shall have the following characteristics:
1. A BOD of not more than 200 mg/l.
2. A suspended solids content of not more than 240 mg/l.
3. A phosphorus content of not more than 10 mg/l.
(w) SANITARY SEWER shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage, industrial or
commercial wastes or a combination, and into which storm, surface and ground
waters or unpolluted industrial or commercial wastes are not intentionally
admitted.
(x) SANITARY SEWER LATERAL shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying
sewage or any other waste liquids, excluding storm, surface, and ground water
drainage, which directly connects an individual source of such sewage or waste to
the sanitary sewer.
(y) SERVICE USER shall mean any individual or establishment, which utilizes the
sanitary sewer system.
(z) SEWAGE (also referred to as wastewater) shall mean a combination of the watercarried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, commercial and
industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as
may be present.
(aa) SEWAGE DISPOSAL WORKS shall mean all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage and industrial or commercial waste, and it
includes sanitary sewer as well as the Wastewater Treatment Plant.
(bb) SEWER shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
(cc) SEWER SERVICE CHARGE shall mean the total charge levied on users
of a treatment works for operation, maintenance, depreciation, and debt retirement.
(dd) SEWERAGE shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the
collection, transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial or commercial
wastes.
(ee) SHALL is mandatory (See “May”).
(ff) SLUG shall mean any discharge of sewage, industrial or commercial waste
which is concentration of any given constituent exceeds more than five (5)
times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration during normal operation, or the
discharge of any volume of liquid waste which exceeds in quantity of flow for a
period of fifteen (15) minutes or more, the normal 24 hour average discharge.
(gg) STANDARD METHODS shall mean the examination and analytical procedures
set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
12
Water and Wastewater” published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.
(hh) STORM SEWER shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface and ground
water drainage but excludes sewage, industrial and commercial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
(ii) SUPERINTENDENT shall mean the Superintendent of Wastewater Collection
and Treatment System of the City of Chilton, or his authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
(jj) STORMWATER RUNOFF shall mean that portion of the rainfall that is drained
into the sewers.
(kk) SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall mean solids that either float to the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, sewage, industrial or commercial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended
solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
(ll) USER CHARGE shall mean a charge levied on users of a treatment works for
the user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of such works.
(mm) WASTEWATER shall be synonymous with sewage and shall mean the water
carried human, animal and household wastes in a public or private drain, and may
include ground water infiltration, surface drainage and industrial or commercial
wastes.
(nn) WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT (WWTP) shall mean an assemblage
of devices, structures, and equipment for treating sewage and industrial or
commercial waste.
(oo) WPDES PERMIT shall mean a permit issued by the State of Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) pursuant to Section (402(b) of the Act Of
Detailing terms and conditions for discharges from the Wastewater Treatment Plant
to the receiving waters.
(2) USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
(b) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this Ordinance.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
13
(c) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
(d) The owner of all houses, buildings, or other properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated with the City and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may be
located in the future a public sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby required at his
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so.
(e) Whenever permits for new connections to the Wastewater Collection and
Treatment System are applied for, the Approving Authority shall determine whether
adequate collection and treatment capacities exist in the System to properly
accommodate such proposed new connections. If the determination is that either
existing collection or treatment capacity in the System is inadequate for properly
handling said proposed new connections, then said connections shall be disallowed.
(3) USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
(a) SANITARY SEWERS. No person shall cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface drainage, sub-surface drainage, ground water, roof runoff, cooling water or
unpolluted water into any sanitary sewer.
(b) STORM SEWERS. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the Approving Authority.
Industrial or commercial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Approving Authority, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
Such approval is subject to review by the Department of Natural Resources, Division
of Environmental Protection of the State of Wisconsin.
(c) SUMP PUMP CONNECTIONS. A person shall connect their sump pump
to a City storm sewer or a fixture installed by the City within sixty (60) days of the
City providing such storm sewer or fixture which services such a person’s lot.
Where any storm sewer or fixture is presently installed which services a person’s lot,
then a person shall connect their sump pump to such storm sewer or fixture within
sixty (60 days after the passage and publication of this ordinance amendment).
Prior to making such above set forth connection, a person shall obtain the approval of
the manner of the connection from the Department of Public Works.
(d) PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS. Except as hereinafter provided, no
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described
waters or wastes to any public sewer.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
14
1. Any gasoline, kerosene, benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, ylene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving water of the WWTP.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the WWTP.
4. Any waters or wastes having a pH in ex of 8.5.
5. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation
of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage,
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshing, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, sanitary napkins,
disposable diapers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
6. No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the
Approving Authority that such wastes can harm either the sewers or WWTP, have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
property or constitute a nuisance. In forming their opinion as to the acceptability
of these wastes, the Approving Authority will give consideration to such factors
as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment
process, degree of treat ability of wastes in the WWTP, capacity of the WWTP,
and other pertinent.
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 140 º Fahrenheit (60º
Centigrade).
b. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 140 º Fahrenheit
(0 degrees and 60 degrees Centigrade).
c. Any commercial garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any commercial grinder equipped with a motor of
one horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Approving Authority.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
15
d. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, cadmium, nickel, copper,
zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such a degree that any such material
discharged in the composite sewage to the sewer exceeds limits established by
the Approving Authority for such materials.
e. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established
by the Approving Authority as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
f. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Approving Authority in compliance with
State or Federal Regulations.
g. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the WWTP.
(2) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
(3) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate).
(4) Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(5) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the WWTP effluent
cannot meet the requirements of the Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Environmental Protection of the State of Wisconsin.
(6) Any sludge, precipitate or waste resulting from any industrial or
commercial treatment or pretreatment of any person’s wastewater or air
pollutants or any waste which would result in a violation of the City’s
WPDES Permit.
h. Any substances prohibited under Title 40, Part 403, of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
i. Toxics prohibited by Section 307A of the Clean Water Act.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
16
j. Quantitive limitations of discharge may be placed on BOD, suspended
solids, and phosphorus. Rates of discharge shall be controlled at the sources
to prevent slugs from entering the system. The pH of wastes entering the
sewerage system shall be within the limits previously specified in this
Chapter.
(e) GREASE AND/OR SAND INTERCEPTORS. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Approving Authority, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or
any flammable wastes, and/or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(f) NEW WATER SOFTENER REQUIREMENTS
All new residential water softeners installed after July 1, 2007 shall be subject to the
following:
1. The softener shall have DIR (demand initiated regeneration) controls and shall
meet the “High Efficiency Softener” standards of the Water Quality
Association which are 3350 grains hardness removed per one pound of salt.
2. The owner shall have the softener inspected every five years by a qualified
technician.
3. A copy of said inspection report shall be forwarded to the City of
Chilton Wastewater Department.
(4) CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL WASTES DIRECTED TO
PUBLIC SEWERS
(a) PURPOSE AND POLICY. This section sets forth uniform requirements for
dischargers into the WWTP wastewater collection and treatment system and
enables the City to meet their WPDES permit requirements.
The objectives of this section are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City wastewater system
this will interfere with the normal operation of the system or contaminate
the municipal sludge.
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the City wastewater
system which do not receive adequate treatment in the WWTP, and which will
pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
3. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge
from the system.
This section provides for the regulation of discharges into the Chilton Wastewater
system from industrial or commercial sewer users and other users, which may
have pollutants of such concentration that exceed limits.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
17
(b) SUBMISSION OF BASIC DATA. Within three (3) months after passage
of this ordinance and each six (6) months thereafter, each person who
discharges industrial wastes to a public sewer shall prepare and file with
the Approving Authority a report that shall include pertinent data relating
to the quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged to the sewage
disposal works as required by the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources and the municipality shall furnish such forms necessary to
be completed.
Similarly, each person desiring to make a new connection to a public
sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall prepare
and file with the Approving Authority a report that shall include actual or
predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste
to be discharged.
(c) EXTENSION OF TIME. When it can be demonstrated that circumstances
exist which would create an unreasonable burden on the person to comply with
the time schedule imposed by Section 12.04(4) (a) a request for extension of time
may be presented for consideration of the Approving Authority.
(d) INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL DISCHARGES.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters or wastes contain substances or possess characteristics
enumerated in Sec. 12.04(2) and which in the judgment of the Approving
Authority, may have deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life health,
or constitute a public nuisance, the Approving Authority may:
1. Reject the wastes.
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers.
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
The Approving Authority shall also require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges
under the provisions of Section 12.04(6).
(e) CONTROL MANHOLES. Each person discharging industrial wastes into a
public sewer shall construct and maintain one or more control manholes or access
points to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of his wastes,
including domestic sewage. Each person discharging commercial wastes into
a public sewer shall be subject to construct and maintain one or more
control manholes or access points to facilitate installation of a control
manhole.
Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a manner
acceptable to the Approving Authority. If measuring devices are to be
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
18
permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the Approving
Authority.
Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed by the
person discharging the waste, at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as
to be in safe condition, accessible and in proper operating condition at all times.
Plans for installation of the control manholes or access facilities and related
equipment shall be approved by the Approving Authority prior to the beginning
of construction.
(f) MEASUREMENT OF FLOW. The volume of flow used for computing
industrial waste collection and treatment charges shall be the metered water
consumption of the person shown in the records of meter readings maintained by
the City Water Department.
(g) METERING OF WASTE. Devices for measuring the volume of waste
discharged may be required by the Approving Authority if this volume cannot
otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering
devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned, and
maintained by the person. Following approval and installation such meters may
not be removed without the consent of the Approving Authority.
(h) PROVISION FOR DEDUCTIONS. In the event that a person discharging
industrial waste into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the
Approving Authority that more than 10% of the total annual volume of water used
for all purposes does not reach the public sewer, then the determination of the
water consumption to be used in computing the waste volume discharged into the
public sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the Approving
Authority and the person.
(i) WASTE SAMPLING. Industrial or commercial waste discharges into the
public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of
character and concentration of said wastes. The determinations shall be made by
the Industry as often as may be deemed necessary by the Approving Authority.
Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the
composition of the wastes. The sampling may be accomplished either manually
or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the Approving Authority.
Installation, operation and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall be the
responsibility of the person discharging the waste and shall be subject to the
approval of the Approving Authority. Access to sampling locations shall be
granted to the Approving Authority or its duly authorized representatives at
all times. Every care shall be exercised in the collection of samples to insure their
preservation in a state comparable to that at the time the sample was taken.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
19
The following substances shall be tested semi-annually by the industrial or
commercial sewer users selected by the Approving Authority:
Arsenic Chromium Selenium
Cadmium Lead Silver
Copper Mercury Zinc
Cyanide Nickel Total Oil & Grease
pH Chloride
The Approving Authority reserves the right to increase or decrease the
list of substances tested.
The Approving Authority shall require immediate re-sampling of discharges
That have a mercury concentration that exceed the method detection limit
(MDL). The MDL for mercury is 0.0002 mg/l. The discharger shall be
responsible for the costs of the testing and shall identify action to be taken
to reduce the discharge if the concentration determined in the retest is
above the MDL.
(j) PRETREATMENT. Where required, in the opinion of the Approving
Authority, to modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures,
processes or operation of the sewage disposal works the person shall provide
at his expense such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be
determined required to render his wastes acceptable for admission to the
public sewers.
(k) ANALYSIS. Laboratory procedures used in the examination of industrial or
commercial wastes shall be those set forth in “Standard Methods”. However,
alternate methods for certain analysis of industrial or commercial wastes may be
used subject to mutual agreement between the Approving Authority and the
person.
Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial or commercial
wastes shall be made by the person discharging them or his agent, as designated
and required by the Approving Authority. The City may also make its own
analysis on the wastes and these determinations shall be binding as a basis for
charges.
(l) SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION. Plans, specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment or processing
facilities shall be submitted for review of the Approving Authority prior to the
start of their construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged
into the public sewers.
(m) ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. The accidental discharge of any prohibited
waste into any sewer shall be reported to the Superintendent by the person
responsible for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of the premises where
the discharge occurs, immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the fact of such
discharge so that steps may be taken to minimize its effect on the sewerage
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
20
system. Notification of such discharge will not relieve the person of liabilities
for any expense, loss or damage to the system, or for any fines imposed on the
City on account thereof.
(n) INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Major contributing industrial or
commercial users discharging incompatible pollutants, other than those
constituents previously described in this Ordinance which are strictly prohibited
from being discharged into the sewerage system, shall reduce their incompatible
pollutional load to effluent levels attainable through the application of the best
practicable control technology currently available as defined in Section 304(b) of
the Act. All persons discharging or proposing to discharge any toxic pollutant as
defined by Section 307(a)(1) of the Act, shall apply for permission of such
discharge from the Approving Authority. Attainment of allowed concentrations
by dilution will not be allowed as a means to meet discharge standards.
(o) SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS. No statement contained in this article shall
be construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the City and any
person whereby an industrial or commercial waste of unusual strength or
character may be admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before or after
pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the
sewage disposal works by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra
costs are incurred by the City without recompense by the person.
(p) RESTRICTED INFORMATION. Information and data furnished to the
WWTP with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to
the public or other governmental agency without restrictions unless the discharger
specifically requests and is able t demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or
proprietary information of the discharger. When requested by a discharger
furnishing a report, the portion of a report which may disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this Ordinance, the WPDES Permit, and/or the pretreatment programs;
provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the
State or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceeding involving
the discharger furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
will not be recognized as confidential information.
Information accepted by the Superintendent as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
Superintendent until and unless a 30-day notification is given to the discharger.
(q) SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS. The following pollutant
limitations are the maximum concentrations acceptable for discharges to the
WWTP not included under mass limits:
0.5 mg/l arsenic 0.002 mg/l mercury (T)
0.5 mg/l cadmium (T) 1.7 mg/l nickel (T)
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
21
1.5 mg/l copper (T) 0.5 mg/l selenium (T)
0.25 mg/l cyanide (T) 0.5 mg/l silver (T)
0.7 mg/l chromium (T) 2.75 mg/l zinc (T)
(r) LOCAL REQUIREMENTS. Local requirements and limitations on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal
requirements and limitations.
(s) RIGHT OF REVISION. The City reserves the right to amend this Chapter
to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
WWTP where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in
this Chapter.
(t) DILUTION. No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water
in any way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge
as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the standards set forth in this Chapter.
(u) MASS LIMITS. The WWTP may impose mass limitations on industrial or
commercial users where that imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
The mass loadings for lead and zinc are allocated to each industry as follows:
Industry Toxic Substance Mass Limit
Chilton Plating Zinc 0.75 ppd
Worthington Cylinders Lead 0.22 ppd
Zinc 0.68 ppd
American Finishing Lead 0.07 ppd
Resources LLC Zinc 0.23 ppd
(v) ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
1. General
In addition to the provisions listed in Section 12.05(4) (m), each discharger
shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated
materials or substances as established by this Chapter. Where necessary,
facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the discharger’s expense. All industrial or
commercial users shall notify WWTP immediately of all discharges that could
cause problems for the WWTP, including any slug loadings by the industrial
or commercial user.
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the discharger’s
premises advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental
discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover
such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedure.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
22
The WWTP will evaluate at least once every two years whether each
significant industrial or commercial user needs a plan to control slug
discharges. If the WWTP determines that a slug control plan is needed, the
plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
a. A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges.
b. A description of stored chemicals.
c. Procedures for immediately notifying the WWTP of slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under this
Chapter, with procedures for follow-up written notification within 5 days;
d. The necessary procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental
spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant
site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
2. Notification of Non-Compliance
If sampling performed by an industrial or commercial user indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the WWTP within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat analysis of the substance
and report to the WWTP within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of
the violation. The industrial or commercial user is not required to
resample if the WWTP performs sampling at the industrial or commercial
user’s at least once a month, or if the WWTP performs sampling between
the industrial or commercial user’s initial sampling and when the
industrial user received the results of this sampling.
3. Notification of Hazardous Waste Discharge
Each industrial or commercial user shall notify the WWTP, the EPA
Region V Waste Management Division Director, and the DNR Bureau of
Solid Waste Management in writing of any discharge into the WWTP/s
treatment system of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be
a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type
of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial or commercial
user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the WWTP, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available
to the industrial or commercial user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
23
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during
that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences.
Discharges are exempt from the hazardous waste notification requirements
during a calendar month in which they discharge 15 kilograms or less of
nonacute hazardous wastes Discharge or any quantity of acute hazardous
waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time
notification.
(w) FEES.
1. Purpose
It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the recovery of costs from
the users of the City’s WWTP for the implementation of the program
established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the
City’s Schedule of Charges and Fees, to be prepared from time to time by
the Superintendent and approved by the City Council.
2. Charges and Fees
The City shall adopt charges and fees, which include:
a. INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE
FEE. This fee shall be charged to any industrial or commercial
discharger, which is required to monitor their wastewater discharge.
b. SAMPLING CHARGE. This charge shall be charged to industrial or
commercial dischargers for the sampling of their wastewater
employing City equipment and manpower. Only those costs
associated with wastewater sampling that are incurred by the City will
be charged to the user.
c. LABORATORY ANALYSIS CHARGE. This charge shall be charged
to an industrial or commercial discharger for each pollutant sample
which is analyzed. The charge for the laboratory analyses shall be
determined by the organization doing the testing.
d. Additional costs which may be incurred by and charged to an industrial
or commercial discharger include the following:
(1) Fees for filing appeals.
(2) Fees for consistent removal (by the City) of pollutants
otherwise subject to categorical pretreatment standards.
(3) Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
24
(x) CHANGE IN OPERATIONS. All industrial or commercial users
shall promptly notify the WWTP in advance of any change in its industrial or
commercial operations which may have an effect upon the waste and wastewaters
generated or any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in
their discharge. A substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants
discharged shall mean any discharge which exceeds 1.2 times the average twentyfour
(24) hour concentration or flow for a period greater than seven (7) days.
(y) ENFORCEMENT. When the Superintendent determines that an actual or
threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to
the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes with the
operation of the WWTP, violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this
Chapter, the Superintendent may for good cause shown suspend the wastewater
treatment service to the discharger. Any discharger notified of the suspension of
wastewater treatment service shall, within a reasonable period of time, as
determined by the Superintendent, ceases all discharges. In the event of
failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order
within the specified time, the Superintendent shall commence judicial
proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the discharger’s compliance
with such order. The Superintendent shall reinstate the wastewater treatment
service and terminate judicial proceedings pending proof by the discharger of
the elimination of the non-complying discharge or conditions creating the threat
of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above.
(z) RIGHT OF APPEAL. Any discharger or any interested party shall have the
right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the City on any matter
covered by this Chapter and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the
event that such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance
or compliance with this Chapter or deals with a wastewater discharger permit
issued pursuant hereto for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged
violation is the subject, receipt of a discharger’s request shall stall all enforcement
proceedings pending receipt of the aforesaid written reply. Appeal of any final
judicial order entered pursuant to this Chapter may be taken in accordance with
local and state law.
(aa) OPERATING UPSETS OR SLUGS OR ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
Any discharger which experiences a slug or accidental discharge or experiences
an upset in operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of
noncompliance with this Chapter shall inform the Superintendent thereof
immediately upon first awareness of the commencement of the slug, accidental
discharge or upset. Early notification may enable countermeasures to be taken by
the Superintendent to minimize damage to the WWTP and receiving waters. The
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions. The City may choose to take immediate
enforcement action. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
discharger shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report. The
report shall specify:
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
25
1. Description and cause of the upset, slug or accidental discharge, the
cause thereof, and the impact on the dischargers’ compliance status. The
description should also include location of discharge, type, concentration,
and volume of waste.
2. Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to occur.
3. All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of such an upset, slug, accidental discharge, or other conditions
of noncompliance.
Such notification shall not relieve the discharger of any expense, loss, damage, or
Other liability, which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWTP, fish
kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by this Chapter or other applicable law. After receipt and review of the
written report, the City may choose to take no further action or to take action.
(bb) PRETREATMENT COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE. In the event additional
pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance
activities are required to comply with applicable limitations, the person
discharging industrial or commercial waste shall submit to the WWTP the
shortest compliance schedule that will be performed to achieve compliance of the
violation(s). The compliance schedule shall, in no case, extend past 12 months
after passage of this ordinance. The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to compliance with the
applicable limitations. The schedule shall also include, but not be limited to, dates
relating to hiring an Engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, DNR approval of reviewable treatment
system specifications, executing a contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve
compliance with applicable limitations. Compliance schedule progress reports
shall be submitted by the person discharging industrial or commercial waste to the
Superintendent no later than 14 days following each milestone date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance. The progress reports at a minimum
shall include a statement as to whether or not the discharger complied with the
increment of the progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date
when compliance with the increment of progress will occur, the reason for delay,
and the steps being taken to return to the timetable of the approved schedule.
(5) BASIS FOR SERVICE CHARGES
(a) SEWER USERS SERVED BY WATER UTILITY WATER METERS. There
is hereby levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises
having a connection with the wastewater system and being served with water
solely by the water utility, a wastewater treatment service charge based, in part,
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
26
on the quantity of water used as measured by the water utility water meter used
upon the premises.
(b) SEWER USERS SERVED BY PRIVATE WELLS. If any person
discharging sewage into the public sanitary sewer system procures any
part, or all of his water from sources other than the water utility, all or
part of which is discharged into the public sanitary sewer system, the
person shall be required to have water meters installed for the purpose
of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
Where sewage meters are already installed the water meters will not be
required. The water meters shall be furnished by the water utility and
installed under its supervision, all costs being at the expense of the person
requiring the meter.
The water utility will charge for each meter, a rental charge set by the
water utility to compensate for the cost of furnishing and servicing the
meter. The rental charge shall be billed at the time the sewerage service
charge is billed. The rental charge for water meters are set at the
following established rates that are determined from time to time by
the WI Public Service Commission & adopted by the Common Council.
(6) AMOUNT OF SERVICE CHARGES
(a) Charges and rates shall be established from time to time in resolution format
approved by the Common Council.
The industrial or commercial charges shall be computed in accordance with the
formula presented below:
C = (V+Cy) + {(B-200) x V x CB x 0.00834} + {(S-240) x V x
CS x 0.00834} + {(P-10) x V x CP x
0.00834} + {(A-25)xVxCAx0.834}
Where:
C = Charge to industry for collecting and treating volume, BOD,
Suspended solids and phosphorus.
V = Wastewater volume in thousands of gallons per billing period.
B = Concentration of BOD in milligrams per liter (mg/l) in the
Industrial or Commercial wastewater.
CB = Cost per pound of BOD
S = Concentration of suspended solids in milligrams per liter
(mg/l) in the industrial or commercial wastewater.
CS = Cost per pound of suspended solids.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
27
P = Concentration of phosphorus in milligrams per liter (mg/l)
in the industrial or commercial wastewater.
CP = Cost per pound of phosphorus.
CA = Cost per pound of ammonia.
0.00834 = Conversion factor.
A = Concentration of ammonia in milligrams per liter (mg/l) in
the industrial or commercial wastewater.
CA – Cost per lb. Of ammonia
(7) BILLING PRACTICE
(a) BILLING PERIOD. Sewerage Service charges shall be billed separately
from the water bill and on a quarterly basis.
(b) PAYMENT. Sewerage service charges shall be payable by 20 days
after the billing date at the City Clerk’s Office.
(c) PENALTIES. All charges levied in accordance with the ordinance shall
be a debt due to the City and shall be a lien upon the property pursuant to
Sec. 66.0821, Wisconsin Statutes. If this debt is not paid within thirty
(30) days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be deemed delinquent
and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the City against the
property owner, the person, or both.
In the event of failure to pay sewer service or surcharges after they
become delinquent, the City shall have the right to remove or close sewer
connections and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purpose.
The expense of such removal or closing, as well as the expense of
restoring service, shall likewise be a debt to the City and a lien upon
the property and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the
City against the property owner, the person, or both.
Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including the
Expense of removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid.
Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent
Shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
(8) RIGHT OF ENTRY SAFETY AND IDENTIFICATION
(a) RIGHT OF ENTRY. Director of Public Works, or other duly
authorized employee of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose
of inspection, observation, and/or testing, all in accordance with the
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
28
provisions of this ordinance and Sec. 196.171 Wisconsin Statutes. The
Public Works Director or other duly authorized employee of the City
shall have no authority to inquire into any process beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers
or waterways or facilities for wastewater treatment.
(b) SAFETY. While performing the necessary work on private premises
referred to in Section 12.05 (8)(a), the duly authorized City employees
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by City employees and against the liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of gauging and sampling operation, and
indemnify the company against loss, or damage to its property by City
employees; except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions as required in Section 12.05(4)(e).
(c) IDENTIFICATION AND RIGHT TO ENTER EASEMENTS. The
Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the
City and the WDNR upon bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through the City holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement, all subject to the
terms, if any, of the agreement.
(9) SEWER CONSTRUCTION
(a) WORK AUTHORIZED. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make
any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the Approving Authority.
(b) COST OF SEWER CONNECTION. All costs and expense incident to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
Owner. The Owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
(c) USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS. Old building sewers may be used
in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the Approving Authority, to meet all requirements
for this ordinance.
(d) MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION. The size, slope,
alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods
to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and
backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building
and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
29
In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M.
and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
(e) BUILDING SEWER GRADE. Whenever possible, the building sewer
shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
(f) STORM AND GROUND WATER DRAINS. No person shall make
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer.
(g) CONFORMANCE TO PLUMBING CODES. The connection of the
building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements
of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Approving Authority before installation.
(h) INSPECTION OF CONNECTION. The applicant for the building sewer
permit shall notify the Approving Authority when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of the Approving Authority.
(i) BARRICADES AND RESTORATION. All excavations for the building
sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights
so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the City.
(10) DAMAGE OR TAMPERING WITH SEWAGE WORKS
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, Damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct.
(11) VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
(a) WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any person found to be violating
any provision of this Ordinance, except Section 12.05 (7)(b) shall be
served by the City with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
City of Chilton Ch. 12 Municipal Utilities
30
Permanently cease all violations.
(b) ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. Any person found to be responsible
for accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system
which cause damage to the treatment facility and/or receiving body of
water shall, in addition to a forfeiture, pay the amount to cover damages,
both values to be established by the Approving Authority.
(c) LIABILITY TO CITY FOR LOSSES. Any person violating any
provisions of this Ordinance shall become liable to the City for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by reason of such violation which
the City may suffer as a result thereof.
(12) VALIDITY
(a) REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCE. All ordinances or parts
of ordinances or regulations or parts of regulations in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed.
(b) INVALIDATION CLAUSE. Invalidity of any section, clause,
sentence or provision of the Ordinance shall not affect the validity of
any other section, clause, sentence, or provision of this ordinance which
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
(13) AUDIT AND DISPOSITION OF FUNDS
(a) ANNUAL AUDIT. The City shall conduct an annual audit, the
purpose of which shall be to re-establish the equity and adequacy of the
user charges relative to changes in system operation and maintenance
costs.
(b) REPLACEMENT FUND. Those portions of the user charges designated
for “Replacement” as defined herein shall be deposited in a separate
account and used only for that purpose.
12.05 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 20.04 of this code.
City of Chilton Ch. 13 Public Works
Updated 7/9/10
CHAPTER 13
PUBLIC WORKS
Page
13.01 Director of Public Works 2
13.02 Public Works Done Directly by City 2
13.03 Public Improvements and Special Assessments 2
1
City of Chilton Ch. 13 Public Works
13.01 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. (#1011 3/6/07)
The position of Director of Public Works shall be established under Section 1.03 of the
Municipal Code. The duties and responsibilities of the position shall be established from
time to time by the Council pursuant to resolution or employment contract. The Director
of Public Works shall manage the street, water and sewer departments. Such resolution or
contract may also include residency requirements to the extent permitted by law.
13.02 PUBLIC WORKS.
The provisions of Sec. 62.15 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall be followed for all Public
Works projects. Included shall be the ability of the Council to provide for public
construction being done directly by the City without submitting bids pursuant to a threefourths
vote as provided for in Sec. 62.15(1).
13.03 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
The provisions of Section 66.0701 through 66.0733 of the Wisconsin Statutes, including
any revisions or modifications thereof, are incorporated herein by reference (Statutory
Procedure). The Statutory Procedure shall be followed unless the City has, by resolution
or ordinance, adopted an alternate procedure for the method and manner of establishing
special assessments, including the calculation of frontage and corners, costs to be
included method of payment and deferral and installment payments.
2
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
1
Updated 8/12/09
Chapter 14
POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION
Page
14.01 Appointment of Chief of Police and Policemen 2
14.02 Regulation of Burning of Rubbish 2
14.03 False Alarms 3
14.04 Notice of Change in Occupancy 6
14.05 Recreational Fires 6
14.06 Fire Inspections 8
14.07 Penalty 8
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
2
14.01 APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF OF POLICE AND POLICEMEN. (#706 5/2/89)
(1) CHIEF OF POLICE.
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the
Common Council and shall hold office from the date signified in such appointment
subject only to removal by the Common Council for cause. The Common Council may,
at its option, declare the office of Chief of Police vacant should any incumbent thereof by
reason of health or physical disability be prevented from adequately fulfilling the duties
of his office for a period exceeding 30 days out of any one year.
(2) POLICEMEN.
Policemen shall be subordinate to the Chief of Police and shall be employees of the
Police Department of the City. Policemen shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council. The Common Council may make such limitations
and related restrictions governing such candidates as the Common Council may deem
necessary. The employment of any incumbent as a policeman shall be subject to like
optional powers of the Council in connection with his health as is herein before indicated
in the case of the Chief of Police.
(3) SALARIES.
The salary of the Chief of Police shall establish annually by Ordinance and approved by
the common council.
14.02 BURNING OF RUBBISH.
(1) REGULATION OF BURNERS.
No person shall build, maintain or operate within the fire district of the City any waste or
refuse container, burner or other similar appliance in the fire district, except upon
securing a special permit from the Fire Chief, and in an Underwriters approved
incinerator or its equivalent, which must be 50 feet from any building. Such approve
burner shall be constructed in such a manner that all openings on the sides and on the top
thereof may be wholly or securely closed or covered with substantial metal doors or with
wire screening, the wires of which shall not be more than one inch across, and the
openings shall not be more than one inch across.
(2) TRASH, ETC.
No person shall allow to remain longer than 36 hours or overnight, in any alley, or on any
sidewalk or premises within 30 feet of any building, any empty boxes, barrels, rubbish,
trash, waste paper, excelsior or other like combustible materials within the City limits.
(3) BURNING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
No person shall set fire or burn any leaves, rubbish or debris on any street or alley or
other public place in the City at any time.
(4) EMERGENCY PROHIBITION.
At all times of extreme dryness or drought, or because of a deficiency in the water
supply, or for reason of any emergency that the Fire Chief deems it necessary, the Fire
Chief is hereby authorized to prohibit the setting of any fires to burn rubbish, leaves, dry
grass or vegetation, or other debris upon any lands within the Fire District and shall cause
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
3
notices to be published in the official newspaper of the City forbidding the setting of fires
during such period as the said Fire Chief shall designate.
14.03 FALSE ALARMS.
(1) DECLARATION OF INTENT.
The primary purpose of this ordinance is to reduce the incidents of “false” burglar and
holdup, which are preventable or avoidable. This ordinance is also intended to encourage
the installation of reliable alarm systems and to ensure that they are well maintained and
reliably used. The installation of properly functioning systems, used responsibly, should
reduce the number of “false” alarms and reduce the danger to both officers and the public
by minimizing the number of times the officers respond in an emergency manner to these
false alarms.
(2) DEFINITIONS.
(a) Alarm Systems. As used in this ordinance alarm system shall mean an
assembly of equipment and/or devices arranged and intended to signal the
presence of a hazard or situation requiring urgent attention and to which the City
Police Dept. is expected to respond. In this ordinance the term alarm system shall
include the terms holdup alarm, burglar alarm system, automatic holdup system,
manual holdup system, direct line system, proprietary system, local alarm system,
central station system and answering service.
(b) Alarm user. Means any person on whose premise, commercial or residential,
an alarm system is maintained within the City of Chilton. Excluded are alarm
systems on motor vehicles unless they are connected to an alarm system at a
premise.
(c) Holdup Alarm. Refers to an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted
robbery.
(d) Manual Holdup alarm. Refers to an alarm system in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person or persons attacked or
by an observer of an attack.
(e) Burglar Alarm System. Means an alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
(f) Automatic Holdup Alarm System. Means an alarm system in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the action of the robber.
(g) Direct Line System. Means a telephone line leading directly from a central
station to the communications center of the Calumet County Sheriff’s Office used
only to report emergency signal information on a person to person basis.
(h) Answering Service. Means a telephone answering service providing the
service of receiving, on a continuous basis through employees, emergency signals
from an alarm system and, thereafter, is expected to immediately relay the
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
4
message of the emergency signal (alarm) by live voice to the communication
center of the Calumet County Sheriff’s Office.
(i) Automatic Dialing Device. Means an alarm system, which automatically
sends over regular telephone, lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation the alarm device is designed to detect.
(j) Central Station System. Means a system in which the operation of electrical
protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in,
maintained and supervised from a central station having trained operators in
attendance at all times.
(k) Proprietary System. An alarm system sounding or recording alarm and
supervisory signals at a control center located within the protected premise, the
control center being under the supervision of the proprietor, or an employee, of
the protected premise. If a proprietary system includes a signal, line connected
directly, by means of an automatic dialing device, to the alarm panel at the
Calumet County Sheriff’s Dept., a central station, or answering service. It thereby
becomes an alarm system as defined in this ordinance.
The system is also included if the control center receives the alarm signal and, by
voice communication via telephone line or by activation of an alarm signal
connected to the Calumet County Sheriff’s Department, indicates the existence of
the alarm. (e.g., the control center receives an indication of a break-in and they
telephone the Calumet County Sheriff’s Department and, by live voice, tell the
dispatcher that they tripped an alarm that sends a signal to an annunciator in the
alarm panel.
(l) Local Alarm System. A signaling system which, when activated, causes an
audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in/or on the premise the
alarm was intended to protect. If the system was designed and intended to attract
the attention of people outside of the building, it shall come under the definition
of alarm system.
(m) Person. Means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
(n) Calendar Year. The calendar year is comprised of a twelve (12) month period,
which starts January 1.
(o) Annunciator. Means the instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving
terminal of a signal line which through both visual and audible signals shows
when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated or it may indicate
line trouble.
(p) False Alarm. Means any of the following:
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
5
1. The activation of an alarm system through negligence of the owner,
alarm user or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or
agents.
2. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure or
malfunction because of improper maintenance by the alarm user, owner,
lessee or his or her employees or agents.
3. The activation of an alarm system because of improper installation by
the alarm user, owner, or lessee or their employees or agents or the
company which installed the system.
4. The negligence or improper use of the equipment by the alarm user,
owner, lessee or employee.
5. False alarm does not include those alarms caused by hurricanes,
tornadoes, earthquakes, other violent conditions, or intentionally giving a
false alarm as listed in S.S. 941.13.
(3) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
Any person having an alarm installed on any business or residence and comes
under the definition of alarm user shall, immediately upon the alarm system
becoming fully functional, notify the Calumet County Sheriff’s Office and the
City of Chilton Police Dept. of the following:
(a) The existence of the alarm and type.
(b) The name of the alarm company installing and responsible for the
maintenance of the alarm system and their phone number
(c) The name of the alarm user and the phone numbers of two people who
can be contacted and will respond to the scene of the alarm to assist
officers in checking property. The alarm owner, user or lessee shall also
notify the Calumet County Sheriff’s Office and the Chilton Police Dept.
immediately of any change in the name or phone numbers for their contact
people.
(d) The person on whose premise the alarm system is installed shall
contact the Sheriff’s Office and the Chilton Police Dept. and advise them
of who shall be considered the person primarily responsible for the
system.
(4) FALSE ENTRY AND MOTION ALARMS.
(a) Failure to provide information concerning Section (3) General Requirements
shall result in the following:
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
6
1. Upon a first offense of the information not having been provided, the
alarm user, owner, or lessee shall be sent a letter by the Police Dept.
informing them of the provisions of this ordinance.
2. After thirty days of having been notified of the existence of this
ordinance, and being given a warning for a first offense, for any second
and subsequent offenses a citation shall be issued which shall result in a
$50 forfeiture plus court costs.
(5) FALSE FIRE ALARMS. (#904 6/00)
(a) While it is recognized that private alarm systems can significantly contribute
to the protection of persons and property within the City of Chilton and
surrounding fire service area, when not properly maintained or due to malfunction
or abuse, such systems can cause false alarms, resulting in needless cost and
expense to the City in responding to such false alarms, Alarm systems properly
maintained and supervised should minimize false alarms and the need to respond
to them. Any property owner who experiences more than 3 false alarms at any
one address in any calendar year shall be billed $300.00 for four through six,
$500.00 for seven through nine, $700.00 for ten through eleven and $900.00 for
twelve and above. Bills not paid will be added to the property tax bill.
(b) EXCEPTION. A false alarm, determined by the Fire Chief or the assistant
fire chief to have been caused by circumstances beyond the control of the
property owner, shall not be subject to the charge.
14.04 NOTICE OF CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY OF CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES. (#743 9/3/91)
NOTICE REQUIRED.
The City of Chilton declares that the public welfare and safety is promoted by the Fire
Department being made aware of the change of occupancy of certain buildings and
structures so that an appropriate and timely fire inspection can be made of such building
or structure covered under Chapters 50-64 of the State Building Codes used by or for
public assembly, institutional, industrial, multi-family (public spaces thereof), office or
mercantile purposes, shall notify the City in writing of any change in occupancy of such
building or structure prior to such change.
14.05 RECREATIONAL FIRES.
(1) INTENT. The intent of this section is to establish guidelines for the use and
construction of recreational fires and outdoor cooking apparatuses.
(2) DEFINITIONS. (Ord. No. 1049 7/21/09)
(a) Recreational Fire - Any fire such as a campfire or cooking fire, fire pit or
portable fire container for the purpose of recreational and personal enjoyment.
(b) Outdoor cooking apparatus - A charcoal grill, gas grill, smoker, camping
stove or similar apparatus designed exclusively for the cooking of food.
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
7
(c) Structure. (Structure is defined in Municipal Code Chapter 16.03 (2) (bz)
Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on
the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
This shall include signs.
(3) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. Recreational fires shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) No recreational fire shall be closer than twenty (20) feet from any structure.
(b) No recreational fire shall be in an area larger than 42 inches by 42 inches.
(c) Any pit used for a recreational fire shall have a minimum depth of 10 inches
and shall be covered when not in use. This pit shall be surrounded on the outside
by a noncombustible material such as concrete block or rock for a 12-inch width
all around the perimeter.
(d) All recreational fires shall be contained within the pit or other container in
which the combustible material is located.
(e) All recreational fires shall be supervised at all times by at least one person
who age is 16 years or older. If not supervised, such recreational fire must be
extinguished.
(f) Combustible material used in recreational fires shall not include rubbish,
garbage, treated wood, hazardous materials, flammable or combustible liquids,
vinyl, plastic or rubber materials.
(g) Police Personnel shall have the right to require any fire to be immediately
extinguished if the smoke is offensive to surrounding residents or creates a
hazardous condition.
(h) Recreational fires utilizing a portable fire container shall be located on the
ground, asphalt, concrete, gravel and paver bricks.
(i) Recreational fires are permitted between the hours of
1:00 PM to 10:00 PM Sunday – Thursday
1:00 PM to midnight Friday and Saturday
Any day/evening preceding a federal holiday: 1:00 PM to midnight
(4) OUTDOOR COOKING FACILITIES.
The requirements described in section (3) for recreational fires shall not apply to any
outdoor cooking apparatus. Such apparatus shall only be used outdoors at ground level.
Revised 7-21-09
City of Chilton Ch. 14 Police & Fire Protection
8
14.06 FIRE INSPECTIONS. (Ord. 1045 4/21/09)
(1) The frequency of fire inspections conducted by the City of Chilton Fire Department shall
be at least once per calendar year, provided the interval between those inspections does not
exceed fifteen (15) months, as provided by the Wisconsin Administrative Code, Fire
Prevention, Chapter Comm 14.01 (11) (6b).
14.07 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subjected to a penalty as provided by Sec. 20.04 of the Municipal Code
City of Chilton Ch.15 Civil Defense
1
CHAPTER 15
CIVIL DEFENSE
Page
15.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE 2
15.02 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY 2
15.03 EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS 2
15.04 EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT LOCATION 3
15.05 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR 3
15.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN 3
15.07 VIOLATIONS 4
Revised in its entirety Ord. 1018 6/19/07
Revision of entire chapter -WI Statue 166 to 323 Ord. 1149 6/5/18
City of Chilton Ch.15 Civil Defense
2
15.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
To prepare the City to cope with emergencies resulting from enemy action and natural or
man-made disasters, it is declared to be necessary: to establish a plan for emergency
government for the City, in order to provide for the common defense, protect the public
peace, and preserve the lives and property of the people and businesses therein; to
provide for the exercise of necessary powers during a civil emergency; to provide for an
Emergency Management Director; and to provide for the rendering of cooperation and
mutual aid between the City and other political subdivisions including the coordination to
the maximum extent possible for the existing services and facilities of this City and the
federal, state and county governmental units and also various private agencies, so as to
allow for the most effective preparation and use of manpower, resources and facilities for
dealing with civil emergencies.
15.02 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
(1) Whenever conditions arise by reason of war, conflagration, flood, heavy snowstorm,
blizzard, catastrophe, disaster, riot or civil commotion, hazardous material, radiological
or biological incident or acts of God and including conditions, without limitation because
of enumeration, which impair transportation, food or fuel supplies, medical care, fire,
health or police protection or other vital facilities of the City, the Common Council shall
be empowered, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §323, to declare by resolution that an emergency
exists in the City. The period of such emergency shall be limited by such resolution to
the time during which such emergency conditions exist or are likely to exist.
(2) The emergency power conferred by Wis. Stats §323 shall include the general
authority to order by such resolution whatever is necessary and expedient for the health,
safety, welfare and good order of the City in such emergency and shall include, without
limitation because of enumeration, the power to bar, restrict or remove all unnecessary
traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, from local highways.
(3) If, because of emergency conditions, the Common Council is unable to meet with
promptness, the Mayor, or in the event of his inability to act, the president of the
Common Council, shall exercise by proclamation all of the powers conferred upon the
Common Council which within his discretion appear necessary and expedient for the
purposes set forth in this section.
(4) Any proclamation issued pursuant to subsection (3) of this section shall be subject to
ratification, alteration, modification or repeal by the Common Council as soon as it can
meet, but such subsequent action taken by the Common Council shall not affect the prior
validity of such proclamation.
15.03 EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Wisconsin Statutes §323, the Common Council
makes the following provisions for emergency succession to the office of Mayor:
Revised 6/5/2018
City of Chilton Ch.15 Civil Defense
3
(1) The president of the Common Council, the chairman of the General Government
Committee, the chairman of the Public Safety Committee are hereby designated as
emergency interim successors, and for the purposes of succession they shall rank in the
order named in this subsection.
(2) If the Mayor is unavailable, the highest-ranking emergency interim successor who is
available shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the Mayor. Such
successor shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties only until such time as
the lawful incumbent Mayor or emergency interim successor higher in rank or in order of
succession exercises, or resumes the exercise of, the powers and duties of the office or
until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or is
elected and qualified as provided by law.
(3) At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take such oath as
may be required to qualify them to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the
office of Mayor.
15.04 EMERGENCY GOVERNMENT LOCATION.
Whenever during a civil emergency it becomes imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to
conduct the affairs of the City at City Hall, the governing body may meet at any place
within or without of the City limits on the call of the Mayor or his or her interim
successor and shall proceed to establish and designate by resolution an alternate or
substitute site as the emergency temporary location of City government where all or any
part of the City’s business may be transacted and conducted during the civil emergency.
If practical, such site or place shall be the location as designated in the emergency
management plan.
15.05 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR.
The office of Emergency Management Director (EMD) is hereby created, with
appointment as provided in Section 1.03(7) of the Municipal Code.
15.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
The EMD shall develop and promulgate an emergency management plan consistent with
state plans, direct the emergency management program, and perform such other duties
related to emergency management as required by the Common Council. Such emergency
management plan shall take effect upon the proclamation of a state of emergency
pursuant to Chapter 323 of the Wisconsin Statutes or a declaration of emergency under
Section 15.02 of this ordinance. In developing such plan and program, the EMD shall
consult with the Public Safety Committee, the Mayor, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief
and the Director of Public Works. Such plan shall include the designation of a temporary
emergency government location. The emergency management plan shall be submitted to
and approved by the Common Council, including any future modifications or
amendments thereto.
Revised 6/5/2018
City of Chilton Ch.15 Civil Defense
4
The EMD shall direct local emergency management training programs and exercises,
direct participation in emergency management programs and exercises ordered by the
adjutant general and the Calumet County head of emergency management services, and
advise the Calumet County head of emergency management services on local emergency
management programs and submit to him or her such reports as he or she requires. The
emergency management plan shall utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities
of the City, including the City’s employees, elected officials and appointees to the
maximum extent practicable.
15.07 PENALTY
Whoever intentionally fails to comply with the directors of emergency management
authorities promulgated under this ordinance or Chapter 323 of the Wisconsin Statutes
during a state of emergency, ordering any training program, or exercises may be fined not
more than $200.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days or both.
Revised 6/5/2018
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-1-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
16.01 TITLE ............................................................................................................................. 2
16.02 PURPOSE....................................................................................................................... 2
16.03 RULES............................................................................................................................ 2
16.04 DEFINITIONS................................................................................................................ 3
16.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................................. 7
16.06 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED...................................................................... 13
16.07 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS ....................................................................... 16
16.08 REGULATION CLARIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS........................................ 17
16.09 ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES............................ 19
16.10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS................................................................................ 30
16.11 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PUD) ............................................ 32
16.12 SITE PLAN REVIEW.................................................................................................. 34
16.13 SIGNS........................................................................................................................... 37
16.14 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING................................................................ 41
16.15 FENCES........................................................................................................................ 48
16.16 WIRELESS TELE-COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.............................................. 50
16.17 WELL HEAD PROTECTION ..................................................................................... 55
16.18 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT............................................................ 59
16.19 VALIDITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE........................................................................ 64
Entire Chapter Revised.
Ord. No. 1089 June 19, 2012
Ord. No. 1076 July 19, 2011
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-2-
16.01 TITLE
An ordinance for the City of Chilton, Wisconsin, for the purpose of regulating the use of
land, the location and the use of buildings and the arrangement of buildings on lots.
The City Council of Chilton does ordain that the ordinance commonly known as the
“Zoning Ordinance of the City of Chilton” be enacted to read as follows:
16.02 PURPOSE
This ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:
(1) Protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience
and general welfare.
(2) Dividing the City into zones and districts restricting and regulating therein the
location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of structures and land.
(3) Promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial, recreational
and public areas.
(4) Providing adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property.
(5) Limiting congestion in the public right-of way.
(6) Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by
regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to the
land and buildings surrounding them.
(7) Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use
of land throughout the City.
16.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
The language set forth in the text of this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following rules of construction:
(1) The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(2) The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the future the present.
(3) The work “shall” is mandatory while the work “may” is permissive.
(4) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(5) All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is ½ foot or
less, the integral foot next below shall be taken.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-3-
16.04 DEFINITIONS
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this ordinance shall be
interpreted as herein defined. Definitions for specific land uses can be found in Sections
16.09(2) through 16.09(7).
(1) ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. The use or structure subordinate to the
principal use or building on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily
incidental thereto.
(2) ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords secondary access to abutting
property.
(3) APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities available which is
occupied as a residence by a single family. Includes dwelling unit and efficiency
unit.
(4) BALCONY. A platform that projects from the wall of a building and is enclosed by
a parapet or railing. A balcony cannot project into a required front or side yard.
(5) BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partially underground but having less
than ½ its floor to ceiling height below the average land grade.
(6) BOARDING HOUSE (ROOMING OR LODGING). A building containing lodging
rooms accommodating, for compensation, 3 or more persons, but not exceeding 12,
who are not the keeper’s family. Lodging may be provided with or without meals.
(7) BUILDING. Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind which is permanently
affixed to the land.
(8) BUILDING HEIGHT. A distance to be measured from the mean ground level to
the top of a flat roof, to the mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip
roof to the neckline of a mansard roof, to the uppermost point on all other roof
types.
(9) BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where
services are offered for compensation.
(10) CELLAR. That portion of a building having more than ½ of the floor to ceiling
height below the average land grade.
(11) CITY PLAN. A set of maps, data, reports, documents, and other material
maintained by the Plan Commission which combine to form the Comprehensive
Plan of the City of Chilton.
(12) CLUB OR LODGE. A club or lodge is a non-profit association of persons, who are
bonafide members paying annual dues, use of premises being restricted to members
and their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises
providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. Serving
of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed, providing such
serving is secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room for the
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-4-
purpose of serving food and meals and providing further that such serving of
alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal, state and municipal
laws.
(13) DECK. A structure, not walled or roofed, usually attached to or part of and with
direct access to or from a building. A deck cannot extend onto a required front or
side yard.
(14) DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof intended for
occupancy by a family but not including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal
cabins, boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes, mobile homes, recreation
vehicles, garages, tents, cellars, basements on unfinished homes or basements unless
they are specifically designed for such use through proper damp proofing, fire
protecting walls, and meets other requirements as may be imposed by the building
and housing codes.
(15) DWELLING UNIT – ATTACHED. A dwelling unit which is joined at one or more
sides by a party wall or wall.
(16) DWELLING UNIT – DETACHED. A dwelling unit which is entirely surrounded
by open space on the same lot.
(17) DWELLING UNIT – EFFICIENCY. A dwelling unit in which eating, kitchen,
living and sleeping space is combined in a single room.
(18) FAMILY. An individual, or 2 or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption living together, or a group of not more than 5 persons who need not be
related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit
in a dwelling unit, exclusive of usual servants.
(19) FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the
building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use, including accessory storage
areas located within selling or working space such as counters, racks or closets, and
any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or
processing of goods, or professional offices. However, the floor area shall not
include: basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the
production of processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. The floor
area of a residence shall include 50% of the area of attached garages, and 25% of
enclosed breezeways or porches, but shall not include basement area.
(20) HOTEL. A building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls and stairway
and in which lodging is offered with or without meals to 13 or more guests.
(21) LODGING ROOM. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters but without
cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms
without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations
shall be counted as one lodging room.
(22) LOT. A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise legally described as of the
effective date of this ordinance, or approved by the City as a lot subsequent to such
date and which is occupied or intended for occupancy by one principal building or
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-5-
principal use together with any accessory buildings and such open spaces as
required by this ordinance and having its principal frontage upon a street.
(23) LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on 2 or more
intersection streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street,
the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
(24) LOT, FRONT. The front of a lot shall be, for the purposes or complying with this
ordinance, that boundary abutting a public right-of-way having the least width. The
owner of a corner lot may select either street lot line as the front lot line subject to
approval by the Building Inspector.
(25) LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street
or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
(26) LOT, THROUGH. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting 2
substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot; on a through lot, both
street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this ordinance.
(27) LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines at the front
setback line.
(28) MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure that is designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation and that is certified by the federal
department of housing and urban development as complying with the standards
established under 42 USC 5401 to 5425.
(29) MOBILE HOME. A vehicle manufactured or assembled before June 15, 1976,
designed to be towed as a single unit or in sections upon a highway by a motor
vehicle and equipped and used, or intended to be used, primarily for human
habitation, with walls of rigid un-collapsible construction, which has an overall
length in excess of 45 feet. “Mobile home” includes the mobile home structure, its
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems, and all appliances and all
other equipment carrying a manufacturer’s warranty.
(30) MODULAR HOME. Any structure or component thereof which is intended for use
as a dwelling and: (1) Is of closed construction and fabricated or assembled onsite or
offsite in manufacturing facilities for installation, connection, or assembly and
installation, at the building site; or (2) Is a building of open construction which is
made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site for
installation, connection, or assembly and installation, on the building site and for
which certification is sought by the manufacturer.
(31) MOTEL (TOURIST COURT). A building or group of detached, semi-detached, or
attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwellings each of which has separate
outside entrance leading directly from the outside of the building, with garage or
parking space conveniently located to each unit and which is designed, used or
intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of automobile transients.
Each unit shall not be less than 600 square feet in area.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-6-
(32) NON-CONFORMING USE. Any building, structure of land lawfully occupied by a
use or lawfully established at the time of the passage of this ordinance or
amendments thereto which does not conform, after the passage of this ordinance or
amendments thereto, to the use regulations herein.
(33) OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley, or
driveway for the use of trucks or other vehicles while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials. Such space shall be of such size as to accommodate one
vehicle of the type typically used in the particular business.
(34) OPEN SPACE. Pervious surface areas of a lot such as grass, natural areas,
landscaped areas, and surface water. This excludes impervious areas including
roofed structures, asphalt, concrete, paved areas, decks, patios, driveways,
sidewalks, swimming pools, etc.
(35) PARKING SPACE. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on
privately owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to
store one standard automobile.
(36) PATIO. A terrace extending not more than six inches above the average level of the
ground at its margins; provided that no fixed walls or roof shall be erected on or
over any patio or similar structure that is located in a required yard.
(37) PORCH. A roofed, open area, which may be screened, usually attached to or part of
and with direct access to or from a building. A porch becomes a room when the
enclosed space is heated or air-conditioned and when the percentage of window area
to wall area is less than 50 percent.
(38) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A zoning classification that allows flexibility
in the design of a development according to an approved plan.
(39) PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE. One which determines the predominant use
as contrasted to accessory use or structure.
(40) PUBLIC. Uses owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state or
other governmental units.
(41) RECREATION VEHICLE. A vehicular unit designed as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping or travel use which either has its own motive power or is
mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel trailer,
camping trailer, truck camper, or motor home.
(42) RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY. Any impervious surface that leads directly from the
street to a garage, carport or rear yard parking area. (Ord. #1129 4/5/2016)
(43) SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a building and street or lot
lines. Distances are to be measured from the most outwardly extended portion of
the structure.
(44) SHIPPING CONTAINER. A shipping container with strength suitable to withstand
shipment, storage and handling and designed to be moved from one mode of
transport to another without unloading and reloading. It is a reusable transport and
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-7-
storage unit for moving products and raw materials between locations or countries
which are repurposed for other uses. (A shipping container is considered a
structure.) (Ord. #1138 5/16/2017)
(45) STREET. All property dedicated or intended for public or private street purposes or
subject to public easements therefore and 21 feet or more in width.
(46) STRUCTURE. Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground. This shall include signs. All structures shall be permanently fastened to
the ground by an approved method with an approved site plan.
(47) TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure which is built of such materials and in
such a way that would commonly be expected to have a relatively short useful life,
or is built for a purpose that would commonly be expected to be relatively shortterm
and not to be habitable. This includes canvas or polymer covered structures
and moving containers. (Ord. #1138 5/16/2017)
(48) YARD (SETBACK). A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure from its lowest level to the sky except as, permitted in
this ordinance. The yard extends along the lot line at right angles to such lot line to
a depth or width specified in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which
such lot is located.
(49) YARD – REAR. The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building
located between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line and extending for
the full width of the lot. (Ord. #1129 4/5/2016)
(50) YARD – SIDE. The yard extending along the side lot line between the front and
rear yards to a depth or width required by set-back regulations for the zoning
district in which such lot is located.
(51) YARD – FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between
side lot lines and extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to depth
required in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is
located.
(52) YARD – STREET SIDE. Side yard which adjoins a public or private street.
16.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION.
(a) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be
held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health
safety, morals, convenience and welfare.
(b) Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance are either
more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law,
ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
prevail.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-8-
(c) No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and
no structure or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase or portion thereof. The City Council hereby declares that they
would have passed this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid
or unconstitutional.
(3) NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
(a) Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this ordinance
may be continued at the site and in a manner of operation existing upon such
date except as hereinafter specified.
(b) Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in a safe
condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
(c) When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district
has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to
any non-conforming use.
(d) When a lawful non-conforming structure is damaged or destroyed by violent
wind, vandalism, fire, flood, ice, snow, mold, or infestation, and the
nonconforming structure was damaged or destroyed on or after March 2,
2006, it may be reconstructed if the structure will be restored to the size,
location, and use that it had immediately before the damage or destruction
occurred, without limits on the costs of the repair, reconstruction, or
improvement.
(e) Whenever a lawful non-conforming use of a structure or land is discontinued
for a period of 12 months, any future use of said structure or land shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
(f) Such non-conforming use shall not be moved to any other part of the parcel of
land upon which the same was conducted at the time of the adoption of this
ordinance.
(g) Any structure which will, under this ordinance, become non-conforming but
for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective
date of this ordinance or of amendments thereto, may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within 6
months of the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereof and
continues to completion within 2 years. Such structure shall thereafter be a
legally existing non-conforming structure.
(h) Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a
lawful non-conforming use is permitted including necessary non-structural
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-9-
repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
use.
(i) Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful non-conforming
residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they
will not increase the number of dwelling units or bulk of the building.
(4) LOT PROVISIONS.
(a) A lot of record existing upon the effective date of this ordinance in an “R”
District, which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance as to area or
width may be utilized for single family detached dwelling purposes provided
the measurements of such area or width are within 70% of the requirements of
this ordinance, but said lot of record shall not be more intensively developed
unless combined with one or more abutting lots or portions thereof so as to
create a lot meeting the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) Except in the case of planned unit developments as provided for hereinafter,
not more than one principal building shall be located on a zoning lot.
(5) ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. (Ord. #1138 5/16/2017)
(a) No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the
time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
(b) No accessory building or structure, unless an integral part of the principal
building shall be erected, altered, or moved within 5 feet of all buildings.
(c) No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building.
(d) Total accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,200 square feet of floor area in
the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
(e) No detached garages or other accessory buildings shall be located nearer the
front lot line than the principal building on that lot.
(f) No accessory buildings shall be located less than 3 feet from a rear lot line and
3 feet from a side lot line.
(g) Accessory Buildings shall be made of the same or comparable rigid, nonpliable
material as the principal building.
(h) A temporary structure may not be standing for more than 30 days.
(i) Shipping containers are not allowed in residential districts. Repurposed
shipping containers that meet State and City of Chilton requirements are
allowed in commercial and industrial zoning districts.
(6) REQUIRED YARDS AND OPEN SPACE.
(a) No yard or other open space shall be reduced, in area or dimension so as to
make such yard or other open space less than the minimum required by this
ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than
the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced. Revised 5/16/2017
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-10-
(b) No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group
shall be used to satisfy yard, other open spaces, or minimum lot area
requirements for any other buildings.
(c) The following shall not be considered to be encroachments on yard and
setback requirements.
1. In Any Yard: Architectural features attached to the principal building, but
not extending more than four (4) feet beyond the required setback line
including: Posts, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters, open terraces, awnings, open
canopies, open-air balconies (suspended from the building), steps, railings,
chimneys, flag poles, and open fire escapes.
2. In Any Yard: Sidewalks, driveways, and off-street open parking spaces.
3. In Rear Yards: Recreational and laundry drying equipment, open arbors
and trellises, balconies, breezeways, porches, decks, and temporary
swimming pools provided that the accessory structure setback
requirements are met..
(7) TRAFFIC VISIBILITY. Except in the Central Business District, no fences,
structures or planting shall be permitted within any yard areas on a corner lot which
shall interfere with the visibility across the corner within 15 feet of the intersecting
street right-of-way lines.
(8) ESSENTIAL SERVICES (PUBLIC UTILITY USE). Essential services shall be
permitted as authorized and regulated by state law and ordinances of the City of
Chilton, it being the intention that such are exempt from the application of this
ordinance.
(9) ANNEXED TERRITORY. Annexed territory shall be placed in the “R-C” Zoning
District until such time as a detailed study determining its proper use district is
undertaken.
(10) LAND RECLAMATION. Under this Ordinance, Land Reclamation is the
reclaiming of land by depositing of material so as to elevate the grade. Land
reclamation shall be permitted only by special use permit in all districts. Any lot or
parcel upon which 400 cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited shall be land
reclamation. The permit shall include as a condition thereof a finished grade plan
which will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and as conditions thereof shall
regulate the type of fill permitted, program for rodent control, plan for fire control
and general maintenance of the site, controls of vehicular ingress and egress, and for
control of materials disbursed from wind or hauling of material to or from the site.
(11) MINING. The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from the land in the
amount of 400 cubic yards or more and removal thereof from the site without
processing shall be mining. In all districts the conduct of mining shall be permitted
only upon issuance of a special use permit. Such permit shall include, as a
condition thereof, a plan for a finished grade which will not adversely affect the
surrounding land or the development of the site on which the mining is being
conducted, and the route of trucks moving to and from the sites.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-11-
(12) SOIL PROCESSING. The operation of processing sand, gravel, or other material
mined from the land shall be permitted only by special use permit. Such special use
permit shall include a site plan where the processing is to be done, showing the
location of the plant, disposal of water, route of trucks moving to and from the site
in removing processed material from the site, and such permit shall be granted for a
specified period.
(13) RELOCATED STRUCTURES. Before any dwelling unit of more than 600 square
feet is moved into a vacant lot, a Manufactured or Relocated Home Permit must be
secured. The Plan Commission shall report to the City Council whether the
structure will be compatible with other development in the area. If the City Council
concurs with the decision of the Plan Commission that a structure would depreciate
the area into which it is to be moved, the City Council may withhold issuance of a
permit for such relocation. The Director of Public Works or designee (Director for
the purposes of this section) shall submit a report concerning structural soundness
and improvements that should be made if the building is relocated. The applicant
shall submit photographs taken from 2 or more angles of the structure to be moved
and photos of the lot on which the structure is to be located together with adjacent
lots and structures. These requirements do not apply to construction sheds or other
temporary structures to be located on a lot for 18 months or less. (Ord. No. 1089
6/19/12)
(a) Before a permit is issued to move any building over any public way in the
city, the party applying therefore shall give a $25,000 performance bond or a
$10,000 cash deposit to the City Clerk. The bond is to insure that the
permittee erects adequate barriers around the excavation exposed by the
removal of the building from its foundation. Such bond or cash deposit is to
be returned upon meeting the above requirements and those set forth in
subsections (d) and (e) below, to the satisfaction of the Director. Should the
conditions set forth in this section not be met by the permittee, the Director
shall have the same done to his satisfaction, charging the cost thereof to the
performance bond or cash deposit.
(b) The Director shall require in addition to said bond, public liability insurance
covering injury to one person in the sum of not less than Three Hundred
Thousand ($300,000) Dollars and for one accident in a sum not less than Five
Hundred Thousand ($500,000) Dollars together with property damage
insurance in a sum not less than Fifty Thousand ($50,000) Dollars.
(c) When a permit is issued the movement of the building shall be a continuous
operation during all hours of the day and night until such movement is fully
completed.
(d) Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall within one day after
said building reaches its destination report to the Director who shall inspect
the streets and highways over which said building has been moved and
ascertain their condition. If any damage is reported, the person to whom the
permit was issued shall forthwith place them in good repair as they were
before the permit was granted. On the failure of said permittee to do so within
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-12-
ten (10 days thereafter to the satisfaction of the Director, the Director shall
authorize to have the repairs of such damage done to City owned property and
shall hold the permittee responsible for the payment of same from his bond or
cash deposit, as provided for in subsection (a) above.
(e) Every person receiving a permit to move a building shall within 6 months
after said building reaches its destination have the building complete and
habitable if it is a home or complete and usable if it is a structure other than a
home, to the satisfaction of the Director. Failure to do so shall constitute a
nuisance and the Director shall proceed with abatement or remove the
nuisance. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the bond or
cash deposit, as provided for in subsection (a).
(14) VACATED STREETS. The zoning of any street, alley, easement, or public way
that is vacated by official action shall be the same as the property the area lies
within.
(15) PLATTING. All buildings hereafter erected upon un-platted land shall be so placed
that they will not obstruct proper street extensions or other features of proper
subdivision and land planning.
(16) DWELLING UNITS. No cellar, basement of unfinished home, garage, tent, trailer,
or accessory building shall at any time be used as a dwelling unit except mobile
homes located in an approved mobile home park. Basements shall not be used as
dwelling units except where specifically designed for such use through proper
damp-proofing, fire protecting walls and other requirements as may be imposed by
the building and housing codes.
(17) STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED. No existing lot shall contain any building
used as a dwelling unless it abuts at least 20 feet on a public street.
(18) INTERPRETATION. In any case where there is doubt as to the meaning or intent
of this ordinance as applied to any proposed use, the Building Inspector shall submit
the application for a building permit or proposal for open land use to the Plan
Commission which shall make a report to the City Council; the City Council shall
determine if a building permit shall be issued or if the open land use may be
permitted.
(19) PERMITTED USES. Except as provided for, no building or premises may be
devoted to uses other than those indicated as permitted uses according to provisions
of this ordinance.
(20) BULK STORAGE (LIQUID). All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil,
gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals and similar liquids shall require a conditional
use permit in order that the City Council may have assurance that fire, explosion, or
water contamination hazards are not present that would be detrimental to the public
health, safety and general welfare.
All existing, above ground liquid storage tanks having a capacity in excess of 270
gallons shall secure a conditional use permit within 12 months following enactment
of this ordinance; the City Council may require the developments of dicing around
said tanks, suitably sealed, to hold a leakage capacity equal to 115% of the tank
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-13-
capacity. Any existing storage tank that in the opinion of the City Council
constitutes a hazard to the public safety shall discontinue operations within 5 years
following enactment of this ordinance.
16.06 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
(1) DISTRICT. For purposes of this ordinance, the City of Chilton is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:
(a) Residential Districts:
1. R-C Rural Character District
The R-C District is intended to maintain areas with limited
development within the City that contain a rural character appeal
as identified in the City’s Comprehensive Plan. Intensive land use
development shall be limited in this district in order to maintain the
area as a buffer to adjacent town agricultural uses. Conversion
(and rezoning) of land within the R-C district to more intensive
land uses should only occur when planned growth warrants the
need for additional lands.
2. R-1 Single-Family Residential District
The R-1 District is intended to provide for single-family residential
land uses in newer urban areas served by public sewers. The
district is also intended to protect the integrity of residential areas
by prohibiting the incursion of incompatible non-residential uses,
and is for the exclusive location of single-family dwellings.
3. R-2 One and Two-Family Residential District
The R-2 District is intended to provide for single-family and two
family dwellings in the more established areas of the City. The
District is also intended to provide an area protected from traffic
hazards and safe from blighting influences.
4. R-D Two-Family Residential District
The R-D District is intended to provide for Two-family dwellings
in urban areas outside the downtown served by public sewer. The
District is also intended to provide an area protected from traffic
hazards and safe from blighting influences.
5. R-3 Multi-Family Residential District
The R-3 District is intended to provide appropriate areas for Multifamily
land used only in urban areas outside of the downtown
served by public sewers. The district is also intended to provide
rental housing in an area protected from traffic hazards.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-14-
6. R-MF-D Multi-Family Residential District (Downtown)
The R-MF-D District is intended to provide appropriate areas for
Multi-family land uses in and around the downtown. The district
is also intended to provide rental housing in an already built up
area.
7. R-MH Mobile and Manufactured Home District
The R-MH District is intended to provide appropriate areas for
manufactured homes on rented lots. Permitted Use, Conditions,
and regulations per Code Chapter 6.05 is incorporated herein by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
(b) Business Districts:
1. C-1 General Business District
The C-1 District is intended to provide an area for the businesses
oriented towards the highway user, tourist, or temporary visitors to
the City.
2. C-2 Central Business District
The C-2 District is intended to provide an area for Central
Business District needs of the community and to create an area of
specialized retail and service business.
(c) Industrial Districts:
1. I-1 Limited Industry District
The I-1 District is intended to provide for industry and
manufacturing in areas suited for industry based on location,
topography, existing streets and potential for utilities, and
relationships to other uses. The I-l District is intended to keep out
uses not compatible with industry.
2. I-2 General Industry District
The I-2 District is intended to provide for industry and
manufacturing that have potential blight producing impacts in
areas suited for industry based on location, topography, existing
streets and potential for utilities, and relationships to other uses.
The I-2 District is intended to keep out uses not compatible with
industry.
(d) Conservation
1. C Conservancy District
The C Conservancy District is established to preserve and
perpetuate in an open state certain areas, such as lakes and
waterways, wetlands and marshes, flood plains and stream beds,
certain agricultural lands, slopes and other areas of aesthetic value,
which because of their unique physical features, are deemed
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-15-
desirable and functional as natural drainage ways, water retention
and erosion control areas, natural habitat for plant and animal life,
green belts and other multi-purpose uses beneficial to the
community.
The regulations of the Conservancy District are intended not only
to preserve and perpetuate certain open space land and water areas
for multiple-purpose uses consistent with the intent and purpose of
this ordinance, but to also protect the community from the costs
which may be incurred when unsuitable development occurs in
certain areas. Development in the Conservancy District is limited
in character, although certain agricultural and recreational uses are
permitted when controlled by specific limitations. Conservancy
District
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this
Chapter.
(e) Planned Development
1. PUD Planned Unit Development District
The PUD District is intended to provide areas for residential,
commercial, or mixed use planned development. The purpose of
the Planned Unit Development District and applicable regulations
is to encourage desirable, quality development through greater
flexibility and design freedom than that permitted under the basic
district regulations. For projects conceived and implemented as
comprehensive and cohesive developments, regulations are
established to permit and encourage diversification, variation and
creativity in the relationship of uses, structures and heights of
structures; encourage the preservation of open space; and
encourage more rational, economic development with respect to
the provisions of public services. PUDs shall conform to the Site
Plan as filed with the City; shall be consistent with the purpose of
this ordinance; shall include adequate community facilities; shall in
all respects conform to the subdivision regulations of the City
except for specified waivers of certain provisions. See Section
16.11 for PUD requirements and procedures.
(2) ZONING DISTRICT MAP. The boundaries of the districts as established by this
chapter are shown on the map accompanying and part of this ordinance, which is
designated as the “Zoning District Map”, which is properly approved and filed with
the City Clerk. The district boundary lines on said map are intended to follow street
right-of-way lines, street centerlines, or lot lines unless such boundary line is
otherwise indicated on the map. In the case of un-subdivided property or in any
case where street or lot lines are not used as boundaries, the district boundary lines
shall be determined by use of dimensions or the scale appearing on the map.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-16-
16.07 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS

Zone standards

Zoning District
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Min. Open Space Height
R-C Rural
Character
1 Acre
150 50 20/50/50 50 70% 40
R-1 Single-Family
Residential 7,200 SF 60 25 8/20/20 25 25% 45/ 3
Stories
R-2
One & Two-
Family
Residential
4,500 SF 60 25 8/20/20 25 25% 45/ 3
Stories
R-D Two-Family
Residential 4,500 SF 60 25 8/20/20 25 25% 45/ 3
Stories
R-3 Multi-Family
Residential
2,000 SF 60 25 8/20/20 25 35% 45/ 3
Stories
R-MF-D
Multi-Family
Residential
(Downtown)
6,000 SF 40 0 - /10/ - 25 10% 45/ 3
Stories
R-MH Manufactured
Home Per Code Chapter 6.05 which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein.
C-1 General
Business 15,000 SF 100 15
7/15/15
20 (1
Story)
25 (2+
Stories)
10% 45/ 3
Stories
C-2 Central
Business All uses exempt from lot size, lot width, yard, and off-street parking requirements.
I-1 Limited
Industry 5,000 SF 50 15 10/15/20 25 10% 75/ 6
Stories
I-2 General
Industry 5,000 SF 50 15 10/15/20 25 10% 75/ 6
Stories
C Conservancy No building shall be erected or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter.
PUD Planned Unit
Development See Section 16.11.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-17-
16.08 REGULATION CLARIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
(1) FRONT SETBACK. Where adjoining structures existing at the time of adoption of
this ordinance have a different setback from that required the Plan Commission shall
determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases. However, in no case shall
a building be required to setback more than 60 feet, except where an industrial
district is adjacent to a residential district.
(2) SIDE AND REAR SETBACKS
(a) Buildings may be excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party
walls are used and if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral unit.
Party walls must be of two-hour fire resistant construction.
(b) In any Business or Industrial District, side and rear yard requirements on
properties abutting a public alley or railroad trackage may be waived.
(3) BUILDING HEIGHT: Height limitations may be increased by 50% for the
following structures: Church spires, belfries, water towers, flag poles, smoke
stacks, cooling towers and elevator equipment. Heights in excess of those allowed
under this section shall be permitted only by a Conditional Use permit granted by
the City Council determining that such structure would not be dangerous and would
not adversely affect the adjoining property.
(4) R-C RURAL CHARACTER DISTRICT
(a) Residential Density (Maximum)
1. Residential Density Definition: the number of single-family housing units
per gross land area (measured in acres). Within each development parcel,
gross land area includes wetlands, easements, and road rights-of-way.
2. Each parcel at least two (2) acres in size as of the effective date of this
ordinance, July 29, 2011, is limited to a maximum of two (2) residential
dwelling units/lots (including any existing homes). This effectively
creates higher residential densities on existing smaller parcels (where land
is already divided), and lower densities on existing larger parcels (where
there is more potential for preservation until planned growth is warranted).
For reference, the effective maximum densities are as follows:
a. Parcels between 2 and 5 acres: 1 unit per acre to 1 unit per 2.5 acres
b. Parcels between 5 and 10 acres: 1 unit per 2.5 acres to 1 unit per 5
acres
c. Parcels between 10 and 20 acres: 1 unit per 5 acres to 1 unit per 10
acres
d. Parcels between 20 and 40 acres: 1 unit per 10 acres to 1 unit per 20
acres
Existing parcels smaller than two (2) acres (without an existing home) are
eligible for a residential dwelling unit provided all other zoning district
regulations can be met.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-18-
3. Density Management. Residential density within the Rural Character
District will be tracked by the City of Chilton for each parcel. When the
maximum residential density is achieved, no further residential units will
be allowed unless planned growth warrants a need for a rezoning.
4. Residential Lot Location. Residential lots shall be located so that:
a. They are grouped together to form clusters and surrounded by open
space,
b. Impacts to natural resources and environmentally sensitive areas are
minimized including wetlands, floodplains, drainage ways, woodlands,
and slopes over 12 percent,
c. Negative impacts to historic and cultural resources are minimized,
d. Negative impacts to prime agricultural land and large tracts of
productive farmland are minimized. The location of lots should avoid
interference with normal agricultural practices, and
(b) Side Yard (Minimum)
1. Accessory Structures: 20 feet
2. Animal-related agricultural structures: 50 feet
(c) Rear Yard (Minimum)
1. Accessory Structures: 20 feet
2. Animal-related agricultural accessory structures: 50 feet
(5) R-3 AND R-MF-D RESIDENTIAL
(a) Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit (3 or More Unit Structures)
1. Efficiency units: 400 square feet
2. One-Bedroom units: 540 square feet
3. Two-Bedroom units: 720 square feet
4. An additional 120 square feet for each bedroom over two bedrooms.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-19-
16.09 ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
(1) LAND USE TABLE. The following table includes the permitted and conditional
uses for each zoning district. Permitted uses are indicated with a ‘P’, permitted
accessory uses with an ‘A’, and conditional uses with a ‘C’. More information
including land use definitions, and in some cases specific standards and exceptions
are included in Section 16.09(2) through Section 16.09(7).
Definitions,
Standards, &
Exceptions
Reference
Rural Character
Single-Family
Residential
One & Two-
Family
Residential
Two-Family
Residential
Multi-Family
Residential
Multi-Family
Residential -
Downtown
General
Business
Central
Business
Limited
Industry
General
Industry
Land Uses R-C R-1 R-2 R-D R-3 R-MFD
C-1 C-2 I-1 I-2
AGRICULTURAL/ OPEN SPACE LAND
USES 16.09(2)
Agriculture - Cultivation (a) P - - - - - - - - -
Animal Boarding and Breeding Services (b) C - - - - - - - - -
Customary Agricultural Accessory Uses and
Structures
(c)
P - - - - - - - - -
On-Site Agricultural Retail (d) A - - - - - - - - -
Horses and Accessory Private Stables (e) P - - - - - - - - -
Horse Riding Academies - Commercial (f) C - - - - - - - - -
RESIDENTIAL LAND USES 16.09(3)
Customary Residential Accessory Uses and
Structures (a) A A A A A A - - - -
Dwelling – Single Family (b) P P P P - - - - - -
Dwelling – Two Family (c) - - C P - - - - - -
Dwelling – Multi-Family (d) - - - - P P
Dwellings Above Commercial Uses (e) - - - - - - - C - -
Home Occupation (f) C C C C - - - - - -
COMMERCIAL LAND USES 16.09(4)
Adult Cabaret (a) - - - - - - - C C -
Bed and Breakfast (b) P P P P - - - - - -
Group Day Care Center (c) - - C C C C C C - -
Entertainment and Service – Indoor
Commercial (d) - - - - - - C C - -
Greenhouses and Nurseries - Commercial (e) C - - - - - P P - -
Indoor Lodging - Commercial (f) - - - - - - P P - -
Indoor Retail Sales Activity as an Accessory
Use to Industrial, Storage, or Wholesaling (g) - - - - - - - - C C
In-Vehicle Sales and Service (h) - - - - - - C
Maintenance Service - Indoor (i) - - - - - - P P P P
Maintenance Service - Outdoor (j) - - - - - - - - C C
Outdoor Display and Sale – Long Term (k) - - - - - - P C C C
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-20-
Definitions,
Standards, &
Exceptions
Reference
Rural Character
Single-Family
Residential
One & Two-
Family
Residential
Two-Family
Residential
Multi-Family
Residential
Multi-Family
Residential -
Downtown
General
Business
Central
Business
Limited
Industry
General
Industry
Land Uses R-C R-1 R-2 R-D R-3 R-MFD
C-1 C-2 I-1 I-2
Parking Garages - Commercial (l) - - - - - - A A A A
Personal Storage (m) - - - - - - - - C C
Personal or Professional Service (n) - - - - - - P P - -
Professional Offices (o) - - - - - - P P - -
Resort (p) C - - - - - - - - -
Retail Sales and Service – Indoor Small (q) - - - - - - P P - -
Retail Sales and Service – Indoor Medium (r) - - - - - - P C - -
Retail Sales and Service – Indoor Large (s) - - - - - - C C - -
Storage or Wholesaling - Indoor (t) - - - - - - P C P P
Storage or Wholesaling - Outdoor (u) - - - - - - C - C C
Veterinary Services – Domestic Animals (v) - - - - - - C - - -
INDUSTRIAL LAND USES 16.09(5)
Auto Wrecking Yard, Junk or Salvage Yard (a) - - - - - - - - C C
Contractor Shop and Yard (b) - - - - - - - - C C
Light Industry Accessory Activity as an
Accessory Use to Retail Sales or Service (c) - - - - - - C C C C
Small Engine Repair (d) C C C - - - - - - -
Industrial - Light (e) - - - - - - - - P P
Industrial - Heavy (f) - - - - - - - - - P
PARK/ RECREATION LAND USES 16.09(6)
Camps and Campgrounds (a) C - - - - - - - - -
Outdoor Public Recreation and Parks -
Passive (b) P P P P P P P P - -
Outdoor Public Recreation and Parks -
Active (c) C C C C C C C C - -
PUBLIC / INSTITUTIONAL / UTILITY
LAND USES 16.09(7)
Airports (a) - - - - - - - - C C
Bus Terminals (b) - - - - - - C C P P
Churches and Similar Places of Worship (c) C C C C C C C C - -
Communication Towers (d) - - - - - - C - C C
Community-Based Residential Facilities (e) - - - - C C - - - -
Essential Services (f) C C C C C C C C C C
Governmental and Cultural Uses – Non-
Industrial (g) - C C C C C C C C C
Rest and Nursing Homes (h) - - C C C C - - - -
Truck and Freight Terminals (i) C C
(2) AGRICULTURAL/ OPEN SPACE USES
(a) Agriculture: Land uses that include crop or forage production, nursery, sod, or
Christmas tree production, floriculture, forestry operations consistent with
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-21-
WDNR best management practices and guidelines, and any other use that the
Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection, by rule,
identifies as an agricultural use related to cultivation. Animal husbandry
(breeding and raising livestock or wild animals) is not permitted without a
conditional use permit. Animal husbandry uses currently in existence will
require a conditional use permit for any expansion in operation. Livestock
and wild animals shall be defined by Wisconsin Administrative Code ATCP
17.
(b) Animal Boarding and Breeding Services: The use of land, with related
buildings or structures, for the breeding, rearing, grooming, training, selling,
or boarding of more than 4 dogs or other domesticated animals over six (6)
months of age.
(c) Customary Agricultural Accessory Uses and Structures: 1) Buildings,
structures, or improvements that are an integral part of, or incidental to, an
agricultural use or keeping of horses; and 2) activities or business operations
that are an integral part of, or incidental to, an agricultural use.
(d) On-Site Agricultural Retail: Land uses that include operations associated with
the sale of agricultural products grown exclusively on the site or exclusively
by the farm operator. Packaging and equipment used to store, display,
package, or carry products for the convenience of the operation or its
customers (such as egg cartons, baskets, containers, and bags) shall be
produced off-site. Roadside stands shall not exceed 12 feet in total height or
200 square feet in floor area, and no portion of any such stand shall be located
or erected nearer than 50 feet from any street line (all other setbacks outlined
in this ordinance must also be followed). In addition, off-street customer
parking shall be limited to no more than three (3) vehicle spaces. Any on-site
agricultural retail that exceeds these requirements shall be considered through
the conditional use process.
(e) Horses and Accessory Private Stables: Keeping, raising, and breeding of
horses not to exceed one (1) horse per two (2) acres of land area excluding
surface water. This ratio may be exceeded only through conditional use.
(f) Horse Riding Academies - Commercial: Operation of commercial riding
schools, academies including associates stables, structures, and tracks, and
trails.
(3) RESIDENTIAL LAND USES
(a) Customary Residential Accessory Uses and Structures: Land uses and
structures clearly incidental to the primary permitted residential use such uses
as private garages, swimming pools, carports, storage sheds, and decks.
A private garage is an accessory building or accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended for and used to store the vehicles of family or
families resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service or
industry is carried on, provided that not more than ½ of the space may be
rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the premises, except
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-22-
that all the space in a garage of none or 2 car capacity may be so rented. Such
a garage shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle. The load
capacity of such commercial vehicle shall not exceed one ton.
(b) Dwelling – Single-Family: A detached building designed, arranged or used for
and occupied exclusively by one (1) family.
(c) Dwelling – Two-Family: A building designed, arranged or used for and
occupied exclusively by, two (2) families living independently of each other.
(d) Dwelling – Multi-Family: A building designed, arranged or used for and
occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other,
which may include apartments, condominiums, row housing, and similar
units.
(e) Dwellings Above Commercial Uses: Residential units in buildings where
commercial uses occupy the lower floor(s) and residential units occupy the
second story or higher.
(f) Home Occupation: Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the
occupant of a dwelling or from the dwelling when carried on within a the
dwelling unit as follows: and not in an accessory building provided that no
signs other than those normally utilized in a residential district are present,
1. No stock in trade is stored on the premises, over the counter retail sales are
not involved, and entrance to the home occupation is gained from within
the structure.
2. Such uses may include professional offices, family day care (following all
State of Wisconsin requirements), minor repair services, photo or art
studio, dress-making, barber shops, beauty shops, or teaching and similar
uses; however, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include
tourist homes, restaurants, or similar uses, or any use that produces
excessive noise or odors.
3. Teaching shall be limited to 4 students at any given time.
4. A home occupation may include one person employed other than the
occupant.; however,
5. No home occupation shall be permitted that results in the need for more
than 2 parking spaces at any given time in addition to spaces required by
the occupant of the home.
6. The home occupation shall be limited to no more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the floor area of the principal building, and shall not utilize any
secondary buildings or structures.
7. One (1) unlighted sign not over three (3) square feet in area.
(4) COMMERCIAL LAND USES
(a) Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, dance hall, bar, tavern, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not licensed under Chapter 125, Stats.,
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-23-
which features Live, Nude Dancing or Live, Semi-Nude Dancing, as defined
in Sec. 7.19 of the Municipal Code. This does not include a live dance, ballet,
musical or dramatic performance of serious artistic merit that features nudity
or semi-nudity and in which the predominant attraction is not to provide
sexual or erotic stimulation or gratification to the customers or patrons.
1. An Adult Cabaret is a conditional use in the C-2 and I-1 Districts. In
addition to those conditions prescribed by this Code, the Wisconsin
Statutes and those imposed by the City Council to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the community, the following conditions shall apply
to an Adult Cabaret:
a. No Adult Cabaret may be located within 250 feet of: a school; library;
licensed day-care center; public park; medical clinic; hospital; church
or regular place of religious worship; or a residence in any residential
zoned district.
b. No Adult Cabaret shall allow, nor shall any person engaged in Live,
Nude Dancing or Live, Semi-Nude Dancing have any physical contact
with any other person, employee, or patron. Live, Nude Dancing and
Live, Semi-Nude Dancing shall only occur on a stage or table that is
elevated at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level. To
prevent actual physical contact between a person engaged in Live,
Nude Dancing or Live, Semi-Nude Dancing and another person,
employee, or patron, all such nude and semi-nude dancing shall not be
less than five feet from an area occupied by any patron.
c. A premises licensed under Chapter 125 of the Wisconsin Statutes shall
be subject to the provisions of sec. 7.19 of the Municipal Code, which
prohibits Live, Nude Dancing.
2. Penalties:
a. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be in accordance with Sec.
16.18(4) of the Municipal Code (which by reference subjects a
violation or noncompliance to the penalty provisions of Sec. 20.04 of
the Municipal Code).
b. In addition, a premises licensed under Chapter 125, Stats. is subject to
license suspension, revocation, or non-renewal as provided in Sec.
7.19 of the Municipal Code.
c. A violation of this ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance in
accordance with Section 8.01, subject to civil abatement procedures.
3. Severability. If any section of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
sections shall not be affected.
(b) Bed and Breakfast: A place of lodging that provides a maximum of two (2)
rooms for rent in a personal residence occupied by the owner at the time of
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-24-
rental, and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast and length of
stay does not exceed seven (7) days.
(c) Group Day Care Center: A child care center that is licensed by the Wisconsin
Department of Health and Social Services, which provides for compensation
supervision and care and/or instruction for four (4) or more children for
periods of less than 24 hours per day at a location.
(d) Entertainment and Service – Indoor Commercial: Land uses which provide
entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building. Such activities
often have operating hours that extends significantly later than most other
commercial land uses. Examples of such land uses include restaurants,
taverns, microbreweries, theaters, health or fitness centers, all forms of
training studios (dance, art, martial arts, etc.) bowling alleys, arcades, roller
rinks, and pool halls. Such land uses do not include adult cabarets.
Microbreweries are facilities where beer, fermented on the premises, is bottled
or kegged and sold, and where food may or may not be sold for eat in or carry
out. The volume of production of such facility may not exceed one hundred
thousand (100,000) gallons a year.
(e) Greenhouses and Nurseries - Commercial: Structures, from which plants,
seedlings, seeds, trees, and those items related to cultivation are sold, traded or
bartered to the public.
(f) Indoor Lodging - Commercial: Land uses including hotels and motels, which
provide overnight housing in individual rooms or suites of rooms, each room
or suite having a private bathroom. Such land uses may provide in-room or
in-suite kitchens, and may also provide indoor recreational facilities for the
exclusive use of their customers. Restaurant, arcades, fitness centers, and
other on-site facilities available to non-lodgers are not considered accessory
uses and therefore require review as a separate land use.
Motels shall contain at least 600 square feet of lot area per unit, except that
there shall be at least 1,000 square feet of lot area per unit, intended for
permanent occupancy (2 weeks or more) by a family.
(g) Indoor Retail Sales Activity as an Accessory Use to Industrial, Storage, or
Wholesaling: Land uses that include any retail sales conducted exclusively
indoors which is clearly incidental to an industrial facility or indoor storage
and wholesaling facility, on the same site.
(h) In-Vehicle Sales and Service: Land uses which perform sales and/or services
to persons in vehicles, or to vehicles which may be occupied at the time of
such activity. Such land uses often have traffic volumes which exhibit their
highest levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent roads. Examples
of such land uses include drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through facilities,
vehicular fuel and service stations, and all forms of car washes.
Service stations are facilities where gasoline, kerosene, or other motor fuel or
lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the
public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles. Includes
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-25-
greasing and oiling and the sale of automobile accessories on the premises.
Also included minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, painting and
upholstering, replacement of parts and motor services to passenger
automobiles and trucks not exceeding 1-1/2 tons capacity. It shall not include
general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or
trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or
repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning.
(i) Maintenance Service - Indoor: Land uses which perform maintenance services
(including repair) and contain all operations (except loading) entirely within
an enclosed building.
(j) Maintenance Service - Outdoor: Land uses which perform maintenance
services, including repair, and have all, or any portion, of their operations
located outside of an enclosed building.
(k) Outdoor Display and Sale – Long Term: Land uses which conduct sales or
display merchandise or equipment on a long term basis outside of an enclosed
building as a principal accessory use of the lot. Examples of such land uses
would include vehicle and equipment sales and rental, manufactured housing
sales, monument sales, and garden centers. Such land uses do not include the
storage or display of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials
typically associated with a junk or salvage yard or other permanent outdoor
land uses specifically defined by the this Ordinance.
(l) Parking Garages - Commercial: Parking garages or structures for employees,
customers, or commercial vehicle and equipment storage.
(m) Personal Storage: Land uses oriented to the indoor storage of personal items
entirely within partitioned buildings having an individual access to each
partitioned area. Such storage areas may be available on either a
condominium or rental basis. Also known as “mini-warehouses.”
(n) Personal or Professional Service: Land uses that are exclusively indoors
whose primary function is the provision of services directly to an individual
on a walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples of such land uses include,
but are not limited to, professional services, insurance services, realty offices,
financial services, medical offices and clinics, veterinary clinics, barber shops,
beauty shops, and related land uses.
(o) Professional Offices: Offices of engineers, architects, lawyers, consultants,
and similar professions including related administrative functions not
dependent on walk-in traffic or appointments from the general public.
(p) Resort: Any structure or group of structures containing more than 2 dwelling
units or separate sleeping quarters designed or intended to serve as a seasonal
or temporary dwelling on a rental or lease basis for profit, the primary purpose
of the structure or structures being recreational in nature. Accessory uses may
include: a grocery for guests only, fish cleaning house, marine services, boat
landing, recreational areas and equipment, and similar uses normally
associated with and incidental to resort operation.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-26-
(q) Retail Sales and Service – Indoor Small: Land uses which conduct or display
sales or rental merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or non-professional
services, entirely within an enclosed building with a footprint smaller than
20,000 square feet. This includes general merchandise stores, grocery stores,
sporting goods stores, antique stores, gift shops, Laundromats, artisan and
artist studios, bakeries, and the like. Artisan craft production such as
consumer ceramics, custom woodworking, or other production activities
directly associated with retail sales are regulated as “Light Industry Accessory
Activity as an Accessory Use to Retail Sales or Service.”
(r) Retail Sales and Service – Indoor Medium: Land uses which conduct or
display sales or rental merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or nonprofessional
services, entirely within an enclosed building with a footprint of
20,000 square feet to less than 50,000 square feet.
(s) Retail Sales and Service – Indoor Large: Land uses which conduct or display
sales or rental merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or non-professional
services, entirely within an enclosed building with a footprint of 50,000
square feet or greater.
(t) Storage or Wholesaling - Indoor: Land uses primarily oriented to the
receiving, holding, and shipping of materials for a single business or a single
group of businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities,
such land uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples
of this land use include conventional warehouse facilities, long-term indoor
storage facilities, and joint warehouse and storage facilities. Does not include
uses described in the “personal storage facility” land use category. Retail
outlets associated with this principal use shall be considered an accessory use.
(u) Storage or Wholesaling - Outdoor: Land uses primarily oriented to the
receiving, holding, and shipping of materials for a single business or a single
group of businesses. Such a land use, in which any activity beyond loading
and parking is located outdoors, is considered an outdoor storage and
wholesaling land use. Examples of this land use include equipment yards,
lumber yards, coal yards, landscaping materials yard, tank farms, construction
materials yards, and shipping materials yards. Such land uses do not include
the storage of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other materials typically
associated with a junkyard or salvage yard. Contractors’ storage yards are
considered accessory in the “contractor shop” land use category. Retail
outlets associated with this principal use shall be considered an accessory use.
(v) Veterinary Services – Domestic Animals: Indoor veterinary services including
animal clinics and hospitals for domestic animals (does not include livestock
services). Also includes indoor grooming, but excludes animal boarding not
related to medical services.
(5) INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
(a) Auto Wrecking Yard, Junk or Salvage Yard:
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-27-
1. Automobile Wrecking Yard: Any premises where 3 or more inoperative
vehicles (including recreational vehicles) are stored which are not
registered and which do not possess current state auto licenses.
2. Junk or Salvage Yard: An area consisting of buildings, structures, or
premises where junk, waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including
automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking and structural steel materials
and equipment yards, but not including the purchase or storage of used
furniture and household equipment or used cars in operable condition.
(b) Contractor Shop and Yard: Land uses that include businesses engaged in
contract services or labor, such as contractors involved with landscaping;
building construction or carpentry; and electrical, plumbing, or heating
systems. Often involves accessory equipment storage yards and rental of
equipment commonly used by contractors.
(c) Light Industry Accessory Activity as an Accessory Use to Retail Sales or
Service: Land uses that include any light industrial activity conducted
exclusively indoors which is clearly incidental to indoor sales or service, on
the same site.
(d) Small Engine Repair: Small engine repair and service including dirt bikes,
snowmobiles, ATVs, lawnmowers, snow blowers, and similar equipment.
(e) Industrial - Light: Land uses which operations (with the exception of loading
operations):
1. Are conducted entirely within an enclosed building;
2. Are not potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat,
vibration, and radiation which are detectable at the property line;
3. Do not pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion); and
4. Comply with all of the applicable performance standards in Section 16.10.
Applicants for building permits in the I-1 District shall submit such
evidence as may be required by the Building Inspector to assure
compliance with the performance standards. Should the Building
Inspector have any doubt as to the ability of any proposed use to meet the
required standards, the matter shall be referred to the Plan Commission
which shall make a recommendation to the City Council which shall grant
or deny the application.
(f) Industrial - Heavy: Land uses which meet one or more of the following
criteria:
1. Are not conducted entirely within an enclosed building;
2. Are potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat,
vibration, and radiation which are detectable at the property line;
3. Pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion).
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-28-
4. Examples of heavy industrial land uses include meat product producers;
alcoholic beverage producers (excluding microbreweries); paper, pulp or
paperboard producers; chemical and allied product producers (except drug
producers) including poison or fertilizer producers; petroleum and coal
product producers; asphalt, concrete or cement producers; tanneries; stone,
clay or glass product producers; primary metal producers; heavy
machinery producers; electrical distribution equipment producers;
electrical industrial apparatus producers; transportation vehicle producers;
commercial sanitary sewage treatment plants; railroad switching yards;
and recycling facilities not involving the on-site storage of salvage
materials.
(6) PARK/ RECREATION LAND USES
(a) Camps and Campgrounds: Land uses designed, maintained, intended or used
for the purpose of providing camping sites for nonpermanent overnight use to
accommodate not more than one (1) recreational vehicle (RV), motor home,
pick-up coach, travel trailer, camping trailer, park model, or tent per site. This
use also includes facilities for use by campers including restrooms/showers,
active and passive recreation areas, office/convenience store buildings, and
necessary accessory uses. Any public or private parcel of land containing two
(2) or more recreational vehicles used for habitation and occupied twenty-four
(24) hours or longer shall be deemed a campground or camping resort. In any
residential zone each home or cottage owner shall be permitted only one
recreational vehicle to be parked on his premises for storage purposes only.
These units are not to be rented, leased, or used for habitation purposes at any
time.
(b) Outdoor Public Recreation and Parks - Passive: Land uses that include
recreational uses located on public or private property which involves passive
recreational activities. Passive uses include arboretums, natural areas, wildlife
areas, hiking trails, bike trails, ski trails, open grassed areas not associated
with any particular active recreational land use, picnic areas, picnic shelters,
gardens, fishing areas, and similar land uses.
(c) Outdoor Public Recreation and Parks - Active: Land uses that include
recreational uses located on public or private property which involves active
recreational activities. Active uses include play courts (such as tennis courts
and basketball courts), playfields (such as ball diamonds, football fields, and
soccer fields), tot lots, outdoor swimming pools, swimming beach areas,
fitness courses, golf courses, sportsmen’s clubs, public fairgrounds, and
similar land uses.
(7) PUBLIC/ INSTITUTIONAL/ UTILITY LAND USES
(a) Airports: Including landing strips, control towers, hangars, aircraft
maintenance and refueling facilities, and accommodations for passengers and
cargo.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-29-
(b) Bus Terminals: A terminal or depot that serves bus passengers and includes
ticketing office(s), bus maintenance, and storage/parking.
(c) Churches and Similar Places of Worship: A building, together with its
accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assembly for religious
worship and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship.
(d) Communication Towers: Land uses that include free-standing broadcasting,
receiving, or relay structures, and similar principal land uses.
(e) Community-Based Residential Facilities: A place where 5 or more unrelated
adults reside in which care, treatment or services above the level of room and
board but not including nursing care are provided to persons residing in the
facility as a primary function of the facility. Community living arrangements
do not include day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals, special
hospitals, prisons, or jails.
(f) Essential Services: Overhead or underground transmission facilities of electric
power, gas, water, telephone and railroad companies. These include: electric
power transmission lines, gas pipe lines, telephone lines, water pumping,
reservoir, and distribution facilities including poles, wires, mains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals or
similar equipment, railroad trackage, but not including buildings, storage, and
switching yards.
(g) Governmental and Cultural Uses – Non-Industrial: Facilities such as fire and
police stations, government offices, highway storage garages, cemeteries,
funeral homes, hospitals, schools, community centers, libraries, public
emergency shelters, clubs or lodges, museums, and similar uses.
Public (government) garages are buildings or spaces for the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles but not including factory assembly of such
vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junk yards.
(h) Rest and Nursing Homes: A private home for the care of children or the aged
or infirm or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home
does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or
injury, nor does it include maternity care or care for mental illnesses or
infirmities. The outward appearance of these facilities shall be residential in
nature and be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood to the greatest
degree possible.
(i) Truck and Freight Terminals: Land uses that include facilities oriented to the
short-term storage and trans-shipment of materials, and/or the outdoor storage
of trucks and related equipment.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-30-
16.10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage a high
standard of development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be
compatible. The performance standards are also designed to prevent and eliminate those
conditions that cause urban blight. All future development shall be required to meet
these standards. The standards shall also apply to existing development where so stated.
Before any building permit is approved, the Building Inspector shall determine whether
the proposed use will conform to the performance standards. The developer shall supply
data necessary to demonstrate such conformance. Such data may include description of
equipment to be used, hours of operation, method of refuse disposal, type, and location of
exterior storage etc. It may occasionally be necessary for a developer or business to
employ specialized consultants to demonstrate that a given use will not exceed the
performance standards.
(1) EXTERIOR STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. EXTERIOR STORAGE
IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. All materials and equipment shall be stored
within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties,
except for the following; laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction,
and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises,
agricultural equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the
premises. Boats and unoccupied trailers, less than 30 feet in length, are permissible
if stored in the rear yard more than 5 feet from any property line on an impervious
surface and moved every 12 months. Seasonal storage of boats and unoccupied
trailers, less than 30 feet in length is permissible on a side yard (not street side) on
an impervious surface. No person shall park a vehicle, boat or trailer on a front yard
or street side yard of any lot used primarily for residential purposes. All parking is
required to be on an impervious surface and on an approved driveway per Municipal
Code 16.10 Performance Standards. Existing uses shall comply with this provision
within 12 months following enactment of this ordinance. (Ord. 1129 4/5/2016)
(2) REFUSE IN ALL DISTRICTS. All waste materials, debris, refuse, unused
construction materials, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly
contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. The owner of vacant
land shall be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse and noxious weeds.
Existing uses shall comply with this provision within 6 months following enactment
of this ordinance.
(3) OFF-STREET LOADING. In connection with any structure which is to be erected
or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or
merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading
space. Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audible in a residential
district, the activity shall terminate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(4) TRAFFIC CONTROL. The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and
controlled in a manner that will avoid:
(a) Congestion on the public streets. Revised 4/5/2016
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-31-
(b) Traffic hazards, and
(c) Excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic
Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly flow. Traffic
into and out of business and industrial areas shall in all cases be forward moving
with no backing into the streets. No access drive or curb cut shall be located within
10 feet of any 2 intersecting right-of-way lines and shall not encroach on the full
radius of corner curbing.
(5) DRAINAGE. No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results
in water run-off causing flooding, or erosion on adjacent properties. Such run-off
shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse, ponding area, or other
public facility.
(6) EXPLOSIVES. No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
materials or products such at TNT or dynamite which could decompose by
detonation shall be permitted except such as are specifically licensed by the City
Council.
(7) RADIATION AND ELECTRICAL EMISSIONS. No activities shall be permitted
that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no
electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely
affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator
of such disturbances.
(8) LANDSCAPING IN ALL DISTRICTS EXCEPT C-2 OR I-2. All developed uses
shall provide a landscaped yard along all streets. This yard shall be kept clear of all
structures, storage, and off-street parking. Except for driveways, the yard shall
extend along the entire frontage of the lot, and along both streets in the case of a
corner lot; such yard shall have a depth of at least 15 feet.
(9) MAINTENANCE IN ALL DISTRICTS. All structures required landscaping and
fences, shall be maintained so as not to be unsightly or present harmful health or
safety conditions.
(10) INDUSTRIAL STANDARDS. Within any I Industrial District, no structure, or
premises shall fail to comply with the following performance standards:
(a) Vibrations. Any vibration discernible (beyond property line) to the human
sense of feeling for 3 minutes or more duration in any one hour and any
vibration producing an acceleration of more than 0.1 grains or resulting in any
combination of amplitudes and frequencies beyond the “safe” range of Table
7, United States Bureau of Mines Bulletin No. 442, “Seismic Effects of
Quarry Blasting”, on any structure.
(b) Screening. Any industrial use abutting to an R District shall provide and
maintain a wall, fence or planting so as to screen and reduce the noise and
dust between the two uses and to inhibit eye level vision between the
residential and industrial areas.
(c) Glare or Heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within an enclosure so as not to be perceptible at the property line.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-32-
(d) Industrial Waste Material. Industrial waste material shall not be washed into
the public storm sewer system nor the sanitary system without first having
received approval from the Department of Public Works. If said approval is
not granted, a method of disposal shall be devised which will not require
additional land for continual operation and will not cause a detrimental effect
to the adjacent land. Should the industrial waste be of a solid form rather than
fluid, the storage area shall be so located and fenced as to be removed from
public view, and a maximum amount of accumulation determined along with
a satisfactory method of disposal.
16.11 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PUD)
(1) GENERAL PROVISION.
(a) Qualification as an Applicant. Applicants for a Planned Unit Development
District can be an individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association or corporation. At the time of application for preliminary approval,
the applicant must demonstrate the ability to eventually exercise single
ownership of the district area. Previous to final approval the applicant must
acquire the entire district area and place it in his singular ownership.
(b) Engineering Design Standards. Normal standards or operational policy,
regarding right-of-way widths, provision for sidewalks, street lighting and
similar environmental design criteria shall not be mandatory in a Planned Unit
District, but precise standard satisfactory to the Plan Commission, pursuant to
the criteria as set forth in Subsection (3) hereof, shall be made a part of the
approved plan and shall be enforceable as a part of this Ordinance.
(c) Guarantee of Performance. At the time final approval is given, the developer
shall enter into an appropriate agreement, through contract and performance
bond, with the City insuring the completion of the proposed development in
accordance with the plan and approvals given. Specific application of the
performance bond shall be determined by the Plan Commission within the
review process.
(d) Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with conditions, commitments,
guarantees or recommendations established in the approval of such
development project shall be cause for rescinding the approval of the same.
Upon notice given by the Building Inspector, the developer then shall be
required to appear before the Plan Commission, at its next meeting, to explain
any such failure to comply. The Plan Commission at such meeting may set a
time limit for compliance to recommend specific steps to be taken to rescind
the approval of the district, including the termination of the construction of
any buildings on such site upon 30 day notice in writing to the developer at
his last known address.
(2) CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL. As a basis for determining the acceptability of
Planned Unit Development District, the following criteria shall be applied to the
development plan with specific consideration as to whether or not it is consistent
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-33-
with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance, has been prepared with the competent
professional advice and guidance, and produces significant benefits in terms of
environmental design.
(a) Character and Intensity of Land Use. In a planned development the uses
proposed and their intensity and arrangement on the site shall be of visual and
operational character which:
1. Is compatible to the physical nature of the site with particular concern for
preservation of environmental and natural features, tree growth and open
space.
2. Would produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic,
ecological desirability, and functional practicality compatible with the
general development plans for the area as established by the community.
3. Would not create traffic or parking demand incompatible with the existing
or proposed facilities to serve it.
(b) Economic Feasibility and Impact. The applicant shall provide satisfactory
evidence of its economic feasibility and if available, adequate financing.
(c) Engineering Design Standards. The width of street right-of-ways, width and
location of street or other paving, outdoor lighting, location of sewer and
water lines, provision for storm water drainage or other similar environmental
engineering considerations shall be based upon a determination as to the
appropriate standards necessary to implement the specific function in the
specific situation, provided, however, that in no case shall minimal
construction standards be less than those necessary to insure the public safety
and general welfare.
(d) Preservation and Maintenance of Open Space. In a Planned Unit
Development District, adequate provision shall be made for the permanent
preservation and maintenance of common “open space” either by private
reservation or by dedication to the public. Public dedications shall be
accepted at the discretion of the governing body.
1. In the case of private reservation, the open area to be reserved shall be
protected against building development by conveying to the City as part of
the conditions for project approval an open space easement over such open
areas restricting the area against any future building or use except as is
consistent with that of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic
and recreational satisfaction of the surrounding residences. Building for
non- commercial recreational or cultural purposes compatible with the
open space objective may be permitted only where specifically authorized
as part of the development plan, or, subsequently with the express
approval of the City Council following approval of building, site and
operational plans by the Plan Commission.
2. The care and maintenance of such open space reservations shall be assured
by establishment of an appropriate management organization for the
project. The manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-34-
individual properties shall be determined prior to the approval of the final
development plan and shall be included in the title to each property.
3. Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservations shall be
established in a manner acceptable to the City and made a part of the
conditions of the plan approval.
(e) Implementation Schedule. The proponents of a Planned Unit Development
District shall submit a reasonable schedule for the implementation of the
development to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission, including suitable
provisions for assurance that each phase could be brought to completion in a
manner which would not result in adverse effect upon the community as a
result of termination at that point.
(3) SUBSEQUENT CHANGE IN THE PLAN. Any subsequent change in the plans as
finally approved shall first be submitted to the Plan Commission, and if in their
opinion such change constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plan, the
plans shall be resubmitted subject to approval procedures outlined in Subsection (4).
(4) EFFECT OF APPROVAL BY THE CITY COUNCIL. Final Approval of the
Planned Unit Development District does not constitute approval for the construction
of new buildings or structures on the site. Separate approval shall be required for
each building or structure upon application for a building permit.
16.12 SITE PLAN REVIEW
(1) PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this Section to require site plan review approval for
certain developments, buildings, structures and uses that may have significant
impact on traffic patterns, adjacent parcels, and the character of the neighborhood
and City.
(2) APPLICABILITY AND PROCESS. An approved Site Plan shall be required prior
to approval/issuance of the following according to the each designated process:
(a) Conditional Use Permits. The Site Plan shall be reviewed as part of the
Conditional Use Permit process outlined in Section 16.18(3). The Site Plan
shall include all information listed in Section 16.12(3) Site Plan
Requirements.
(b) Building Permits in the C-1 and C-2 Zoning Districts. The Site Plan shall be
reviewed by the Plan Commission. In addition to building code requirements,
issuance of a building permit shall be based on an approved Site Plan. The
Site Plan shall include all information listed in Section 16.12(3) Site Plan
Requirements.
(c) Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zoning Districts. The procedure for
approval of the Site Plan for a PUD shall include the following:
1. Initial discussion with the Plan Commission to determine general
feasibility of the PUD District.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-35-
2. Preliminary review of the Site Plan/PUD according to the requirements of
Section 16.12(3) by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission may
recommend approval, approval with revisions, or denial of the Site
Plan/PUD to the City Council.
3. After Plan Commission review, a Public Hearing shall be held by the City
Council. After public input, the City Council may approve, approve with
revisions, or deny the Preliminary Site Plan/PUD.
4. Final approval of the Site Plan/PUD District in all its terms and details by
the City Council based on consistency with the Preliminary Site Plan/PUD
as approved. The Final Site Plan/PUD shall include all information within
Section 16.12(4).
(3) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The following information shall be provided by
the applicant in adequate detail to satisfy the Plan Commission and City Council
where applicable:
(a) A narrative statement describing the development character, all intended uses,
and operation of any business (es).
(b) An accurate map of the property (ies), including topography and the
relationship to surrounding properties.
(c) A general development plan showing at least the following information in
sufficient detail:
1. The size, arrangement, and location of any proposed lots.
2. All existing and proposed public and private roads, sidewalks, paths,
driveways, parking facilities, signage, lighting, and landscaping. All
roads, parking/loading areas and walks shall be paved with hard surface
material meeting applicable specifications of the Public Works
Department.
3. The type, size, height, and location of any existing or proposed structures
including setbacks.
(d) Appropriate statistical data on the size of the development, residential density,
ratio of various land uses, open space calculations, estimated cost of
structures, and any other pertinent data.
(e) Building plans and architectural drawings of all proposed structures in
sufficient detail such that the uses, scale, and aesthetic nature of the
building(s) can be determined.
(f) Additional Site Plan requirements for Planned Unit Developments:
1. All maps shall include a minimum of 300 feet of the area surrounding the
proposed district’s boundaries.
2. Commercial buildings shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from all
PUD boundaries.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-36-
3. The location of sewer and water mains in relation to proposed PUD
Districts shall be illustrated.
4. The location of recreational and open space areas and areas reserved or
dedicated for public uses such as school, park, etc shall be shown. Any
part of the project area not used for buildings or other structures, or for
parking, loading or access ways shall be landscaped with grass, trees,
shrubs, or pedestrian walks. Reasonable additional requirements as to
landscaping, lighting, signs or other advertising devices, screening, access
ways, building setbacks and height limitations may be imposed by the City
Council for the protection of adjoining residential property.
5. Any architectural design standards that will be employed for development
of the PUD.
6. General outline of intended organizational structure related to property
owner’s association, deed restrictions and private provisions of common
services.
7. The names of the owners and developers of the development site and the
mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all parties.
(4) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT FINAL PLAN. In addition to the Site Plan
requirements in Section 16.12(3), the following information shall be provided by the
applicant in adequate detail to satisfy the City Council for approval of the Final
Planned Unit Development District
(a) A plat of survey of the Planned Unit Development District with a recordable
legal description, including all existing utilities and recorded easements. The
plat of survey shall conform to Chapter 236 (or Section 703.13 the
Condominium Ownership Act) of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(b) A copy of any declaration of covenants and restrictions which govern the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the Planned Unit Development
District, any recordable declaration of the Condominium Ownership Act’s
applicability (Section 703.01 through 703.28 of the Wisconsin Statutes) or any
bylaws governing the administration of properties subject to the
Condominium Ownership Act.
(c) A topographic map with two-foot contour intervals showing all public rights
of way and building locations. Said map shall also indicate all utility lines,
storm water drainage ways (including Flood Plain) and any easements
therefore.
(d) A statement indicating the number of phases, if more than one is intended, to
be used in construction of the development. Also included shall be the time
limit for completion and description of the real property of each phase. If
more than one stage phase is proposed, a plot plan shall be provided indicating
the physical location of each phase.
(e) An application fee as established by resolution.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-37-
16.13 SIGNS
(1) Signs are a permitted accessory use in all Zoning Districts, subject to the following
regulations:
(a) DEFINITIONS.
1. SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration, structure
or device which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or piece of land, and
which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization or business, and may be a single-face, doubleface,
or “V” type structure.
2. SIGN – ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to the primary commodity, service or entertainment not sold
or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
attached.
3. SIGN – BILLBOARD. A sign which advertises goods, products or
facilities, or services not on the premises where the sign is located or
directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located.
4. SIGN – BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to the primary commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
attached.
5. SIGN – BUSINESS (OFF-PREMISE BANNER OR PLATE). A sign
which directs attention to an off premise business or profession or to the
primary commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered. (ORD.
1099 1/15/2013)
6. SIGN – IDENTIFICATION (NAMEPLATE). A sign identifying a
resident, school, church, or other non-business use.
7. SIGN – ILLUMINATED. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
design or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of
the sign proper.
8. SIGN – ILLUMINATED FLASHING SIGNS. Any illuminated sign on
which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and/or constant in
intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use.
9. SIGN – MOBILE. Any sign mounted on any type of frame, chassis, or
trailer, whether on wheels, skids, or otherwise mounted, designed to be
easily relocated or driven for the primary purpose of advertising. These
are sometimes referred to as a mobile sign, portable sign or relocatable
sign. These exclude signs such as real estate signs, garage/yard sale signs,
or sandwich board signs directly adjacent to the business it advertises.
10. SIGN – REVOLVING. A sign, which does not remain stationary and
revolves at a rate faster than one revolution per minute.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-38-
11. SIGN – TEMPORARY. A sign that is not solidly affixed to the ground or
to a building and displayed not more than 60 days within a six (6) month
period. This includes garage or yard sale signs, banners, and sale
advertisements.
(b) A sign is considered a structure or a part of a structure for the purpose of
applying yard and height regulations.
(c) Except for traffic control, signs and parts of the superstructure may not extend
into the required yards and right-of-way without a revocable special permit for
temporary signs and decorations granted by the City, subject to the laws of the
State of Wisconsin.
(d) Illuminated flashing signs or devices giving off an intermittent or rotating
beam consisting of a collection or concentration of rays of light shall not be
permitted in any district.
(e) For the purpose of selling or leasing property in any district, a sign not in
excess of 32 square feet per surface (10 square feet in Residential Districts)
may be placed within the front yard of such property to be sold or leased.
Such signs shall not be less than 15 feet from the right-of-way line unless flat
against the structure.
(f) The area within the frame shall be used to calculate the square footage except
that width of a frame exceeding 12 inches shall constitute advertising space,
or should such letters or graphics be mounted directly on a wall or facia or in
such a way as to be without a frame, the dimensions for calculating the square
footage shall be the area extending 6 inches beyond the periphery formed
around such letters or graphics in a plane figure, bound by straight lines
connecting the outer-most points thereof, and each surface utilized to display a
message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign. Any
symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of graphics painted
on or attached to windows, walks, awnings, free standing structures,
suspended by balloons or kites or on persons, animals or vehicles shall be
considered as a sign.
(g) Except for temporary signs, signs shall not be attached by an adhesive or
painted on a building or fence but shall be on a separate frame or attached by a
permanent fixture. Permanent window signs (painted or vinyl occupying no
more than 25% of the glazed portion of a window) and awning signs are
excluded.
(h) The source of light for any illuminated sign shall not be directed into any
street or property used or zoned for residential purposes.
(i) Election signs are permitted in all districts; however, they shall be removed
within 15 days following election days. Election signs shall not be greater
than 32 square feet per surface (10 square feet in Residential Districts).
(2) RESIDENTIAL (R) DISTRICTS. Within the R Districts, the following signs are
permitted:
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-39-
(a) One (1) nameplate sign for each dwelling and such sign shall not exceed three
(3) square feet in area per surface, and no sign shall be so constructed as to
have more than two (2) surfaces for advertising purposes.
(b) One (1) nameplate sign for each dwelling group of three (3) or more units, and
such sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per surface and no sign
shall be so constructed as to have more than two (2) surfaces for advertising
purposes.
(c) One (1) unlighted sign not over three (3) square feet in area for home
occupations.
(d) Public and institutional uses within a Residential District may be allowed a
sign in excess of three (3) square feet may be allowed as a conditional use,
taking into consideration the size, design, location and lighting of the sign,
and its impact on the aesthetics of the neighborhood, visibility and any other
safety factors.
(e) Symbols, statues, sculptures and integrated architectural features on nonresidential
buildings may be illuminated by flood lights provided the direct
source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
residential district.
(f) Temporary signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area per surface.
(3) BUSINESS (C) DISTRICTS. Within the Business Districts, nameplate signs and
business signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
(a) The aggregate square footage of signage per lot shall not exceed the sum of
three (3) square feet for each front foot of building plus one square foot for
each front foot of building siding on a street. Signs directing ingress, egress,
and traffic flow (directional signs) are exempt from the aggregate square
footage limits; however, each directional sign shall be no greater than three
(3) square feet per surface.
(b) No individual sign shall exceed 200 square feet of area per surface.
(c) Off-Premise Signs, Billboards, Displays and Devices shall be permitted only
by Conditional Use subject to the following:
1. Must be a minimum of 100 feet from Residential District property line.
2. Must be a minimum of 100 feet from an intersection.
3. Must be a minimum of 350 feet from a church or school.
4. Must be a minimum of 1,000 feet from another billboard on the same side
of the street.
5. Must be a minimum of five (5) feet from the right-of-way and from any
property line.
6. Must be erected on a free standing structure – no back bracing or guy
wires are allowed.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-40-
7. Must meet all federal, state and local requirements prior to issuance of
permit.
8. The maximum size shall be 32 square feet per side of sign.
9. No off premise, sign shall be permitted within 60 feet of the right-of-way
or 110 feet of centerline, whichever is greatest on all streets within the
City limits.
10. Height of sign shall not exceed principal building on lot; if a vacant lot,
the height of the sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.
(d) Off-Premise Banner or Plate Signs shall be permitted only by Conditional
Use subject to the following: (1/15/2013 Ord. No. 1099)
1. Must be attached or affixed to a permanent building structure.
2. The sign cannot exceed the set back of the principal building.
3. The sign cannot exceed the height of the principal building.
4. The maximum size of the sign shall be 32 square feet, taking into
consideration the size, design, location and lighting of the sign, provided it
does not exceed the allowable square footage for signs in commercial or
industrial zoning.
5. The sign must be one sided.
(e) Mobile Signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet per side and shall not
be located in any right-of-way.
(4) INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICTS. Within the industrial Districts, nameplate signs and
business signs and advertising signs shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
(a) The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of
4 square feet per front foot of building, plus one square foot per front foot of
property not occupied by a building. No individual sign surface shall exceed
250 square feet except advertising signs permitted as an accessory use shall
not exceed 250 square feet of surface and shall be counted toward square
footage permitted.
(b) Off-Premise Signs, Billboards, Displays and Devices shall be permitted only
by Conditional Use subject to the provisions of Section 0.
(c) Mobile Signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet per side and shall not
be located in any right-of-way.
(5) DANGEROUS AND ABANDONED SIGNS
(a) REMOVAL. Except as otherwise herein provided, all dangerous and
abandoned billboards and/or sign messages shall be removed by the owner or
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-41-
lessee of the premises upon which a sign or billboard is located when the
business it advertised is no longer conducted where advertised or when, in the
judgment of the City, such sign is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of
repair as to be dangerous or unsafe, whichever occurs first. If the owner or
lessee fails to remove the sign or billboard, the City Council or its designee,
shall give the owner thirty (30) days written notice to remove and sign or
billboard. Thereafter, upon the owner’s or lessee’s failure to comply, the City
Council or its designee, may remove such sign or billboard, any costs for
which shall be charged to the owner of the property or may be assessed as a
special assessment against the property, and/or the City Council, or its
designee, may take any other appropriate legal action necessary to attain
compliance. The owner may appeal the City’s or its designee’s decision to the
Board of Appeals.
(b) ALTERATIONS. For signs erected before the adoption of this Sign Code,
said signs shall be rebuilt or relocated to conform to this Article if the cost of
reconstruction or relocation is fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement
value.
(c) VIOLATIONS. All signs maintained in violation of any of the provisions of
this Article are hereby declared public nuisances within the meaning of this
Code of Ordinances. In addition to the above penalty provisions for violation
of this Chapter, the City Council or its designee may bring an action to abate
the nuisance in the manner set forth in the Wisconsin Statutes.
(6) VIOLATIONS OF SIGN CODE
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who begins, erects or completed the erection
or construction of any sign controlled by this Article prior to the granting of a
permit shall be in violation of this Chapter.
(b) If the City finds any sign regulated herein unsafe or insecure or is a menace to
the public, it shall give written notice to the sign owner and to the property
owner.
(c) If such sign owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the
standards herein set forth within thirty (30) days after such notice, the City
Council may cause such sign to be removed or altered at the expense of the
owner of the sign or the owner of the property upon which it is located so as
to comply with the provisions of this Article.
(d) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this Article
shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in Section 16. Each day, or portion
thereof, that such violation continues is hereby deemed to constitute a separate
offense.
16.14 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
(1) SURFACING AND DRAINAGE. Driveways, approaches, parking and loading
areas shall be improved with gravel or an equally durable and dustless surface.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-42-
Such areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water
accumulation within the area. These requirements shall also apply to open sales lots
for cars, trucks, and other equipment.
(2) LOCATION. All accessory off-street parking facilities required herein shall be
located as follows:
(a) Spaces accessory to one and two family dwellings in the same lot as the
principal use served.
(b) Spaces accessory to multiple family dwellings in the same lot as the principal
use served or within 40 feet of the main entrance to the principal building
served.
(c) Spaces accessory to uses located in a business or industrial district; within 800
feet of a main entrance to the principal building served.
(d) There shall be no off-street parking space within 3 feet of any street right-ofway.
(e) No off-street open parking area containing more than 4 parking spaces shall
be located closer than 15 feet from an adjacent lot zoned for residential
purposes.
(3) ACCESS. All off-street parking spaces shall have access off driveways and not
directly off the public street.
(4) PARKING DESIGN.
(a) Parking access aisles shall have the following minimum widths:
i. Two-way aisles:
1. Perpendicular parking: 24 feet
2. Angled or parallel parking: 18 feet
ii. One-way aisles:
1. Perpendicular parking: 20 feet
2. 60° angled parking: 18 feet
3. 45° angled parking: 13 feet
4. 30° angled parking: 11 feet
5. Parallel parking: 12 feet
6. If the degree of angle of parking provided is not listed, the aisle width
required shall be the next largest angle of parking shown above.
b. All required parking spaces shall have minimum area of 162 square feet with
a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of 18 feet.
c. Parking that meets the number, location, and configuration required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Standards for Accessible Design shall
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-43-
also be provided. These spaces count toward the number otherwise required
for each use.
(5) RESTRICTED VEHICLE PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS. No motor
vehicle over 1 ½ ton rated capacity bearing a commercial license nor any motor
vehicle equipped or used for the purpose of auto salvage commonly referred to as a
wrecker, or any commercially licensed trailer, or any school bus, as defined under
Wis. Stat. Sec. 340.01(56), shall be parked or stored in a residential district except
when loading, unloading or rendering a service.
(6) RESTRICTED VEHICLE PARKING OTHER THAN RESIDENTIAL. No motor
vehicle over 1 ½ ton rated capacity bearing a commercial license or any motor
vehicle equipped or used for the purpose of auto salvage commonly referred to as a
wrecker, or any commercially licensed trailer, or any school bus, as defined under
Wis. Stat. Sec. 340.01(56), shall be parked or stored on any City street or district for
more than two hours unless occupied by the driver and/or except when loading,
unloading or rendering a service.
(7) SIGNS. Signs located in parking areas necessary for orderly operation of traffic
movement shall be permitted in addition to others permitted in this chapter.
(8) LIGHTING. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking shall have no direct
source of light visible from a street or adjacent land.
(9) REDUCTION OF PARKING AREAS. Off-street parking spaces shall not be
reduced in number unless such number exceeds the requirements set forth herein.
(10) PARKING IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS (C-2) DISTRICT. Uses located within
the Central Business District are exempt from all off-street parking and loading
requirements.
(11) OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Agricultural/Open Space Uses
1. Animal Boarding or Breeding – Commercial: One (1) parking space per
every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(b) Residential Land Uses
1. Dwelling – Single-Family: Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit.
2. Dwelling – Two-Family: Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit.
3. Dwelling – Multi-Family: Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(c) Commercial Land Uses
1. Adult-Cabaret: One (1) parking space per every three (3) patron seats or
one (1) space per three (3) persons at the maximum capacity of the
establishment, whichever is greater.
2. Bed and Breakfast: One (1) parking space per bedroom.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-44-
3. Group Day Care Center: One (1) parking space per every six (6) person
capacity of the center, plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest
working shift.
4. Entertainment and Service – Indoor Commercial: One (1) parking space
per every three (3) patron seats or one (1) space per three (3) persons at
the maximum capacity of the establishment, whichever is greater.
5. Greenhouse and Nurseries: One (1) parking space per 400 square feet of
gross floor area in the principal building(s).
6. Indoor Lodging – Commercial: One (1) parking space per room or suite,
plus one (1) space for every employee on the largest working shift.
7. In-Vehicle Sales and Service: One (1) parking space per 150 square feet of
gross floor area in the principal building(s).
8. Maintenance Service – Indoor: One (1) parking space per 300 square feet
of gross floor area in the principal building(s).
9. Maintenance Service – Outdoor: One (1) parking space per 300 square
feet of gross floor area in the principal building(s), plus adequate parking
for the storage of vehicles awaiting service or pick-up.
10. Outdoor Display and Sale – Long Term: One (1) space per 2,000 square
feet of outdoor sales or display area.
11. Personal Storage: One (1) parking space for each employee on the largest
work shift.
12. Personal or Professional Service: One (1) parking space per 300 square
feet of gross floor area in the principal building(s).
13. Professional Offices: One (1) parking space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area in the principal building(s).
14. Resort: One (1) parking space per room, suite, cabin, or cottage, plus one
(1) space for every employee on the largest working shift.
15. Retail Sales and Service – Indoor: One (1) parking space per 300 square
feet of gross floor area in the principal building(s).
16. Storage or Wholesaling – Indoor: One (1) parking space per 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area in the principal building(s).
17. Storage or Wholesaling – Outdoor: One (1) parking space for every
10,000 square feet of gross storage area, plus one (1) space per each
employee on the largest work shift.
18. Veterinary Services: One (1) parking space per 300 square feet of gross
floor.
(d) Industrial Land Uses
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-45-
1. Auto Wrecking Yard, Junk or Salvage Yard: One (1) parking space for
every 20,000 square feet of gross storage area, plus one (1) space for each
employee on the largest work shift.
2. Contractor Shop and Yard: One (1) parking space per each employee on
the largest work shift.
3. Industrial: One (1) parking space per each employee on the largest work
shift.
(e) Park/Recreation Land Uses
1. Boat Launching Areas and Boat Liveries: One (1) parking space for every
two slips or berths plus one (1) space per each employee on the largest
work shift. Facilities that include a boat ramp should provide an
additional 15 parking spaces per launching lane.
2. Camps and Campgrounds: One and one half (1.5) parking spaces per
camping site plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift.
Each recreational vehicle camping area shall provide sufficient parking
and maneuvering space so that the parking, loading or maneuvering of
recreational vehicles, incidental to parking shall not necessitate the use of
any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way or any private grounds not part
of the recreational vehicle parking area.
3. Recreation Areas: One (1) parking space per four (4) expected patrons at
maximum capacity. Additional paved, graveled, or grassed area for
overflow parking may be provided for occasional outdoor assembly land
uses (i.e., special events) located on outdoor public recreation sites.
(f) Public/Institutional/Utility Land Uses
1. Airports: One (1) parking space per three expected patrons at maximum
capacity.
2. Bus Terminals: One (1) parking space per each employee on the largest
work shift.
3. Churches and Similar Places of Worship: One (1) space per five (5) seats
at the maximum capacity.
4. Community-Based Residential Facilities: 1-8 residents: three (3) total
spaces; 9-15 residents: four (4) total spaces; 16+ residents: five (5) total
spaces.
5. Community or Recreation Center: One (1) space per 250 square feet of
gross floor area, or one (1) space per four (4) patrons to the maximum
capacity, whichever is greater.
6. Funeral Home: One (1) space per three (3) patron seats at the maximum
capacity.
7. Hospital or Clinic: Two (2) spaces per three (3) patient beds, plus one (1)
space per staff doctor and each other employee on the largest work shift.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-46-
8. Library or Museum: One (1) space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
or one (1) space per four (4) seats to the maximum capacity, whichever is
greater.
9. Rest and Nursing Homes: One (1) space per six (6) patient beds, plus one
(1) space per employee on the largest work shift.
10. School - Elementary and Middle: One (1) space per teacher and per staff
member, plus one (1) space per two (2) classrooms.
11. School - Senior High: One (1) space per teacher and staff member, plus
one (1) space per five (5) non-bused students.
12. School - College or Trade: One (1) space per staff member on the largest
work shift, plus one (1) space per two (2) students of the largest class
attendance period.
(g) Adjustments to Required Parking.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to allow adjustments to the
minimum number of parking spaces required to avoid constructing
unneeded and excessive off-street parking facilities. Reducing the amount
of excess off-street parking facilities is intended to provide for more costefficient
site development, to eliminate constructing more impervious
surface than necessary, to minimize stormwater runoff, to avoid
construction of unnecessarily large stormwater management facilities, and
to provide more landscape areas and open space on commercial and
industrial sites. To achieve these purposes, the Plan Commission may
reduce the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces in
specific cases as described in this Section.
2. Adjustments. In all commercial and industrial districts, the minimum
number of required parking spaces may be adjusted by the Plan
Commission on a case-by-case basis. The petitioner for such an
adjustment shall show to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that
adequate parking will be provided for customers, clients, visitors, and
employees. The following provisions and factors shall be used as a basis
to adjust parking requirements:
3. Evidence that Actual Parking Demands will be less than Ordinance
Requirements. The petitioner shall submit written documentation and data
to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that the operation will require
less parking than the Ordinance requires.
4. Availability of Shared Parking. The petitioner shall submit written
documentation to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that off-site
shared parking spaces are available to satisfy the parking demand. When a
reduction of parking spaces attributable to shared parking is requested, the
petitioner shall submit written verification that such parking is available
and shall include copies of any contracts, joint lease agreements, purchase
agreements, and other such documentation to show that such shared
parking can be accomplished. The City Attorney shall provide an opinion
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-47-
designating the method by which the required shared parking shall be
provided. The off-site shared parking spaces shall be clearly posted for the
Joint use of employees, and/or tenants, or customers of each respective use
of those spaces.
5. Use of On Street Parking for Visitors. Available nearby on-street parking
may be counted toward visitor parking needs. This may only be allowed
when on street parking is permitted in a specific location, and then only
when such on-street parking spaces are within two hundred fifty (250) feet
of the entrance they are intended to serve.
(12) OFF-STREET LOADING. The regulations and requirements set forth in this
section shall apply to the required and non-required loading and unloading facilities
in all the districts. If, in the application of the requirements of this section, a
fractional number is obtained, one loading space shall be provided for a fraction of
½ or more, and no loading space shall be required for a fraction of less than ½.
(a) Location. All loading berths shall be 25 feet or more from the intersection of
2 street right-of-way lines. Loading berths shall not occupy any yard
requirement bordering a street.
(b) Size. Unless otherwise specified the first berth required shall not be less than
12 feet in width and 50 feet in length. Additional berths shall be not less than
12 feet in width and 25 feet in length. All loading berths shall maintain a
height of 14 feet or more.
(c) Access. Each loading berth shall be located with approximate means of
access to a public street or alleys in a manner which will least interfere with
traffic.
(d) Surfacing. All loading berths and access ways shall be improved with a
durable material.
(e) Accessory Uses. Any area allocated as a required loading berth or access
drive so as to comply with the terms of this ordinance, shall not be used for
the storage of goods, storage of inoperable vehicles, nor shall it be included as
a part of the space requirement necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
(f) Number of Required Loading Berths.
1. Auditorium, Convention Hall, Public Buildings, Hospitals, Schools,
Hotels, Sports Arena. At least one loading berth 25 feet in length for each
building having 1,000 to 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area. For those buildings
having 10,001 square feet of floor space to 100,000 square feet of floor
area or fraction thereof, one additional loading berth 50 feet in length.
2. Retail Sales and Service Stores, Offices. At least one loading berth 25 feet
in length for each building having 6,000 square feet of floor area or more
plus one additional loading berth 50 feet in length for each 25,000 square
feet of floor area up to 100,000 square feet.
3. Manufacturing, Fabrication, Processing and Warehousing. At least one
loading berth 25 feet in length for each building having 3,000 square feet
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-48-
or fraction thereof plus one loading berth 50 feet in length for each 25,000
square feet of floor area up to 100,000 square feet plus one loading berth
for each 50,000 square feet of floor are over the first 100,000 square feet
of floor area. The operator of the business shall have the option to declare
the length of the berths required for buildings above 100,000 square feet
of floor area, except that one-half or more of the total number of berths
required shall be 50 feet in length.
4. Other. There shall be provided adequate off-street loading space in
connection with any structure which requires receipt or distribution of
materials by vehicles.
(g) Uses Not Specifically Noted Above Including Public Uses. Parking space
requirements shall be determined by the City Council upon advice from the
Plan Commission.
(13) JOINT FACILITIES. Required parking facilities serving 2 or more uses may be
located on the same lot or in the same lot or in the same structure provided that the
total number of parking spaces furnished shall be not less than the sum of the
separate requirements for each use, during any peak hour parking period when the
parking facility is utilized at the same time by 2 or more uses. Conditions required
for joint use:
(a) The proposed joint parking space is within 500 feet of the use it will serve.
(b) The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal
operating hours of the 2 buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street
parking facilities is proposed.
(c) A properly drawn legal instrument approved by the City Council, executed by
the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street parking facilities shall be filed
with the City Clerk. Said instrument including the City and all private parties
involved.
(14) LIBRARY. The library property on Park Street is exempt from all off street parking
and loading requirements.
16.15 FENCES
(1) PERMIT REQUIRED. No fence shall hereinafter be located, moved, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without being in conformity
with all the structural requirements of local and state building codes. All fences,
shall present the non-structural (finished) face outward. A permit is required for all
fences that are greater than four (4) feet in height, or located in a front yard.
(2) FENCES PERMITTED. The following fences are permitted subject to the
following restrictions and providing that said fence does not in any way interfere
with traffic visibility:
(a) Fences in all districts are permitted up to the property lines subject to the
following:
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-49-
1. Screening, erected, placed, maintained or grown in a required front or
street side yard shall not exceed a height greater than four (4) feet above
the curb level or its equivalent, and shall not exceed a height greater than
three (3) feet within the vision clearance areas established in Section
16.15(3).
2. Unless otherwise provided, a vision-barrier fence that is within four (4)
feet of the lot line in an abutting residential district shall not exceed six (6)
feet in height except by conditional use.
3. A snow fence shall be permitted in all districts when comprised of wooden
pickets, including plastic snow fence, bound together by wire and not
exceeding four feet in height and removed between May 1 and November
1 of each year. No privately owned snow fence shall extend beyond the
highway right-of-way line.
4. Security fences or walls are permitted in all districts other than residential
districts. Security fences or walls may be placed up to the side and rear
property lines, but shall not be located closer than two (2) feet to a public
right-of-way line. Security fences or walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet
in height.
5. Fences to be installed around swimming pools shall be governed by
Chapter 10, Section 10.09 of the Municipal Code.
6. Fences to be installed for the purpose of a beer garden shall be governed
by Chapter 6, Section 6.01(6) (d) (2) of the municipal Code.
(b) Agricultural fences in the R-C District shall be permitted provided that they
do not extend into the highway or road right-of-way.
(c) Residential fences or walls are permitted up to the property lines in residential
districts subject to the following:
1. Fences shall not be greater than six (6) feet in height in the side yard and
rear yard or greater than four (4) feet in height in the street yard.
2. Fences or walls in the rear street yard of a double frontage lot shall not be
greater than six (6) feet in height.
3. No fence or wall which incorporates barbed top spikes shall be permitted
in any residential district.
(d) Reference in the above provisions and elsewhere in this ordinance, referring to
“up to the property line” shall mean adjacent to, but not overlapping,
including not obscuring vision lines to surveying pipes marking said property
line.
(3) REQUIRED VISION CLEARANCE.
(a) In order to provide adequate vehicular vision, no fence, structure, screening,
vegetation, or embankment shall be erected, placed, maintained or grown
between the heights of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above the curb level or
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-50-
its equivalent within the triangular space formed by the intersection and points
a distance along the intersecting lines as follows:
1. Two (2) street rights-of-way:
a. In any Residential District: 25 feet.
b. In any other district: 10 feet.
2. A street right-of-way and a driveway or alley: 10 feet.
(b) However, a fence so designated, constructed and maintained as to be at least
ninety (90%) percent open for through vision may be constructed in such
vision clearance area.
Required Vision Clearance Areas.
(4) EXISTING SCREENING. Any screening which exists at the time of the passage of
this Code, but does not conform to the provisions thereof, shall not be altered or
enlarged without making the entire unit conforms to the provisions of this section.
16.16 WIRELESS TELE-COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
(1) PURPOSE. In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and
business while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
community, these regulations are necessary in order to:
(a) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the
residents and businesses of the City;
(b) Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting
standards;
(c) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
structural standards and setback requirements;
(d) Maximize the use of existing towers and buildings to accommodate new
wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers
needed to serve the community and encourage co-location; and,
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-51-
(e) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the
total number of towers throughout the City.
(2) DEFINITIONS.
As used in this section of the Zoning Ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
(a) Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or
television communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, radio frequencies, wireless
telecommunications signals, including but not limited to directional antennas,
such as panel(s), microwave and satellite dishes, and omni-directional
antennas, such as whip antennas.
(b) Co-location means the location of multiple antennas of more than one
commercial wireless communication service provider or governmental entity
on a single tower or alternative tower structure.
(c) FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
(d) FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
(e) Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
(f) Personal communications service (PCS) means a provider of personal wireless
service facilities as now defined in Par. 704 of the Telecommunications Act of
1996, 47 U.S.C. par. 332, and as the same may be amended from time to time.
(g) Personal wireless facilities means transmitters, antenna structures and other
types of installations used to provide personal wireless services.
(h) Pre-existing towers shall have the meaning set forth in this ordinance.
(i) Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes personal
communication service towers, radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers,
alternative tower structures and the like.
(j) Tower site means the area encompassing a tower and all supporting
equipment, structures, paved or graveled areas, fencing and other items used
on connection with said tower.
(k) Wireless telecommunication services means licensed commercial wireless
telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication
services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar
services that are marketed to the general public.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-52-
(3) CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
A Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Section 16.20(3) of the Municipal
Zoning ordinance shall be required for the construction of a new tower or colocation
on an existing tower not previously granted a Conditional Use Permit.
(a) No Conditional Use Permit shall be granted for the placement of a tower in
any residential zone.
(b) Antennas not exceeding 30 feet in antenna height may be placed on existing
structures that have an existing height greater than 45 feet irrespective of the
zoning district.
(c) No Conditional Use Permit for a tower site exceeding 30 feet in height shall
be granted within 1,500 feet of an existing tower site.
(d) If a Conditional Use Permit is granted, the governing authority may impose
conditions to the extent the governing authority concludes such conditions are
necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining
properties.
(e) Any information of an engineering nature required by the Conditional Use
Permit that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall
be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(4) TOWER/STRUCTURE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
All towers constructed after June 22, 2000 or wireless telecommunication antennas
affixed to building shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural
treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state
authorities.
(b) Wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the City determines that an alternative design would better blend into
the surrounding environment.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that
is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure
so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
(d) The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs or walls shall
include submittal of a report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer indicating the existing structure’s suitability to accept the antenna,
and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete
details of all fixtures and couplings and the precise point of attachment shall
be indicated.
(e) All towers shall comply with the “Obstruction Marking and Lighting”
requirements of the FAA in cooperation with the FCC. Where “Dual Lighting
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-53-
Systems” are suggested, it shall be mandatory that white strobe lighting be
used only during daylight hours and only the red light shall be utilized at
night.
(f) Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display
strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the FAA or other
federal or state authority for a particular tower. Light, if required, shall be
shielded from the ground. When incorporated into the approved design of the
tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas
may be attached to the tower.
(g) Towers shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any
residential structure.
(h) Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
(i) Distance from Streets and Utility Lines. All towers shall be so installed that
no part of the structure will be nearer to a street or other public thoroughfare
than the height of the tower measured from its base to the top of the structure.
Any variance necessary from the requirement shall be reviewed by the Plan
Commission. If a variance is granted herein, the owner shall sign an
agreement, approved by the City Attorney, to hold the City harmless from any
and all liability that may result from the construction and maintenance of any
structure permitted pursuant to such a variance. No wires, cables, or guy
wires shall extend over any street or other public thoroughfare or over any
electric power or communications lines.
(j) Tower sites shall be enclosed by security fencing and shall be equipped with
an appropriate anti-climbing device sufficient to deter the general public from
obtaining access to the site.
(k) The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment
information signs is prohibited.
(l) All towers shall be shielded, filtered and grounded to meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the
federal and State government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas so as to minimize the possibility of interference with locally received
transmission.
(m) The following site plan review requirements shall govern landscaping
surrounding towers:
1. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that
effectively screens the view of the tower site from adjacent property. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet
wide outside the perimeter of the security fencing.
2. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the
landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-54-
3. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
4. All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment.
Site plan review shall be required for these types of buildings.
(5) FACTORS CONSIDERED IN GRANTING CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
The governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether
to issue a Conditional Use Permit, although the governing authority may waive or
reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the governing
authority concludes that the goals of this article are better served thereby.
(a) Height of the proposed tower;
(b) Capacity of the tower structure for additional antenna equipment to
accommodate expansion, or to allow for co-location of another provider’s
equipment;
(c) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district
boundaries.
(d) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(e) Surrounding topography;
(f) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(g) (g) the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(h) Proposed ingress and egress;
(i) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative
technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures.
(6) CO-LOCATION
(a) Any proposed telecommunication tower and tower site shall be designed,
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate co-location of
both the applicant’s antenna(s) and comparable antenna(s) for at least two
additional users. Towers and tower sites shall be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower, to accept antennas mounted at
varying heights, and to accommodate supporting buildings and equipment.
(b) The holder of a permit for a tower, excepting amateur radio towers and sites,
shall allow co-location for at least two additional users and shall not make
access to the tower and tower site for the additional users economically
unfeasible. If additional user(s) demonstrate (through independent arbitration
or other pertinent means) that the holder of a tower permit has made access to
such tower and tower site economically unfeasible, then the permit shall
become null and void.
(c) No new tower, excepting amateur radio towers and sites, shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-55-
applicant’s proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna
may consist of any of the following:
1. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area
required to meet applicant’s engineering requirements.
2. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant’s engineering requirements.
3. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to
support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.
4. The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with
the applicant’s proposed antenna.
5. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render
existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(7) REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
(a) All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site, unless the Plan
Commission and City Council approve a time extension.
(b) Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve
(12) months shall be considered abandoned. In such circumstances, the
following shall apply: The owner of such antenna or tower or owner(s) of the
property where the tower site is located shall remove the antenna and/or tower
including all supporting equipment and building(s) within ninety (90) days of
receipt of an abandonment notice from the City Inspection Department.
(c) If removal to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works or designee
does not occur within the ninety (90) days, the City may remove and salvage
the antenna or tower and all supporting equipment and building(s) at the
property owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower,
then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower.
16.17 WELL HEAD PROTECTION (ORD. NO. 1111 10/21/2014)
(1) PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to ensure a safe and sanitary
drinking water supply for the City of Chilton Water Works by the establishment of
well head protection zones surrounding the well heads for all well sites, which are
the supply sources for the City of Chilton Water Works system, and by designation
and regulation of property uses and conditions that may be maintained within such
zones.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-56-
(2) APPLICABILITY. This Ordinance applies to all well sites that are or are proposed
to be the supply sources for the City of Chilton Water Works. The regulations
specified in this Ordinance shall apply within the boundaries of the City of Chilton.
(3) PROTECTIONS ZONE DESCRIPTION. There is hereby established a use district
to be known as a well head protection zone, identified and described as Five Year
Capture Zone of Well 7, 9 and 10 (Exhibit A Attached) developed by Layne
Northwest, a division of Layne Christensen Company and all the area within 1,200
feet of the City of Chilton Well #11.
(4) Separation Distance Requirements. Any Utility water supply well site selected or
proposed after October 1, 2013 shall be adequately separated from potential sources
of contamination. The following separation distances, as specified in NR 811.12(5)
(d) WI Administrative Code, shall be maintained round Well #11.
(a) 50 feet between a City Well and a storm sewer main or a sanitary sewer main
where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main class materials
and joints. Gravity sanitary sewers shall be successfully air pressure tested in
place. The air pressure test shall meet or exceed the requirements of the 4 psi
low pressure air test for plastic gravity sewer lines found in the latest edition
of Standard Specifications for Sewer & Water Construction in Wisconsin.
Force mains shall be successfully pressure tested with water to meet the
AWWA C600 pressure and leakage testing requirements for one hour at 125%
of the pump shut-off head.
(b) 200-feet between a City Well and any sanitary sewer main not constructed of
water main class materials, sanitary manhole, lift station, one or two-family
residential heating fuel oil underground storage tank or above-ground storage
tank or Private On-Site Wastewater Disposal System (POWTS) treatment tank
or holding tank component and associated piping.
(c) 300-feet between a City Well and any farm underground storage tank system
or other underground storage tank system with double wall and with
electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any
piping connected to it. These installations shall meet the most restrictive
installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval
from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated
Local Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110. These requirements apply to
tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel,
fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil or
hazardous substances.
(d) 300-feet between a City Well and any farm above-ground storage tank with
double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a
canopy; other above-ground storage tank system with double wall, or single
wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy and with electronic
interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring
for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations
shall meet the most restrictive installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260
and receive written approval from the Department of Safety and Professional
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-57-
Services or its designated Local Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110.
These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel,
ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner
fuel, lubricant, waste oil or hazardous substances.
(e) 400-feet between a City Well and a Private On-Site Wastewater disposal
System (POWDS) dispersal component with a design capacity of less than
12,000-gallons per day, a cemetery or a storm water retention or detention
pond.
(f) 600-feet between a City Well and any farm underground tank system or other
underground storage tank system with double wall and with electronic
interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the tank and any piping
connected to it; any farm above ground storage tank with double wall or
single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a canopy or
other above ground storage tank system with double wall or single wall tank
with secondary containment and under a canopy; and with electronic
interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring
for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations
shall meet the standard double wall tank or single wall tank secondary
containment installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written
approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its
designated Local Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110. These
requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol,
other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel,
lubricant, waste oil or hazardous substances.
(g) 1,000-feet between a City Well and land application of municipal,
commercial, or industrial waste; the boundaries of a land spreading facility for
spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under Ch. NR 718 while
that facility is in operation; agricultural, industrial, commercial or municipal
waste water treatment plant treatment units, lagoons, or storage structures;
manure stacks or storage structures; or POWTS dispersal component with a
design capacity of 12,000 gallons per day or more.
(h) 1,200-feet between a City Well and any solid waste storage, transportation,
transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor, processing, wood burning, one
time disposal or small demolition facility; sanitary landfill; any property with
residual groundwater contamination that exceeds Ch. NR 140 enforcement
standards; coal storage area; salt or deicing material storage area; any single
wall farm underground storage tank or single wall farm above ground storage
tank or other single wall underground storage tank or above ground storage
tank that has or has not received written approval from the department of
safety and professional services or its designated Local Program Operator
under s. ATCP 93.110 for a single wall tank installation. These requirements
apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-58-
fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil,
or hazardous substances; and bulk pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage
facilities.
(5) EXISTING FACILITIES AND NON-CONFORMING USES. The standards in this
section, not inconsistent with the provisions of Section 62.23(7) (h), Wisconsin
Statutes, shall apply to all existing lawful uses of a structure or building or its
accessory uses, which are not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance
(Non-Conforming Use). A non-conforming use may be continued subject to the
following conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a non-conforming use shall be permitted
unless made in conformity with provisions of this section. For the purposes of
this section, the words “modification”, in and “addition” shall include, but are
not limited to, any alteration, addition, modification, rebuilding or
replacement of any such structure or accessory use. Ordinary maintenance is
not considered a modification or addition; and includes internal or external
painting, decorating, paneling and the replacement of windows, doors, and
other non-structural components.
(b) If a Non-Conforming Use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any
future use of the property shall conform to the appropriate provisions of this
ordinance.
(c) A Non-Conforming Use shall provide copies of all federal, state and local
reports off on-going environmental monitoring or testing.
(d) A Non-Conforming Use shall provide environmental procedures or
monitoring as deemed necessary by the City of Chilton, which may include
but are not limited to storm water runoff management and monitoring.
(e) Ordinary maintenance shall be done by a Non-Conforming Use in a manner
that improves the existing environmental conditions already in existence.
(f) A Non-Conforming Use shall have the responsibility of filing with the City of
Chilton a contingency plan satisfactory to the City of Chilton, provide
immediate notification to the City of Chilton of any emergency or other event
that has the potential to cause groundwater contamination. The contingency
plan shall include at a minimum a list of contacts, including City of Chilton
contacts, to be notified in the event of an emergency, the type of emergency
that may occur, or a response plan and the type of equipment used to respond
to emergencies.
(g) In the event the Non-Conforming Use causes the release of any contaminants
which endanger the City’s groundwater, the activity causing said release shall
immediately cease with cleanup satisfactory to the City of Chilton, including
the payment of all cost of cleanup, City of Chilton consultant fees, and City of
Chilton administrative cost for oversight, review and documentation.
(6) ADMINISTRATION. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and
enforced jointly by the City Public Works Committee and the City’s Director of
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-59-
Public Works. They shall examine all applications for building permits for
properties within a 1,200 foot radius of a municipal well site with regard to the
setback distances established in this Ordinance.
(7) SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Ordinance is invalid or
unconstitutional, or if the application of this Ordinance is to any person or
circumstances is invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the
above provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect
without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or its application.
(8) PENALTIES. Anyone who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject
to forfeiture as provided in Sec. 20.04 of the Municipal Code. Each day of violation
shall be considered a separate offense. In addition, the City shall be entitled to
injunctive relief.
16.18 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(1) AMENDMENTS. In accordance with the provisions of Wisconsin Statutes, the
City Council may, from time to time, adopt amendments. All proposed
amendments shall be referred to the Plan Commission prior to adoption.
(2) REZONING. The procedure for changing zoning district boundaries (rezoning)
shall be as follows:
(a) The Plan Commission, City Council or property owner may initiate a
rezoning. Persons wishing to initiate a rezoning of property shall make
application on forms provided by the City Clerk. The form shall be
accompanied by a fee established by resolution which is to be used for the
costs of processing the application. The application shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
(b) Property owners or occupants within 200 feet of the property in question shall
be notified in writing, although failure by any property owner to receive such
notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
(c) The Plan Commission shall make its report to the City Council on or before
the next regular meeting of the City Council.
(d) A public hearing on the rezoning application shall be held by the City
Council. Notice of said hearing shall be made by publication as a Class 2
notice under Chapter 985 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(e) The City Council must take action on the application within 60 days following
referral by the Plan Commission. The person making the application shall be
notified of the City Council’s action.
(3) CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. The procedure for issuance of conditional use
permits is as follows:
(a) The person applying for a conditional use permit shall fill out a form provided
by the City Clerk together with a fee as established by resolution.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-60-
(b) Conditional use permit applications require Site Plan Review according to
Section 16.12.
(c) The Clerk shall refer the application to the Plan Commission. Property
Owners within 200 feet of the property in question shall be notified in writing,
although failure of any property owner to receive such notification shall not
invalidate the proceedings.
(d) The Plan Commission shall consider the petition at its next regular meeting,
but not earlier than 7 days from the date of submission to the Plan
Commission.
(e) The petitioner or his representative shall appear before the Plan Commission
in order to answer questions concerning the proposed conditional use.
(f) The report of the Plan Commission shall be placed on the agenda of the City
Council at its next regular meeting following referral from the Plan
Commission, but no more than 90 days after the application has been
submitted by the applicant.
(g) The City Council must take action on the application within 60 days after
receiving the report of the Plan Commission. If it grants the conditional use
permit, the City Council may impose conditions it considers necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare and such conditions may include
a time limit for the use to exist or operate.
(4) ENFORCING OFFICER AND PENALTY. This ordinance shall be administered
by the Building Inspector and enforced by the Director of Public Works who may
institute in the name of the City any appropriate actions or proceedings against a
violator as provided by law. Any person, firm, corporation or voluntary association
which violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Sec. 20.04 of the Code of Municipal
Ordinances of the City of Chilton.
(5) DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS OR DESIGNEE.
The Director of Public Works or designee shall enforce this ordinance and in
addition, thereto and in furtherance of said authority he shall:
(a) Determine that all building permits comply with the terms of this ordinance.
(b) Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance
with terms of this ordinance.
(c) Maintain permanent and current records of this ordinance, including but not
limited to, all maps, amendments, and conditional uses, variances, appeals and
applications therefore.
(d) Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances, conditional
uses or other matters to the designated official bodies.
(e) Institute in the name of the City of Chilton any appropriate actions or
proceedings against a violator as provided by law.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-61-
(6) BOARD OF APPEALS.
(a) A Board of Appeals is hereby created in accordance with sec. 62.23, Wis.
Stats. The Board of Appeals shall consist of 5 members appointed by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, for 3 years, except that of
those first appointed, one shall serve for one year, 2 for 2 years and 2 for 3
years without compensation and shall be removable by the Mayor for cause
upon written charges and after public hearing. The mayor shall designate one
of the members as chairperson. The Board of Appeals may employ a secretary
and other employees. The Mayor shall appoint an alternate member for a term
of 3 years, who shall act with full power only when a member of the Board of
Appeals refuses to vote because of interest. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired terms of members whose terms become vacant.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for its government and procedure.
Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and
at such other times as the Board of Appeals may determine. The chairman, or
in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Appeals
and shall be a public record.
(d) Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person, persons, bodies
politic or corporate or the officers thereof aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the City of Chilton affected by any decision of
the administrative officers. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable
time, as provided by the rules of the Board of Appeals, by filing with the
officers from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeals a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officers from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals and
give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and
shall decide the same within a reasonable time.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative
official.
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon
which the Board of Appeals is required to pass.
3. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms
of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-62-
difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall
be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice
done.
4. Permit the erection and use of a building or premises in any location
subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the
general purposes of this ordinance, for such public utility purposes which
are reasonably necessary for public convenience and welfare.
5. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may
modify any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its
opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all the
powers of the administrative official. The concurring vote of 4 members
of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass or to effect
any variation in the requirements of this ordinance.
(f) In addition to the powers mentioned previously, the Board of Appeals shall
have the following specific powers:
1. Grant a permit for a temporary building for commerce or industry in a
residence district, which is incidental to the residential development, such
permit to be issued for a period of not more than one year.
2. Grant a permit for the extension of a district boundary for a distance of not
more than 25 feet where the boundary of a district divides a lot in single
ownership at the time of the adoption of this ordinance.
3. By special permit, after due notice and public hearing, authorize the
location of any of the following buildings or uses in any district from
which they are excluded by this ordinance, provided that such building or
use shall comply with all other regulations in the district in which it is
proposed to be relocated:
a. Nurseries and greenhouses for the propagation and cultivation of
plants.
b. Private clubs and lodges excepting those the chief activity of which is
a service customarily carried on as a business.
c. Hospitals and clinics
d. Institutions of an educational, philanthropic or eleemosynary nature.
e. Cemeteries
f. Community building or recreation field
In passing upon appeals covering the foregoing uses, the Board may establish
adequate safeguards and conditions in harmony with the terms of this
ordinance, particularly as they apply to structures of a height and bulk greater
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-63-
than the normal standards of the district in which the proposed use may be
located.
4. Interpret the provisions of this ordinance in such a way as to carry out the
intent and purpose of the plan as shown on the “District Map”
accompanying and made a part of this ordinance, where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout on the aforesaid map.
5. After public hearing, grant a permit for the construction or erection of a
building or structure located within 2 miles of the boundary line of any
airport to a height greater than that permitted by this ordinance, provided
that the Board of Appeals shall first have determined that the height, use
and location of such building or structure will not constitute a hazard to
the normal, safe operation of aircraft.
6. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to call on any other City
department for assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be
the duty of such other departments to render such assistance as may be
reasonably required.
(7) BUILDING PERMITS. No person shall erect, alter, wreck or move any building,
sign or part thereof without first securing a building permit therefore. No structure
requiring a building permit shall be occupied prior to final inspection/approval by
the Building Inspector.
(8) CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(a) Application. No structure hereafter erected or moved, or that portion of an
existing structure erected or moved shall be occupied or used in whole or in
part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the structure complies with
all of the provisions within this ordinance. No parcel of land unoccupied by a
building or structure shall be utilized for a use until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the proposed use of land
complies with all the provisions within this ordinance. No parcel of land
unoccupied by a building or structure shall be utilized for a use until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector stating that
the proposed use of land complies with all the provisions within this
ordinance.
(b) Request for Certificate. Said certificate shall be issued after the Building
Inspector has found the building or structure satisfactory.
(c) Non-Conforming Use. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to and a
record maintained of each existing non-conforming use upon the effective
date of this ordinance. Said certificate shall indicate the type of use, square
footage in use, number of employees and other such information as considered
necessary to establish the size and scale of the non-conforming use.
City of Chilton Chapter 16 Zoning Code
-64-
16.19 VALIDITY
(1) All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the City of Chilton in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
Updated 1/12/11
CHAPTER 17
SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING
(#562 12/1/81)
(#884 7/6/99)
Page
17.01 General Provisions 2
17.02 Definitions 3
17.03 General Requirements and Design Standards of Subdivision 8
17.04 Plat Documentation 18
17.05 Procedure for Approval 20
17.06 Improvements to Subdivision 23
17.07 Minor Subdivision 25
17.08 Subdivisions Created by Successive Divisions 25
17.09 Variances 26
17.10 Violations, Penalties and Remedies 26
17.11 Amendments, Interpretation and Separability 26
1
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
17.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) TITLE. This ordinance shall hereafter be known,
cited and referred to as: The City of Chilton Subdivision and Platting Regulations.
(2) JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE. Section 236.45 of the revised Wisconsin Statutes
enables Cities with an established planning agency to adopt ordinances governing
subdivision or other division of land.
The following regulations are adopted for the purpose of promoting the public health,
safety and general welfare and are designed to lessen congestion in the streets and
highways ; to further the orderly layout and use of land, to secure safety from fire, panic
and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land;
to avoid improper concentration(s) of population; to facilitate adequate provision for
transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements;
to facilitate the further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land and to
encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. To provide safe and
orderly shoreland subdivision layouts the following regulations are also adopted pursuant
to Section 59.97(3), 144.26(2) and 144.26(8), Wisconsin Statutes.
(3) APPLICABILITY. These regulations shall apply to the following:
(a) Subdivision: Any division of land within the incorporated area of the City of
Chilton or within the extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the City
which results in either a major subdivision or a minor subdivision as defined
herein. All land divisions must be consistent with the Ordinance and other
applicable City Ordinances, as well as the City of Chilton Comprehensive
Plan’s goals, objectives, policies and recommendations. (Ord. 1064 12/7/10/0)
(b) Replatting: When a replat of a recorded subdivision or part thereof is
proposed, the subdivision shall be vacated or altered according to the
provisions of Sections 236.40 through 236.445, Wisconsin Statutes.
(c) Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Transfers of interests in land by will or pursuant to court order.
(2) Leases for a term not to exceed 10 years, mortgages or easements.
(3) The sale or exchange of land between owners of adjoining property if
additional lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not
reduced below the minimum sizes required by this ordinance or other
applicable laws or ordinances.
Revised 12-7-2010
2
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
4. A division of land resulting in parcels more than five acres in area.
(4) ADMINISTRATION. The regulations shall be administered by the City Council
and/or its designated agency or agencies hereinafter referred to as the Council.
17.02 DEFINITIONS. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
number includes the plural; the plural number includes the singular number and the work
“shall” is mandatory and not permissive. For the purpose of these regulations, the
following terms are defined.
(1) AREA DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A map adopted by the City Council indicating
the physical layout of future streets, alleys, cul-de-sacs, and drainage ways or
easements.
(2) ATTORNEY AND ENGINEER. Attorney and engineer are the attorney and
engineer employed by the City unless otherwise stated in the test.
(3) SERVICE WAY (ALLEY). A public or private way which provides secondary
access to a lot, block or parcel of land.
(4) BLOCK. A parcel, lot or group of lots existing within well defined and fixed
boundaries, usually being an area surrounded by streets or other physical barriers, and
having an assigned number, letter or other name through which it may be identified.
(5) BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The distance from the boundaries of a lot or
centerline of a street within which structures or buildings shall not be erected.
(6) CERTIFIED SURVEY MAP. A map of a minor subdivision as defined by this
ordinance, prepared, approved, and recorded as required by this ordinance and in
accordance with Chapter 236.34 of the Wisconsin Statutes.
(7) CITY COUNCIL. City Council is the City of Chilton Council, Chilton, Wisconsin.
(8) COMMISSION. The Chilton Plan Commission.
(9) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Comprehensive Development Plan is the
Comprehensive Development Plan adopted by the City of Chilton indicating the
general locations recommended for the various functional classes of public works,
places and structures and for the general physical development of the City of Chilton
and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and amendments to such
Plan or parts thereof.
3
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
(10) CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way traversing a block for the purpose of
providing pedestrian access.
(11) CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor street having one end open to motor traffic and the
other end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
(12) DEADEND STREET. A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and no
vehicular turnaround.
(13) DEVELOPMENT. The act of constructing buildings or installing site
improvements.
(14) EASEMENT. Any strip of land reserved by the subdivider for public utilities,
drainage, sanitation or other specified uses having limitations, the title to which shall
remain in the property owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of
the servitude.
(15) FINAL PLAT. The map or drawing of subdivision prepared in compliance with
the provisions of Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes, and any accompanying material as
described in Section 6.0.
(16) FRONTAGE. The length of the front property line of the lot, lots or tract of land
abutting a public street, road, highway or rural right-of-way.
(17) GRADIENT. The slope of a road, street, or other public way specified in percent
(%).
(18) IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch,
water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, off-street
parking area or other facility for which the local municipality may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation.
(19) LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. A trafficway including all roads for through
traffic in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except only at such points and
in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such trafficway.
(20) LOT. Lot is a parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated
from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map
or by metes and bounds for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
4
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
(21) LOT BUTT. Lot, butt is a lot at the end of a block and located between 2 corner
lots.
(22) LOT CORNER. Lot, corner is a lot at the intersection of 2 or more streets with 2
or more adjacent sides of the lot abutting a street.
(23) LOT THROUGH. Lot, through is a lot with 2 opposite sides abutting 2 or more
streets.
(24) MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the
owner thereof, or his agent, for the purpose of sale or building development where:
(a) The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites of five acres
each or less in area, or
(b) Five or more parcels or building sites of five acres each or less in area are
created by successive divisions within a period of five years.
(25) MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the
owner thereof, or his agent for the purpose of sale or building development where:
(a) The act of division creates less than five parcels or building sites of five acres
each or less in area; or
(b) Less than five parcels or building sites of five acres each or less in area are
created by successive divisions within a period of five years.
(26) MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. Minimum subdivision
design standards are the guides, principles and specifications for the preparation of
subdivision plans indicating among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions
of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plat.
(27) MINOR STREET. Minor street is a street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
(28) NEIGHBORHOOD UNIT. A residential living environment where the internal
street system discourages through traffic and where major thoroughfares preferably
bound the neighborhood; centrally located community buildings, schools and
playgrounds provide maximum pedestrian accessibility. Local shops to meet daily
household needs are grouped together at accessible points providing a harmony of design
and development.
(29) OFFICIAL MAP. The map of the City by law showing thereon streets, highways,
parkways, parks and playgrounds and the exterior lines of planned new streets, highways,
parkways, parks or playgrounds as provided by statute.
5
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
(30) OUTLOT. An outlot is a parcel of land, other than a lot or block, so designated on
the plat. A remnant parcel of land not be used for building purposes.
(31) OWNER. Owner is an individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient propriety interest in the land
sought to be subdivided to commerce and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this chapter.
(32) PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS. Parks and playgrounds are public lands and open
spaces dedicated for and usable for recreation purposes.
(33) PEDESTRIAN WAY. Pedestrian way is the right-of-way generally, but not
necessarily, across or within a block for use by pedestrian traffic whether designated as a
pedestrian way, crosswalk or however otherwise designated.
(34) PERSON. Person is any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
(35) PLAN COMMISSION. Plan Commission is the Plan Commission of the City of
Chilton, Wisconsin.
(36) PLAT. A map of a major subdivision as defined by this ordinance, prepared,
approved and recorded as required by this ordinance and Chapter 236 of the Wisconsin
Statutes.
(37) REPLAT. The changing of the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part
thereof.
(38) RIGHT-0F-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied for a
special use. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be
dedicated to public use by the make of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.
The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that every
right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct
from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the
dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
(39) ROADWAY. The surface portion of the street available for vehicular traffic.
(40) SERVICE DRIVE. An approved public street generally paralleling and
contiguous to a main traveled way, primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating
ingress and egress to the right-of-way and providing safe and orderly points of access at
fairly uniformly spaced intervals.
(41) SEWAGE DISPOSAL. A septic tank seepage tile sewerage disposal system or
6
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
any other sewerage treatment device approved by the county sanitary inspector as being
in accordance with the Calumet County Sanitary Ordinance, the rules of the Department
of Health and Social Services and the Department of Natural Resources and which
services only one lot.
(42) SEWERED AREA. An area in the City of Chilton which, in the opinion of the
Council, may be readily and feasibly served by sewer and water by extensions to existing
sewer and water systems.
(43) SIDEWALK. That portion of a street or cross walkway, paved or otherwise
surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only.
(44) STREET. Means and includes all access ways in common use such as streets,
roads, lanes, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, parkways, viaducts, circles, courts
and cul-de-sacs, and includes all of the land lying between the right-of-way lines as
delineated on a plat showing such streets whether improved or unimproved, and whether
dedicated for public use or held in trust under the terms of a reservation; but shall not
include those access ways such as easements and rights-of-way intended solely for
limited utility purposes, such as for electric power lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water
lines, or drainage and sanitary sewers.
(45) STREET WIDTH. Street width is the shortest distance between the lines
elineating the right-of-way for a street.
(46)STREET, ARTERIAL. A major, high capacity street designed to carry large
volumes of traffic between various areas of the community.
(47) STREET COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the
system of major streets and highways including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and the principal circulating streets within such a development.
(48) STREET HALF. A street bordering one or more property line of a tract of land
in which the subdivider has allocated a part of the ultimate right-of-way width.
(49) STREET, MINOR (OR LOCAL). A street of limited continuity used primarily
for access to abutting properties and local needs of a neighborhood.
(50) SUBDIVIDER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, guardian, attorney, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings
under the regulations of this act to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or
herself or for another or for others.
(51) SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The basic land planning standards
established as guided for the preparation of plats.
(52) SURVEYOR. A land surveyor duly registered in the State of Wisconsin.
7
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
(53) TERRACE. Terrace is the portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line and the property line.
(54) THOROUGHFARE. A street with a high degree of continuity, including
collectors, major arterial and limited access highways.
(55) WISCONSIN ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The rules of administrative agencies
having rule making authority in Wisconsin published in a loose leaf, continual revision
system as directed by Section 35.93 and Chapter 227 of the Wisconsin Statutes including
subsequent amendments to those rules.
(56) CONSERVANCY AREAS. (#577 6/15/82) Areas of water or natural cover
which shall remain undisturbed for their natural beauty, prevention of erosion, recharging
of ground-water or other benefits. These areas should include wetland areas as herein
defined, areas of slopes exceeding 10 (ten) percent, and areas where bedrock is 5 (five)
feet or less from the surface. (Map).
(57) WETLAND AREAS. (#577 6/15/82) Areas of peat and muck soils or where the
water table is periodically at or near the soil surface.
(58) S.W.C.D. (#577 6/15/82) The Calumet County Soil and Water Conservation
District.
17.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS OF SUBDIVISION.
(1) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. The proposed subdivision shall conform to:
(a) The provisions of Chapter 236, Wisconsin Statutes,
(b) All applicable local ordinances.
(c) The area development plans of the City of Chilton.
(d) The rules of the Division of Health, Chapter H65 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and Department of Natural Resources relating to lot
size and lot elevation if the subdivision is not served by a public sewer and
provision for such service has not been made.
(e) The rules of the Division of Highways, Department of Transportation, relating
to safety of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment
in the streets if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts on a state
highway or connecting streets.
(2) STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
8
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
shall conform to all area development plans adopted by the City of Chilton
and shall be related to: existing natural features, public convenience and
safety and proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
(b) The right-of-way width and building setback requirements of all limited
access expressways, highways and county trunk routes shall be determined by
the Council upon the recommendation of the State Highway Commission or
the County Highway Commissioner, whichever is appropriate. In no case,
however, shall the right-of-way width for a state highway be less than 35 feet
from the right-of-way line. All town roads must comply with the minimum
design standards of Section 86.26, Wisconsin Statutes.
(c) Arrangement of Streets:
1. Major arterial streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed systemof major streets, highways and thoroughfares.
2. Collector streets shall be properly related to special traffic generating
from facilities such as schools, churches and shopping centers, to
population densities and to the arterial streets into which they feed.
3. Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to
topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
drainage and sewer systems, to require the minimum amount of street
necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property.
(d) When a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street,
the Council may require service drives, reverse frontage lots with screen
planting contained in a
non-access reservation along the rear of the property line, deep lots with rear
service alleys or
such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
(e) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited
access highway right-of-way, the Council may require a street approximately
parallel to and on each
side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land. Such distances shall be determined with regard for the
requirements of approach grades and
future grade separations.
(f) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided at
intersections.
(g) Property lines at street intersections may be required to be rounded with a
9
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
radius of 20 feet or a greater radius where the Council considers it necessary.
Cutoffs or chords may be permitted in place of rounded corners.
(h) A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves
on major and collector streets.
(i) Arc distances when appropriate for lot frontages on curved rights-of-way
shall be shown along the lot frontage for municipal assessment purposes.
(j) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles
and no streets shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees, and more
than two streets intersecting at one point shall be discouraged.
(k) Reserve strips or median strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where approved by the Council.
(l) All street rights-of-way shall be of the width specified on the official map or if
no width is specified there, they shall be not less than the width specified
below:
Arterial Streets 120 feet
Collector Streets 70 feet
Minor Streets 66 feet
Service drives – 60 feet in addition to the major traffic street it adjoins.
(m) Clear visibility measured along the centerline shall be not less than specified
below:
Minimum Sight
Street Type Distance in Feet
Major (arterial) 400
Collector 350
Minor 200
(n) The minimum radii or curvature on the centerline shall be as specified below:
Minimum Radius
Street Type in Feet
Major (arterial) 300
Collector 200
Minor 100
(o) Cul-de-sacs: Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not
exceed 500 feet in length and shall provide a turnaround with a minimum rightof-
way radius of 40 feet, and a return radius of 30 feet.
10
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
(p) Half Streets. Half streets shall be prohibited unless specific waiver be
granted by the City Council.
1. Where no half street adjacent to the subdivision exists, the dedication
of half streets will not be approved unless the remaining portion shall
appear as a mapped street on the official map powers, half streets shall be
prohibited unless assurance of eventual dedication is provided to the
governing body.
(q) Street grades shall conform to the following specifications: Grades may be
greater where it is proven to be non-traffic hazard to the City Council.
Street Type Maximum Grade
Major (arterial) 5%
Collector 7%
Minor 10%
Service Streets 5%-10%
(r) Street Names:
1. Any street which is the reasonable continuation of an
existing street shall bear the same name. If the topography or other
features of a permanent nature are such as to render the continuation of
the actual roadway impossible and where such nomenclature is apt to
produce confusion, the street shall not carry the same name as the street
to which it may be geometrically aligned.
2. The Council and/or the Calumet County Planning and Zoning
Committee may disapprove the name of any street shown on the plat
which has already been used elsewhere in the County which because of
similarity may cause confusion.
3. The following table shall be considered in nomenclature:
Type Dead-end Curving Straight
Short Places or Crescent, Way, Terrace, Row or
Streets Courts Circle or Lane Lane
Long Streets Drive or Road Street to Avenue
4. The term boulevard shall be reserved for such streets which because of
their breadth or monumental character are to be especially designated.
(3) SERVICE WAYS (ALLEYS).
(a) Service ways shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts
except that the Council may waive this requirement if definite and assured
11
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
provision is made for service access such as off-street loading and parking
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(b) Service ways shall not be approved in residential areas unless necessary
because of topography or other exceptional circumstances.
(c) The width shall not be less than 30 feet and crooked and dead-end alleys shall
be prohibited.
(d) Service Streets – Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned
major thoroughfare or a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such right-of-way for adequate protection of residential
properties and afford separation of through and local traffic may be required.
Such service streets shall be located at a distance from the major thoroughfare or
railroad right-of-way suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes
in appropriate districts. Such Distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(e) Hardship to owners of adjoining property avoided. The street arrangements
shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in
platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
(4) SIDEWALKS.
(a) Location. Installation of sidewalks shall be controlled by Sec. 5.03 of the
Municipal Code. (#957 2/18/03)
(b) Grades. Sidewalk grades shall be controlled by the City Engineer as provided
under Sec. 5.01 of the Municipal Code.
(c) Widths. All sidewalk widths shall, when installed, conform to the following
minimum standards:
Classification Width
Single-family zone 4.5 ft.
Multiple-family zone and
Public Building Sites 5 ft.
Commercial Zone 6 ft.
Industrial Zone 5 ft.
(5) EASEMENTS AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
(a) Easements centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities
where required by the Council and shall be at least six feet wide on each side
of the lot line or total of 12 feet.
12
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
(b) Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or
stream there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-ofway
of sufficient width conforming substantially to the (flood way) line of
such a water course. Grading or construction adequate for the purpose may
be required. Wherever possible, the drainage shall be maintained by an open
channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential
volume of flow as determined by the Council. Said improvement shall be
guaranteed prior to approval of the final plat.
(c) Residential lots including corner lots in a subdivision shall have a minimum
building setback from the right-of-way line for those street classes referred to
in 17.03(2)(e) as
follows:
1. Arterial streets – 40 feet
2. Collector streets – 30 feet
3. Minor streets – 25 feet
(6) BLOCKS.
(a) The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for
the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in
residential areas shall not exceed 1200 feet between right-of-way lines.
(b) Pedestrian crosswalks not less than 15 feet wide may be required by the
Council through the center of blocks more than 900 feet long where deemed
essential to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
(7) LOTS.
(a) The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum
building lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for
the type of development and use proposed, and said building lines shall be
shown on the plat.
(b) Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the local zoning
ordinance as well as existing county and state requirements, however:
1. Residential lots where served by public sewer shall be not less than 80
feet wide measured at the right-of-way line, or such minimum lot width
may be measured at the building setback line only if said lot is located
on the outer radius of a curved street such as a cul-de-sac. However, in
no case shall the lot width measured at the right-of-way line be less han
60 feet wide. Residential lots where served by public sewers shall not
be less than 8,000 square feet in area.
13
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
2. Residential lots not served by public sewerage disposal facilities shall
comply with the rules and regulations of the Division of Environmental
Protection, Chapters H62 and H65 of the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
the Calumet County ordinances and other State and local requirements.
(c) Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service
and parking facilities required by the type of use and development
contemplated.
(d) Every lot in a subdivision shall abut on a public street.
(e) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
(f) Double frontage or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries
as defined in 17.03(2)(1) or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation.
(8) DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE.
(a) When a final plat of a subdivision has been approved by the “public bodies”
and all other required approvals are obtained and the plat is recorded, that
approval shall constitute acceptance for the purpose signated on the plat of all
lands shown on the plat as dedicated to the public including street dedications.
(b) Whenever a preliminary plat includes a proposed dedication of land to public
use and the Council finds that such land is not required or not suitable for
public use, the Council may either refuse to approve such dedication, or
require the rearrangement of lots in the proposed subdivision.
(8.5) DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK USE
(a) Dedication Requirement. In order to provide adequate open spaces for public
parks and that the cost of providing such spaces be equitably apportioned on
the basis of additional need created by subdivision development, each
subdivider shall be required to dedicate land or pay fees in lieu of land for
park space.
(b) General Design. In the design of a subdivision, land division, planned unit
development or certified survey, provision shall be made for suitable, park
spaces, drainage-ways and other public purposes. Such sites are to be shown
on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat, and shall comply with the City’s
comprehensive Plan. Consideration shall be given to the preservation of
scenic and historic sites, stands of trees, marshes, lakes, ponds, streams,
14
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
watercourses, watersheds, ravines and woodlands, prairie and wetlands, and
plant and animal communities.
Where the dedication is not compatible with the comprehensive plan, or for other
reasons is not feasible as recommended by the Plan Commission, and as approved
by the Common Council, the subdivider shall, in lieu thereof, pay to the City a fee
as established by this Section, or a combination thereof.
(c) Site Reservations Required.
(1) Where the area proposed to be divided contains a park, which is
shown upon the comprehensive plan of the City, at the Common
Council’s determination, such area shall be dedicated to the City.
(2) Whenever any river, stream or important surface-drainage course is
located in the area being divided, the subdivider of land shall provide
an easement along each side of the river, stream or drainage course
for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting the river, stream or drainage course for
drainage or recreational use.
(d) Dedication of Parks, Space. The developer shall dedicate sufficient land area
to provide adequate park, to meet the needs to be created by and to be provided
for the land division, subdivision or comprehensive development. The minimum
dedication shall be:
(1) Ten percent (10%) of the total acreage intended to be used for
single-family dwelling units;
(2) Ten percent (10%) of the total acreage intended to be used for
duplexes;
(3) Fifteen percent (15%) of the total acreage intended to be used for
multi-family dwellings.
(e) Combination of Residential Uses. Where a combination of residential uses is
intended, the minimum dedication shall be the sum obtained by adding ten
percent (10%) of the acreage intended for single-family dwellings, ten percent
(10%) of the acreage intended for duplex dwellings and fifteen percent (15%)
of the acreage intended for multi-family dwellings. Where a definite
commitment is made to the City by the developer with respect to those
portions of the total acreage intended for single family, duplex and multifamily
dwellings, the dedication shall be based upon the maximum
dedications which the zoning classification of the parcel will permit.
(f) Minimum Size of Park and Playground Dedications.
(1) In general, land reserved for park purposes shall have an area of at
least two (2) acres. Where the amount of land to be dedicated is less than
two (2) acres, the Common Council may require that the recreation area be
15
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
located at a suitable place on the edge of the proposed land division,
subdivision or certified survey so that additional land may be added at
such time that the adjacent land is subdivided. In no case shall an area of
less than (1) acre be reserved for park space if it will be impractical or
impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its area.
(2) Land reserved for park space shall be of a character and location
suitable for use as a playground, play field or for other recreation
purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry. Such land shall have a
total frontage on one (1) or more streets of at least two hundred (200) feet,
and no other dimension of the site shall be less than two hundred (200)
feet.
(g) Suitability of Lands. The Common Council shall have sole authority to
determine the suitability and adequacy of parklands proposed for dedication.
Drainage ways, wetlands or areas reserved for streets shall not be considered
as satisfying land dedication requirements.
(h) Utility Extensions. The sub-divider shall install or provide for installation of
water and sanitary sewer lines to the property line of all dedicated land,
where such services are to be provided to the adjacent properties. Where the
dedication is not compatible with the comprehensive plan, or for other
reasons is not feasible as recommended by the Plan Commission, and as
approved by the Common Council, the sub-divider shall, in lieu thereof, pay
to the City a fee as established by this Section, or a combination thereof.
(9) PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND OTHER PUBLIC SITES.
(a) When a proposed park, playground, school site or other public site as shown
on the Comprehensive Development Plan is embraced in part or in whole by
the boundary of a proposed subdivision and such public sites are not
dedicated to the City or Board of Education, such public ground shall be
reserved and no action taken towards approval of preliminary or final plat for
a period not to exceed 90 days to allow the City Council or Board of
Education the opportunity to consider and take action toward acquisition of
such public grounds or park by purchase or other causes.
(10) EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS. (#577 6/15/82)
(a) Intent: The intent and purpose of these regulations is to:
1. Prevent property damage and/or pollution of surface water from
uncontrolled erosion, sediment and runoff.
2. Obtain wise use, conservation, development and protection of City’s
soil, water, wetland woodland and wildlife resources.
3. Preserve growth and cover and promote natural beauty of the City and
16
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
itsenvirons.
4. Prohibit the creation of building sites in those areas poorly suited for
the development because of soil and/or topographic conditions.
5. Implement any county or regional plans adopted by the City.
(b) Land Suitability: Lands having a slope of ten (10) percent or more shall be
maintained as a Conservancy Area. Lands having bedrock within five (5) feet
of the natural undisturbed surface shall not be used as building sites which are
served by private sewage disposal systems. Natural wetland areas should
remain as Conservancy Areas, to the extent that such classification is
reasonable and desirable under the circumstances.
(c) Applicability: All lands in the City covered by the Subdivision ordinance
shall be subject to these erosion and sediment control provisions, and all lands
to be improved or developed where:
1. An area of 5,000 square feet or more is disturbed, or
2. Excavation or fill or a combination thereof will exceed 500 cubic
yards, or,
3. Any public or private road or street is to be constructed or enlarged, or
4. Any water course is altered or material removed from stream or lake
beds.
(This section does not preclude the necessity of obtaining permits from
other appropriate agencies.)
(d) Standards and Criteria: Standards and specifications for needed erosion
control practices shall be based on the Calumet County Soil and Water
Conservation District Technical Guide, and that runoff and sediment loads
will be safely handled by downstream channels.
(e) General Principles: The following general principles shall be used when
evaluating erosion, sediment and runoff control plans:
1. That smallest practical area of soil shall be exposed at any one time,
during all construction.
2. Where necessary, temporary seeding, mulching or other cover shall be
used until construction is completed.
3. Provision shall be made to prevent or control increased runoff during
17
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
and after development.
4. Permanent seeding or cover shall be completed as soon as possible
after construction.
5. If permanent seeding cannot be established immediately after
construction, temporary erosion control measures shall be installed and
maintained until permanent seeding can be established.
6. Natural vegetation, including trees and shrubs, shall be retained where
possible.
7. All lots (both developed and undeveloped) shall be graded to conform
to the erosion, sediment and runoff control plan for the subdivision.
(f) Plan Requirements: The erosion, sediment, and runoff control plan shall
show:
1. Site Plan Map, including;
b. Area of Plat,
c. Existing and proposed drainage courses,
d. Size and location of all culverts,
e. Location of all erosion, sediment and runoff control practices.
2. Soil Map.
3. Drainage area of watershed affected by construction.
4. Seeding Plan (Temporary and/or Permanent).
5. Plans for erosion, sediment and runoff control practices. These
practices shall meet standards and specifications of the Calumet
County Soil and Water Conservation District.
17.04 PLAT DOCUMENTATION.
(1) PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The preliminary plat shall be drawn with waterproof non-fading black ink or
legibly drawn with pencil on tracing cloth or tracing paper of good quality at
a scale of 100 feet to an inch and shall show correctly on its face:
1. Date, scale and north point.
2. The proposed subdivision name which shall not duplicate the
name of any plat previously recorded in Calumet County.
18
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
3. The name and address of the owner, the sub-divider and the
surveyor preparing the plat.
4. Location of the subdivision by private claim or by government
lot, quarter, quarter section, township, range and county.
5. A small scale drawing of the section or government subdivision
of the section in which the subdivision lies with the location of the
subdivision indicated thereon.
6. The lengths and bearings of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed plat.
7. Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of
adjoining parcels of un-platted land.
8. Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision.
9. Locations, widths and names of all existing platted or dedicated
streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage
ditches, permanent buildings, bridges and other pertinent date as
determined by the Council.
10. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date
of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of
such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to U.S.
Coast and Geodetic Survey datum as utilized by the City of
Chilton.
11. If the subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distances and
bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet back
from the ordinary high water mark of the lake or stream. Areas
defined on City of Chilton Flood Plain Study Maps.
12. Layout and width of all new streets and rights-of-way such as
alleys, highways, easements for sewers, watermains and other
public utilities.
13. Direction and distance to nearest water and sewer mains.
14. A brief description of the requested improvements such as
sanitary sewers, laterals, watermains, storm sewer, curb and
gutter, paving, and roadside ditches where applicable.
15. Approximate dimensions and areas of lots.
19
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
16. Proposed building setback lines.
17. Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of tangents.
18. Approximate location and area of property proposed to be
dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant
for use of all property owners in the subdivision with the
conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation.
19. A brief description of the proposed restrictions, if any, which
will be put on the plat.
(2) FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS. (a) The final plat of the subdivision shall
comply with the requirements of the ordinance and of Chapter 236, Wisconsin
Statutes, which is hereby adopted as amended by reference and incorporated
herein as though fully set out.
17.05 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
(1) PROCEDURE: GENERAL:
Final approval of a proposed plat will involve the successive approvals of a
preliminary sketch, a preliminary plat, and the final plat.
(2) PRELIMINARY SKETCH AND PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION.
(a) Sketch Plan. Sub-dividers shall prepare, for review by the Plan Commission,
City Engineer and others, A proposed subdivision sketch plan, containing the
following information:
1. Site location map showing major streets, school locations,
commercial centers and other significant developments.
2. Tract boundaries.
3. North point and scale.
4. Streets within and adjacent to tract.
5. Topography and physical features.
6. Proposed general street design.
7. Proposed lot size and orientation.
(b) The sketch plan will be considered as the basis for discussion between the
sub-divider and Plan Commission. Submission of such sketch plan shall not
constitute formal basis of such sketch plan, unofficially advise the subdivider
of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms with this
20
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
chapter and other ordinances of the City and will discuss possible
modifications. No fee shall be required of the sub-divider for the submission
of sketch plans.
(c) (#577 6/15/82) Before filing a preliminary plat for approval, the sub-divider
must submit to the Council, nine (9) copies of a preliminary simple sketch
showing the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to
existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free hand pencil sketch and
should show the general location of the proposed plat in the City. One copy
of the preliminary sketch shall include a letter from the Calumet County Soil
and Water Conservation District stating whether erosion control measures are
needed for the proposed plat.
(d) The preliminary sketch shall be accompanied with a letter of intent, briefly
describing the desired public utilities and improvements for the proposed
plat.
(e) The Plan Commission shall, within four weeks of its submission, express
its opinion of the proposed plat with regard to the availability and feasibility
of desired improvements. Comments regarding the availability of sanitary
sewer and watermains will be referred to the Director of Public Works, who
will be available for consultation with the sub-divider.
(f) Based on the Plan Commission review of the preliminary sketch, the
sub-divider may proceed with obtaining a preliminary plat.
(3) PRELIMINARY PLAT – PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
(a) (#577 6/15/82)
After approval of the preliminary sketch and before submitting a final
plat for approval, the Sub-divider shall submit nine (9) copies of a
preliminary plat not less than 1 week preceding the meeting of the
Council or Plan Commission for preliminary approval. These plats
shall be drawn as specified in Section 17.04(1). The preliminary plat
shall be accompanied by an erosion, runoff and sediment control plan,
if needed, which shall be formally submitted to the Calumet County
S.W.C.D. for review. These plans should be considered by Plan
Commission for review.
(b) Following a review of the preliminary plat and data and after
negotiations with the sub-divider on changes deemed advisable
including the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the
Council or Plan Commission shall within 40 days of its submission
express its approval in writing to the sub-divider and state the
conditions of such approval and if disapproved shall express its
disapproval and state its reasons for rejection.
21
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
(c) Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the sub-divider to final
approval of the layout shown by such plat if the final plat is submitted
within six months of the date of approval of the preliminary plat and
conforms to such layout and conditions of the approved preliminary
plat which shall have been certified as non-objectionable by all local
and state agencies having the authority to object.
(4) FINAL PLAT – PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.
(a) After approval of the preliminary plat, nine (9) copies of the final plat
meeting the requirements of Section 17.04(2) herein, shall be submitted
to the Council or Plan Commission within six months of the approval of
the preliminary plat. The final plat shall also be submitted by the subdivider
or his agent to the Department of Local Affairs and Development.
(b) Upon receipt thereof, the Council or Plan Commission shall examine
the final plat and all necessary certificates to determine its conformance
to the preliminary plat and the requirements established in this ordinance.
Approval of the final plat shall not be granted until the plat has been
certified as non-objectionable by all state and local agencies having the
authority to object. The Council or Plan Commission shall take action on
the final plat within 40 days after the plat has been officially submitted.
If disapproved or conditionally approved, the reasons or conditions shall
be stated on the record of the Council and forwarded in writing to the
sub-divider.
(c) The following documents shall be submitted with the final plat:
1. Petitions for all improvements required under Sections 17.06(1)
1, 2 and 4. Petitions for sanitary sewer and water service
laterals shall indicate whether standard or oversized services
are desired.
2. All waivers of hearings or requests for Public Hearing as
outlined in Section 17.06(4)(a) 1.
3. All executed easements as per Section 17.06(4)(a) 1.
4. (#577 6/15/82) A final erosion, runoff and sediment control
plan, if required, approved by the S.W.C.D.
Failure to submit the above documents as specified, will constitute grounds for the refusal of the
final plat.
(d) The final plat of the subdivision shall be recorded by the sub-divider
in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Calumet County, Wisconsin, as
required by Chapter 236.25, Wisconsin Statutes as amended. Necessary
22
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
copies of the final approval plat shall be forwarded To the Council for
distribution.
17.06 IMPROVEMENTS TO SUBDIVISION.
(1) REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to proceed as soon as
practicable after approval of a subdivision plat with installation of all the
following improvements within the sub-division. Such improvements
shall be financed as in accordance with Section 17.06(1)(b) and cost then
borne by the developer.
1. Water Supply. Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision
by extension of the existing City system. Service
connection stubbed to the property line and all necessary hydrants
shall also be provided. Water main shall be 8” standard size. Any
increase in size to facilitate services beyond subdivision shall be
borne by City. All grades and materials, equipment, etc. must be
approved by City before installation. All services to property line
shall be a minimum of 1” and of approved materials. (#957 2/18/03)
2. Sewage Disposal. Sanitary sewer mains and service
connections stubbed in to property line shall be provided to serve
all the lots in the sub-division and shall be connected to the
existing city sewer system except that where connection to the City
sewer system is not available in a street adjacent to or within the
sub-division the sewer system within the subdivision shall be
installed and capped for future use. A variance to this requirement
to the existing sewer system cannot be provided. Sanitary sewer
shall be 8” standard size main – any increase in size to facilitate
service beyond sub-division shall be born by the City and all
grades and materials, equipment, etc. must be approved by City
before installation. Sewer laterals shall be a minimum of 4”
diameter to property line and of approved materials. (#957 2/18/03)
3. Drainage. (#726 8/7/90) See Section 17.06(5).
4. Curb and Gutter. Permanent curb and gutter shall be installed.
5. Street and Alley Grading. The full width of the right-of-way of
each street and alley dedicated in the plat shall be graded full width
and have a minimum depth of 5”of 3 inch crushed rock and 4
inches of ¾ inch crushed rock, a type of roadway approved by the
Director of Public Works or other proper City officials, and in
accordance with City specifications.
23
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
6. Sidewalks. See Section 17.03(4).
(b) The adequacy of such facilities shall be subject to approval of the
Director of Public Works. Prior to final plat approval, the sub-divider
shall, as determined by the City in its sole discretion, either:
1. Provide a performance bond to be equal to 110% of the City
Engineer’s estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be
furnished, including the cost of inspection by the City of Chilton;
or,
2. 75% of said engineer’s estimate shall be escrowed with the City
of Chilton for all improvements with the balance payable to the
City upon the sale of 50% of the improved lots or the expiration of
two years from final plat approval, whichever occurs first.
(2) PRIVATELY OWNED UTILITIES.
(a) All privately owned utilities including gas
mains, electrical cables, telephone cables, cable television or any
other non-public improvement shall not be installed until such time
the sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and watermains have been installed
unless they are on a separate easement.
(3) UPDATING OF PRIVATE UTILITIES. It is the responsibility of the
developer to submit plans to utility company for platting of easements for private
facilities.
(4) RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
(a) The City shall be responsible for the following duties with regard to
required public improvements:
1. Assist the developer in obtaining all easements, waivers, and
special agreements. All completed forms necessary shall be
subject to review by the City. Easements shall be recorded as
required by the City on the final plat.
2. Secure necessary state approvals for extensions of municipal
service, as required.
3. Supervise installation of all improvements of municipally
owned utilities, in order to provide that all such improvements
conform to City specifications.
(5) DRAINAGE. (#912 10/17/00, #726 8/7/90) A complete and adequate
drainage system design shall be required for the subdivision and the developer
24
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
shall include in the proposed subdivision plans for adequate drainage. Such
plans shall include a storm sewer system including laterals or a system of
open ditches, culverts, pipes and catch basins or both systems. Such systems
shall be designed in conformity with all requirements of the City. The
expense of constructing the entire drainage system(s) shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
17.07 MINOR SUBDIVISION.
(1) REQUIREMENTS. A certified survey map shall be required, approved and
recorded for any minor sub-division. The certified survey map shall
be prepared in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 236.34 of the
Wisconsin Statutes which is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as though fully set out.
(2) PROCEDURE. The sub-divider shall file a copy of said survey map with the
City. The City Council shall review and within 40 days approve, approve
conditionally or reject the map. The divider shall be notified in writing of any
conditions of approval or reasons for rejection.
(3) CERTIFICATES.
(a) The map shall include the certificate of the surveyor who surveyed
and mapped the parcel as required by Chapter 236.34 of the Wisconsin
Statutes and shall be signed by the property owner.
(b) The certificate of approval of the City Council shall be typed, lettered
or reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink on the face of the
map.
(4) MAP. The map shall be filed by the divider for record with the Register of
Deeds of Calumet County. A copy of the final approved map shall be
forwarded to the Calumet County Regional Planning Commission. Additional
copies of the final approved map shall be forwarded to the City and
appropriate agencies. The volume and page number of the recording file shall
be noted on the final approved map.
(5) IMPROVEMENTS. The requirements of sec. 17.06 of this ordinance shall
apply to a minor sub-division.
(6) DESIGN STANDARDS. The general requirements and design standards
described in sec. 17.03 of this ordinance shall apply to a minor subdivision.
17.08 SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS.
(1) SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS.
(a) Where it is not practicable to require that a final plat of a
Subdivision created prior to this ordinance by successive divisions be
filed in accordance with This chapter, the City Council may in lieu
25
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
thereof order an assessor’s plat to be made under Section 70.27,
Wisconsin Statutes, and may assess the cost thereof as provided in
such section or as provided for under Section 236.31 Wisconsin
Statutes.
(b) Regardless of the type of plat filed, any such subdivision shall
comply with all provisions of this chapter to the extent that they may
be reasonably applied.
17.09 VARIANCES.
(1) When in the judgment of the Council it would be inappropriate to apply literally a
provision of this chapter because extraordinary hardship would result, it may waive or
vary such provisions so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured provided that in no event shall the requirement of filing and recording the plat or
survey be waived.
(2) Any modification or variance thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the City
Council setting forth the reasons which in the opinion of the Council, justified the
modification
17.10 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of these
regulations shall upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $500
and the cost of prosecution for each violation and in default of payment of such forfeiture
and the cost shall be imprisoned in the county jail until payment thereof but not
exceeding 30 days. This fine shall be imposed for each lot or parcel created by the
subdivision. Each day a violation exists or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
Compliance therewith may also be enforced by injunction order at the suit of
the county or the owner or owners of real estate within the district affected by the
regulations of the ordinance as provided by law.
17.11 AMENDMENTS, INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY.
(1) AMENDMENTS. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and
general welfare, the City Council may from time to time, amend the regulations
imposed by this ordinance. The City Council shall hold public hearings on all
proposed amendments. Notice of such public hearings shall be given by publication
of a Class 2 notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the local unit once a
week for two weeks preceding the hearing or as otherwise provided by statute.
(2) INTERPRETATION.
(a) The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(b) Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this ordinance upon the
26
City of Chilton Ch. 17 Subdivision and Platting
subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this ordinance or
of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any
kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards
or requirements shall govern.
(c) This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement provided that where the regulations of this ordinance
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such
easement, covenant or other private agreement, the requirements of this
ordinance shall govern.
(3) SEPARABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance are separable and if for any
reason a clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of this ordinance shall be
decided by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect other provisions which can be given effect without the invalid provision.
27
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
1
CHAPTER 18
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
(Ord. #541 10/21/80, Ord. #836 04/15/97)
Page
18.01 Intent 2
18.02 Definitions 2
18.03 Cable Communications System Regulatory Board 5
18.04 The Cable Communications System Franchise 5
18.05 Application for Franchise 6
18.06 Franchise Review and Renewal 8
18.07 Significance of Franchise 10
18.08 Transfer of Ownership and Control 11
18.09 Operation of Franchise 13
18.10 Rights Reserved to the City 14
18.11 Acceptance and Effective Date of Franchise 16
18.12 Termination of Franchise 17
18.13 Regulatory Jurisdiction and Procedures 19
18.14 Reports and Records of the Grantee 20
18.15 Franchise Payment 22
18.16 Liability and Indemnification 23
18.17 Proposal Bond 25
18.18 Performance Bond 26
18.19 Rates 26
18.20 Services, Facilities and Equipment, Channel Capacity 27
18.21 Extension of Service 28
18.22 Time of Performance 28
18.23 Customer Service Standards 30
18.24 Technical Standards 34
18.25 Construction Standards 34
18.26 Construction and Installation 35
18.27 Interconnection 38
18.28 Unauthorized Connections or Modifications 39
18.29 Preferential or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited 39
18.30 Subscriber Privacy 40
18.31 Remedies 40
18.32 Separability 41
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
2
18.01 INTENT. It is the intent of this chapter to provide for and specify the means to attain a
cable communications system franchise in the City and to set forth the obligations
and rights of the City and grantee accompanying such franchise.
18.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases and words
and their derivations shall have the meaning specified herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future and words in the singular
number include words in the plural number.
(1) ADDITIONAL SERVICES. A subscriber service provided by the grantee, in
addition to basic service, for which a special charge is made based on program or
service content, time or spectrum space usage.
(2) ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES. Any and all revenues derived directly or indirectly
by the grantee, or any affiliate that is a cable operator, in connection with the
operation of the cable system pursuant to this chapter. Further, annual gross revenues
includes compensation in whatever form, exchange or otherwise, derived from all
cable services, cable operations, and cable-related activities within the service area
including, but not limited to, (a) revenues from subscriber rates, pay television,
premium channels, service tiers, service clusters, institutional networks, on-air
advertising, installations, reconnections, or similar fees: (b) rebates or commissions
received from travel, home shopping or similar services, or commercial access; (c)
any, and all, compensation from all ancillary cable services, cable operations, and
cable-related activities within the service area, including but not limited to, sale of
cable or cable equipment, advertising inserted into periodic billing statements or
other notices, fees from the sale of subscribers’ late fees, rental or sale of video
discs, rental or sale of video cassettes, rental or sale of descrambling converters, or
other devices, rental or sale of remote control devices, rental or sale of a/b or input
switches, rental or sale of interactive games or software, rental or sale of digital
equipment, and (d) compensation received for studio leased access and other facility
rental, other than those not associated with the operation of the system.
(3) BASIC CABLE SERVICE OR BASIC SERVICE. The service tier that includes all
signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a
signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such
station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any
public educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise
agreement to be carried on the basic tier, and additional video programming signals
added to the basic tier by the grantee, as defined from time to time by federal law and
rules of the FCC.
(4) CABLE ACT. Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C.
151 et seq., and all other provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
3
(5) CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS – CCS. Any network of cables, optical,
electrical, or electronic equipment, including television systems, used for the purpose
of transmission of electrical impulses of television, radio and other intelligences,
either analog or digital for sale or use by the inhabitants of the City.
(6) CITY. The City of Chilton, its offices and employees unless otherwise specifically
designated, and the area within the territorial limits of the City.
(7) COMMENCE OPERATION. Operation will be considered to have commenced
when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering
of “full system service” to at least 25% of the dwelling units located within the City.
(8) COUNCIL. The governing body of the City or any successors to the legislative
powers of such body.
(9) DEDICATED INSITUTIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS. Interactive, broadband
communications channels dedicated to serving city, county, state and federal
governmental agencies, educational institutions and other nonprofit and profit
organizations that may be qualified by the Council.
(10) EDUCATIONAL CHANNEL OR EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL. Any
channel where educational programs are the only designated use.
(11) FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successors.
(12) FRANCHISE. The right, privilege and authority granted by the ordinance codified
herein to construct, maintain and operate a cable television system in the City.
(13) FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A contractual agreement entered into between the
City and any grantee hereunder which is enforceable by the City and said grantee
and which sets forth the rights and obligations between the City and said grantee in
connection with the franchise.
(14) FRANCHISE FEE OR PAYMENT. Includes any tax, fee, or assessment the City
imposes on the grantee solely because of the grantee’s status as such. The term
“franchise fee’ or “franchise payment” does not include: (a) any tax, fee, or
assessment of general applicability (including any such tax for or assessment
imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a
tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against the grantee); (b)
capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for
educational or governmental access facilities; (c) requirements or charges
incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for
bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or
liquidated damages; or (d) any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.
(15) FULL SYSTEM SERVICE. All “basic services” and “additional services” offered
by the grantee.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
4
(16) GRANTEE. Any person, as herein defined, receiving a franchise pursuant to this
chapter and any legal franchising resolutions as may be adopted by the City.
(17) GRANTEE’S PROPOSAL. Incorporates all of the documents included in the
response to and including the document entitled “Invitation for Applications,”
dated___, submitted to the City Clerk.
(18) HEAD END. The land, electronic processing equipment, antennas, tower, building
and other appurtenances normally associated with and located at the starting point
of a CCS.
(19) LEASED CHANNEL OR LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel available
for lease and programming by persons or entities other than the grantee, including
those portions of the other access channels not in use by their designated
programmers.
(20) LOCAL ORIGINATION. Any channel where the grantee is the only designated
programmer and provides video programs to subscribers.
(21) MAY. Is permissive.
(22) PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
(23) PUBLIC AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel where any
member of the general public or any noncommercial organization may be a
programmer without charge on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis,
in accordance with FCC regulations, or where local government programming is
used.
(24) REASONABLE NOTICE. The provisions of notice of contemplated action
delivered at least 48 hours prior to such action. Saturday, Sundays and holidays
recognized by the City shall be excluded in the computation of this 48 hours.
(25) SALE. Includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
(26) SERVICE AREA. Geographical area within the incorporated limits of the City.
(27) SHALL AND MUST. Each is mandatory.
(28) STREET. Includes all streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way or other public ways in
the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or
such other public property so designated by law.
(29) SUBSCRIBER. Any person, firm, company, corporation or association receiving
either “basic service” or “additional service” from the grantee.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
5
(30) SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED. Operation will be considered substantially
completed when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit
the offering of “full system service” to at least 90% of the dwelling units in the City
to which access is legally and reasonably available.
(31) USER. A person utilizing a channel for purposes of production or transmission of
material, as contrasted with receipt thereof, in a subscriber capacity.
18.03 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM REGULATORY BOARD.
(1) REGULATORY BOARD ESTABLISHED. The City Council is hereby designated
and established as a Cable Communications System Regulatory Board. The City
Administrator shall work with and assist the Board with the performance of its duties.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE REGULATORY BOARD. The duties of the
Regulatory Board shall be as follows:
(a) Resolving disputes or disagreements between subscribers and the grantee
after investigation should the subscriber and the grantee not first be able to
resolve their dispute or disagreement.
(b) Reviewing and auditing reports submitted to the City as required by SS26.10
and 26.15 and such other correspondence as submitted to the City concerning
the operation of the CCS so as to insure that the necessary reports are
completed and filed pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(c) Reviewing the rules and regulations set by the grantee under the provisions of
SS26.10.
(d) Assuring that all tariffs, rates and rules pertinent to the operation of the CCS
in the City are made available for inspection by the public at reasonable hours
and upon reasonable request.
(e) Reviewing rates and recommending any rate changes to the City Council as
provided in SS18.20 of this chapter.
(f) Confer with the grantee and advise on the interconnection of the City’s cable
system with other cable and communications system.
(g) Solicit, review and provide recommendations to the council to insure
compliance with this chapter.
(h) Such other duties as the City Council may assign.
18.04 THE CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM FRANCHISE. The City shall grant the
right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications
system in the City to the Grantee, for a period not to exceed 15 years, subject to the
rights, obligations, conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
6
18.05 APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE. Applications for a franchise hereunder shall be filed
with the City Clerk and shall contain the following information and provisions:
(1) PROPOSAL BOND AND FILING FEE. Provisions of the proposal bond as required
in SS18.17 and payment of a nonrefundable filing fee to the City of $500 shall be due
and payable concurrently with the application information.
(2) NAME AND ADDRESS OF APPLICANT. The name and business address of the
applicant, date of application and signature of applicant or appropriate corporate
officer.
(3) DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED OPERATION. A general description of the
applicant’s proposed operation in the service area and in other areas within the State,
including but not limited to business hours, operating staff, maintenance procedures
beyond those required in this chapter, management and marketing staff complement
and procedures, and if available, the rules of operation for public access.
(4) SIGNAL CARRIAGE. A statement of the television and radio services to be
provided, including both off the air and locally originated signals.
(5) SPECIAL SERVICES. A statement setting forth a description of the automated
services proposed and a description of the production facilities to be made available
by the grantee for the public, municipal and educational channels required to be made
available under this chapter and the Federal Communications Commission.
(6) PROGRAMMING ASSISTANCE. A statement establishing any additional funding,
facilities, equipment or personnel beyond those required elsewhere to be designated
to affect and promote local programming development. It is understood that the
foregoing shall be available without charge to all on a fair and nondiscriminatory
basis and may be used by the grantee as well. Such funding and services shall be
contingent upon a special showing, where required, that the proposed uses are
consistent with the regulatory program of the FCC.
(7) SCHEDULE OF CHARGES. A statement of the applicant’s proposed schedule of
charges as set forth by the provisions of SS18.20.
(8) CORPORATE ORGANIZATION. A statement detailing the corporate organization
of the applicant, if any, including the names and addresses of its officer and directors
and the number of shares held by each officer and director.
(9) STOCKHOLDERS. A statement identifying the number of authorized and
outstanding shares of applicant’s stock including a current list of the names and
current addresses of its shareholders holding 5% or more of applicant’s outstanding
stock.
(10) INTRA COMPANY RELATIONSHIPS. A statement describing all intra company
relationships of the applicant, including parent, subsidiary or affiliated companies.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
7
(11) AGREEMENTS AND UNDERSTANDINGS. A statement setting forth all
agreements and understanding, whether written or oral, existing between the
applicant and any other person with respect to any franchise awarded hereunder and
the conduct of the operation thereof existing at the time of proposal submittal.
(12) FINANCIAL STATEMENT. If the applicant is a corporation, audited financial
statement for the 2 previous fiscal years. If the applicant is a partnership, copies of
the “U.S. Partnership Return of Income” (IRS Form 1065) for the 2 previous fiscal
years. If the applicant is a corporation, audited financial statement for the 2
previous fiscal years. If the applicant is a partnership, copies of the “U.S.
Partnership Return of Income” (IRS Form 1065) for the 2 previous fiscal years. If
the applicant is a sole proprietorship, copies of “U.S. Individual Tax Return” (IRS
Form 1040) for the 2 previous fiscal years.
(13) FINANCIAL PROJECTION. A 10 year operation proforma which shall include the
initial and continuing plant investment, annual profit and loss statements detailing
income and expenses, annual balance sheets and annual levels of subscriber
penetration. Costs and revenues anticipated for voluntary services shall, if
presented, be incorporated in the proforma as required in this chapter, but shall be
separately identified in the proforma.
(14) FINANCIAL SUPPORT. Suitable written evidence from a recognized financial
institution, addressed to both the applicant and to the City, advising that the
applicant’s financial ability and planned operation have been analyzed by the
institution and that the financing institution is prepared to make required funds
available to applicant, if awarded a franchise. If the planned operation is to be
internally financed, a board resolution shall be supplied authorizing the obtainment
and expenditure of such funds as are required to construct, install and operate the
CCS contemplated hereunder.
(15) TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. A technical description of the type of system
proposed.
(16) TECHNICAL STATEMENT. A state from the applicant’s senior technical staff
member or consultant advising that he has reviewed the network description. The
network technical standards, performance measurements, channels to be provided,
service standards, construction standards and conditions of street occupancy and
that the applicant’s planned network and operations thereof shall meet all the
requirements set forth therein.
(17) EXISTING, PENDING AND PROPOSED FRANCHISES. A statement of existing
pending and proposed franchises held or applied for by the applicant which the
applicant proposes to apply for, indicating as applicable when the franchises were
issued and when the systems were constructed and the present state of the system or
application in each respective governmental unit, together with the name, address
and telephone number of a responsible governmental official knowledgeable of the
applicant.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
8
(18) CONVICTIONS. A statement as to whether the applicant or any of its officers or
directors or holders of 5% or more of its voting stock has in the past 10 years been
convicted of or has charges pending for any crime other that a routine traffic
offense and the dispositions of each such case.
(19) OPERATING EXPERIENCE. A statement detailing the prior cable television
experience of the applicant including that of the applicant’s officers, management
and staff to be associated with the proposed operation.
(20) FRANCHISE RENEWAL INFORMATION. If an application is for renewal of a
franchise, the proposal shall include the following:
(a) A summary of the technical, financial, and programming history of the
network since the granting of the original franchise.
(b) A statement and timetable that outlines all proposed changes, expansion or
improvements in the system as to service, programming or technical
specifications during the forthcoming 5 year review period.
(21) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS. The application for a new franchise shall
respond specifically and in sequence to subs. (1) through (19) above and shall be
bound separately from any additional information proffered by the applicant. Six
copies of the application shall be supplied to the City. Supplementary, additional or
other information that the applicant deems reasonable for consideration may be
submitted at the same time as its application, but shall be separately bound and
submitted in the above number of copies. The City may at its discretion consider
such additional information as part of an application.
(22) SUPPLEMENTATION OF APPLICATION. The City may require such
supplementary, additional or other information that the City deems reasonable
necessary for its determinations. Such modifications, deletions, additions or
amendments to the application shall be considered only if specifically requested by
the City.
(23) REVIEW OF QUALIFICATIONS. Specific permission to operate a CCS under the
provisions of this Chapter may be granted by the City Council to any Grantee after
a review of the legal, character, financial and technical qualifications and the
adequacy and feasibility of the Grantee’s construction arrangements and after the
City Council has approved the Grantee’s qualifications as a part of a public
proceeding affording due process.
18.06 FRANCHISE REVIEW AND RENEWAL.
(1) PERFORMANCE REVIEW.
(a) On or about the second, fifth and tenth anniversaries of the effective date of
the franchise, the City shall schedule a public meeting or meetings with the
grantee to review the franchise performance, plans and prospects. The grantee
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
9
shall make available specified records, documents and information for this
purpose and the City may inquire in particular whether the grantee is
supplying a level and variety of services equivalent to those being generally
offered at that time in the industry in comparable market situations.
(b) Topics for discussion and review at both the regular and special review
sessions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: services, rate
structure, free or discounted services, application for new technologies,
system performance, services provided, programming, subscriber complaints,
user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to this agreement, under
grounding processes and developments in the law.
(2) REVISING FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The City shall confer with the grantee regarding any modifications in the
franchise which might impose additional obligations on the grantee, and the
grantee may in turn seek to negotiate relations in any requirements imposed
on it which are shown to be impractical.
(b) Within 30 days of the conclusions of such negotiations, the City may direct
the grantee to show cause why specified terms and conditions should not be
incorporated into the franchise and the grantee may similarly file with the City
a written request that specified obligations of its franchise be removed or
relaxed. Implementation of such requests shall correspond with the
procedures set forth in SS18.14 (3). The Council will order changes in the
franchised rights and obligations of the grantee only if it finds from all
available evidence that such changes will not impair the economic viability of
the system or degrade the attractiveness of the system’s service to present and
potential subscribers.
(3) FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
(a) The City shall determine whether to renew a franchise granted under this
ordinance in the event that the grantee files a written request for such a
renewal. The grantee shall submit such a request no sooner than 36 months
before the expiration of the franchise. At the time of such request, the City
may revise this ordinance, reevaluate the needs of the community for cable
service, and review the performance of the grantee.
(b) To the extent applicable, the Cable Act shall govern the procedures and
standards for renewal of any franchise awarded pursuant to this ordinance.
(c) To the extent that the Cable Act is not applicable, the City in its sole
discretion and judgment shall have the right to grant, deny or conditionally
grant renewal of a franchise, provided that the City shall not unreasonably
refuse to renew the franchise or unreasonably condition the renewal. The
conditions the City may place on its approval shall include, but are not limited
to: updating the ordinance and surveying community cable needs, remedy of
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
10
historical or existing violations of the franchise or ordinance; payment of all
fees and penalties owed by the grantee at the time of the renewal; acceptance
of any updated ordinance; and acceptance of any updated franchise
agreement.
18.07 SIGNIFICANCE OF FRANCHISE.
(1) FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE. The franchise shall not be exclusive and the City
reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any person, firm, company,
corporation or association at any time.
(2) FRANCHISE AMENDABLE. The scope of the franchise shall be deemed
amendable from time to time to allow the grantee to innovate and implement new
services and developments; provided, however, that no such services or developments
be implemented without the expressed prior approval of the City Council.
(3) PRIVILEGES MUST BE SPECIFIED. No privilege or exemption shall be inferred
from the granting of the franchise unless it is specifically prescribed.
(4) AUTHORITY GRANTED. The franchise shall give to the grantee the right and
privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon, along, above,
over and under streets, as defined in SS18.02, which have been or may hereafter be
dedicated and open to public use in the City, towers, antennas, poles, cables,
electronic equipment, and other network appurtenances necessary for the operation of
a CCS in the City, subject to SS18.29 of this chapter.
(5) MORTGAGE OR PLEDGE OF SYSTEM. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to prohibit the mortgage or the pledge of the system or any part thereof. However,
any such mortgage or pledge shall be subject to and subordinate to the right of the
City under this franchise or applicable law.
(6) PREVIOUS RIGHTS ABANDONED. The franchise shall be in lieu of any and all
other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed,
controlled or exercisable by the grantee or any successor pertaining to the
construction, operation or maintenance of a cable communications system in the City.
The acceptance of the franchise shall operate, as between grantee and the City, as an
abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and
authorities within the City. All construction, operation and maintenance by the
grantee of any cable system in the privilege, power, immunity or authority, except as
granted by applicable state or federal law.
(7) SUBJECT TO OTHER REGULATORY AGENCIES RULES AND
REGULATIONS. The grantee shall at all times during the life of the franchise be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the City and other duly
authorized regulatory State and Federal bodies and shall comply with any and all
codes which the City has adopted or shall adopt applying to the public generally and
to other grantees.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
11
(8) COMPLIANCE TO LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS. In the event any valid
law, rule or regulation of any governing authority or agency having jurisdiction,
including but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission, contravenes
the provisions of this chapter subsequent to its adoption, then the provision hereof
shall be superseded by any such valid law, rule, or regulation to the extent that the
provisions hereof are in conflict and contrary to any such law, rule or regulation.
(9) POLE USE AGREEMENTS REQUIRED. The franchise shall not relieve the
grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole – or conduit – use agreements
from the gas, electric and telephone companies, or others maintaining poles or
conduits in the streets of the City, whenever the grantee finds it necessary to make use
of such poles or conduits.
(10) NO RIGHT OF PROPERTY. Anything contained herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the franchise shall not impart to the grantee any right of property in
or on City-owned property.
(11) FRANCHISE BINDING. Anything contained herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, all provisions of this chapter shall be binding upon the grantee, its
successors, lessees or assignees.
18.08 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL.
(1) TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE. Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be a
privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Any franchise so granted cannot, in
any event, be sold, Transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of by any method,
including, but not limited to, forced or voluntary sale, merger, or consolidation, either
in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the City, and then only under
such reasonable conditions as the City may establish. Such consent as required by the
City, shall be given or denied no later than 120 days following any request, and shall
not be unreasonably withheld. Prior consent shall not be required when transferring
the franchise between wholly-owned subsidiaries of the same entity.
(2) NOTICE TO CITY ON 20% CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. The
Grantee shall promptly notify the City in writing of any proposed change in or
transfer of, control of the Grantee. For the purpose of this Subsection, a change in, or
transfer of, control shall occur on the acquisition or transfer by any person of twenty
(20) percent or more of the beneficial ownership interest in the grantee.
(3) CONSENT OF CITY REQUIRED ON 51% CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR
CONTROL. In the event that any person or group of persons acquires or transfers
51% or more of the beneficial ownership interest in the Grantee, Grantee’s franchise
shall be subject to cancellation unless and until the City shall have consented in
writing to the acquisition or transfer. The City shall have consented in writing to the
acquisition or transfer. The City shall give or deny consent no later than one hundred
and twenty (120) days after receiving written notice of the acquisition or transfer.
The City’s consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
12
determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control,
the City may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and
the Grantee shall assist the City in any such inquiry.
(4) GRANTEE’S RESPONSIBILITIES. In seeking the grantee’s consent to any change
in ownership or control, the grantee shall have the responsibility to do the following:
(a) To show to the satisfaction of the City whether the proposed purchaser,
transferee, or assignee (the “proposed transferee”), which in the case of a
corporation, shall include all directors and all persons having a legal or
equitable interest of 5% or more of the voting stock (¡) has ever been
convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude including, but not
limited to, any violation of Federal, State or local law or regulations, or is
presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts:
(ii) has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation
entered against it, her, him or them by any court of competent jurisdiction; or
(iii) has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising
out of or involving a cable system.
(b) To establish, to the satisfaction of the City, the financial solvency of the
proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed
transferee which the grantee was required to submit in its franchise
application, and such other data as the City may request, where the same shall
be audited, certified and qualified by the certified public accountant.
(c) To establish to the satisfaction of the City, that the financial and technical
capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and
operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the
existing franchise terms.
(5) RIGHTS OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS. Any financial institution having a
pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the
construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the City
that the financial institution, or its designee, as approved in writing by the City, shall
take control and operate the cable system in the event of a grantee default in its
financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for
such operation that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise
requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the
system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a
period exceeding 1 year unless extended by the City in its discretion, but during said
period of time it shall have the right to petition the City to transfer the franchise to
another grantee. Except insofar as the enforceability of this subsection may be
limited by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar
laws affecting creditors’ rights generally, and further subject to applicable federal,
state or local law, if the City find that such transfer, after considering the legal,
financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the proposed
transferee, is satisfactory, the City shall transfer and assign the right and obligations
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
13
of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the City to such transfer
shall be given or denied no less than 120 days after any request, and shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
(6) EFFECT OF CITY’S CONSENT TO TRANSFER. The consent or approval of the
City to any transfer by the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights
of the City in and to the streets, and any transfer shall be its terms, be expressly
subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise.
(7) CITY’S RIGHT TO PURCHASE SYSTEM. The City shall be entitled to a right of
first refusal of any bona fide offer to purchase the CCS made to the grantee. Bona
fide offer as used in this section means a written offer which has been accepted by
grantee subject to the City’s rights under this franchise. The price to be paid by the
City shall be the price of the bona fide offer at the same terms and conditions as the
bona fide offer. The City shall notify grantee of its decision to purchase within 90
days of the City’s receipt from the grantee offer.
18.09 OPERATION OF FRANCHISE.
(1) OPERATIONS TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES. The grantee shall
maintain and operate its CCS in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
FCC, the State of Wisconsin and the City as are applicable or may be promulgated.
(2) INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE; NOTIFICATION. The grantee, whenever it is
necessary to interrupt service over the CCS for the purpose of maintenance, alteration
or repair, shall do so at such times as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to
the subscribers, and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately
necessary, the grantee shall give reasonable notice thereof to the affected subscribers.
(3) LOCAL PAYMENT CENTER. The Grantee shall maintain a local payment center,
which shall be open during normal business hours. This payment center shall accept
subscriber payments, handle new subscriptions, disconnections and adjustments to
subscriber bills, respond to installation, repair, and/or maintenance requests, and
handle equipment returns.
(4) REPAIR SERVICES. The grantee shall maintain a repair and maintenance crew
capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service as specified in
SS18.27. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for this service, except as
authorized by F.C.C. regulations, and state and federal law.
(5) SERVICE INFORMATION. The grantee shall furnish each subscriber at the time
service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth procedures, furnish
information concerning the procedure for making inquiries or complaints, including
the name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent
to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed and furnish information
concerning the City Office responsible for administration of the franchise with the
address and telephone number of the office.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
14
(6) SERVICE RECORDS MAINTAINED. The grantee shall at all times make and keep
a list of all complaints and interruptions or degradation of service received or
experienced during the term of franchise at its office in the City. The records
maintained above shall also include complaint response time and service restoral
period and shall be continuously open to inspection, examination or audit by any
dually authorized representative of the City. Records must be kept five (5) years.
(7) GRANTEE RULES AND REGULATIONS. The grantee shall have the authority to
promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its
business as shall be reasonable and necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its
rights and perform its obligations under this chapter.
(a) Rules to Be in Conformance with Other Regulations. No such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions promulgated under (7) above shall be in
conflict with the provisions hereof or the laws of the State, or the Rules and
Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, or any rules and
regulations promulgated by the City in the exercise of its regulatory authority.
(b) All Rules to Be Filed with City. Two copies of all rules, regulations, terms
and conditions promulgated under (7) above, together with any amendments,
additions or deletions thereto, shall be kept currently on file with the City
Clerk and another copy thereof shall be maintained for public inspection
during normal business hours at grantee’s office in the City; (i.e., the local
payment center) no such rules, regulations, terms, conditions, or amendments,
additions or deletions thereto shall take effect unless and until so filed and
maintained.
(8) SUBSCRIBERS’ ANTENNAS. The grantee shall not require the removal, or offer
to remove or provide any inducements for removal of any potential or existing
subscriber’s antenna as a condition of provision of service.
(9) SALE OR SERVICE OF TELEVISION RECEIVERS. Neither the grantee during
the period of the franchise nor any of its affiliated, subsidiary, parent organizations,
officers or directors or stockholders holding 5% or more of outstanding stock of the
grantee, shall within the corporate limits of the City or within 10 miles in any
direction, directly or indirectly, engage in the retail sale, renting, leasing, or repairing
of radio or television receivers or their appurtenances, nor shall they require any
subscriber to utilize the services of any specific television/radio service business for
the repair or maintenance of the subscriber’s receivers, either radio or television.
(10) ANTENNA SWITCH. The grantee, upon request from any subscriber, shall install
at a reasonable charge therefor, a switching device so as to permit a subscriber to
continue to utilize his own television antenna as he chooses.
18.10 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.
(1) RIGHT OF AMENDMENT RESERVED TO CITY. The City may from time to
time, add to, modify or delete provisions of this charter as it shall deem necessary in
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
15
the exercise of its regulatory powers provided that such additions or revisions are
reasonable and do not place an undue financial burden on the grantee. Such additions
or revisions shall be made only after a public hearing for which the grantee shall have
received written notice at least 30 days prior to such hearing.
(2) NO IMPAIRMENT OF CITY’S RIGHTS. Nothing herein shall be deemed or
construed to impair or affect, in any way to any extent, the right of the City to
acquire the property of the grantee through the exercise of the right of eminent
domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise
itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing shall be construed to
contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City’s
right to eminent domain.
(3) GRANTEE AGREES TO CITY’S RIGHTS. The City reserves every right and
power which is required to be reserved or provided by any ordinance of the City, and
the grantee by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to
comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or
powers which have been or may be enacted or established.
(4) CITY’S RIGHT OF INTERVENTION. The City shall have the right to intervene
and the grantee specifically agrees by its acceptance of the franchise not to oppose
such intervention by the City in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a
party.
(5) POWERS OF THE CITY. Neither the granting of the franchise nor any provision
governing the franchise shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any
governmental right or power of the City.
(6) CITY’S RIGHT OF INSPECTION. The City reserves the right during the life of the
franchise to inspect and supervise all construction or installation work performed
subject to the provisions of this chapter and to perform system measurements to
insure compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(7) CITY’S RIGHT OF ACQUISITION. Upon expiration of the term of the franchise,
or revocation, or other termination as provided by law, or upon receipt of application
for approval of an assignment of the franchise or upon charge of defacto control, the
City shall have a right to purchase the CCS as set forth in SS18.13 and in SS18.09(6)
herein.
(8) CITY’S RIGHT OF CCS INSTALLATION. The City reserves the right during the
life of the franchise to install and maintain free of charge upon or in the poles and
conduits of the grantee any wire and pole fixtures necessary for municipal
subsystems on the condition that such installation and maintenance thereof does not
interfere with the operation of the grantee.
(9) CITY’S TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE. Any right or power in or duty imposed
upon any elected official, officer, employee, department or board of the City shall be
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
16
subject to transfer by the City to any other elected official, officer, employee,
department or board.
18.11 ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE.
(1) EFFECTIVE DATE. The franchise(s) provided for in this chapter shall take effect
and be in force after the 30th day following the execution of a franchise agreement
between the City and the grantee, provided that within those 30 days, the grantee shall
file with the City the following:
(a) A notarized statement by the grantee of unconditional acceptance of the
franchise.
(b) A certificate of insurance as required in Section 18.17(4).
(c) A performance bond as required in Section 18.19.
(2) GRANTEE TO HAVE NO RECOURSE. The grantee shall have no recourse
whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any
provision or requirement of this chapter or its regulation or from the City’s exercise
of its authority to grant additional franchises.
(3) ACCEPTANCE OF POWER AND AUTHORITY OF CITY. The grantee expressly
acknowledges that in accepting the franchise it has relied upon its own investigation
and understanding of the power and authority of the City to grant this franchise.
(4) INDUCEMENTS NOT OFFERED. The grantee by acceptance of the franchise
acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into this franchise by any
understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on
behalf of the City concerning any term or condition of this franchise that is not
included in this chapter.
(5) GRANTEE ACCEPTS TERMS OF FRANCHISE. The grantee acknowledges by
the acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read its terms and conditions and
it is willing to and does accept all the obligations of such terms and conditions and
further agrees that it will not, prior to substantial completion of the system, set up as
against the City the claim that any provision of this chapter as adopted, is
unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid or void.
(6) INCORPORATION OF PROPOSALS. The grantee, by the acceptance of the
franchise, agrees that the matters contained in the grantee’s proposal and as stated in
oral presentation and supplemental correspondence, except as inconsistent with
Federal and State rules and regulations or law, shall be incorporated into this chapter
as though set out verbatim.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
17
18.12 TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.
(1) PERFORMANCE OR PROPOSAL BOND. The City reserves the right to revoke
the franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated with the franchise in the
following circumstances:
(a) If the grantee should default in the performance of any of its obligations under
this chapter or under the franchise agreement.
(b) If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the
performance bond and liability and indemnification coverages as required in
SS18.19, and 18.17 respectively.
(c) If a petition is filed by or against the grantee under the Bankruptcy Act, or any
other insolvency or creditors’ rights law, State or federal, and the grantee shall
fail to have it dismissed.
(d) If a receiver, trustee or liquidator of the grantee is applied for or appointed for
all or part of its assets.
(e) If the grantee makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors.
(f) If the grantee should violate any orders or rules of any regulatory body having
jurisdiction over the grantee unless the grantee is lawfully contesting the
legality or applicability of such order or ruling.
(g) If the grantee fails to receive the necessary FCC authorization within a
reasonable period of time, unless such cause is directly attributable to an
action or condition imposed by the City.
(h) If the grantee knowingly and with intent to deceive makes any false,
misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in its proposal for a franchise or
other reports or information provided to the City, other regulatory agencies or
subscribers.
(2) REVOCATION PROCEDURE. Upon the occurrence of any of the events
enumerated in (1) of this section, the following procedures shall be followed:
(a) The grantee shall be provided with a written notice of the alleged default,
describing the alleged default in as much detail as possible.
(b) The grantee shall have 30 calendar days to correct the alleged default or deny
that such alleged default exists.
(c) If the alleged default is denied to exist, or if no satisfactory corrective action
is undertaken within the 30 day period, the grantee shall be afforded a public
hearing, with 20 days advance notice, before the City Council in order to
respond to the allegation of default. The public shall be permitted to speak at
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
18
such hearing, and the hearing may be continued from time to time as
appropriate.
(d) The City Council shall conclude the hearing with a finding that the grantee is
in default or is not in default.
(e) If the City Council determines that there is a default, the grantee shall be
granted an additional amount of time as the City Council shall deem
reasonable to correct the default to the satisfaction of the City Council.
(f) At the conclusion of such reasonable period, the City Council shall again at
the public meeting determine whether the default has been satisfactorily
corrected, and if it has not, the franchise granted under authority of this
chapter may be immediately resolved to be revoked without further notice or
hearing.
(3) PURCHASE OF SYSTEM BY CITY ON NONRENEWAL.
(a) If the City determines not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall first offer
the CCS for sale to the City at fair market value, determined on the basis of
the CCS valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise
itself.
(b) If the determination of fair market value cannot be negotiated or determined,
the value shall be determined by an impartial appraisal procedure pursuant to
Ch. 788, Wis. Stats., wherein the grantee and the City shall each choose an
appraiser and the appraisers chosen shall choose a third appraiser and the
valuation determined by such appraisers shall be considered the fair market
value at which the system will be offered to the City. The determination of
the value of the system shall be decreased by the determination of the value of
the system shall be decreased by the amount of any damages sustained by the
City in connection with nonrenewal, including without limitation, payment
made by the City to another person or entity to operate the CCS for a
temporary period after nonrenewal. The cost of the appraisal procedure shall
be shared equally by the City and grantee.
(4) PURCHASE OF SYSTEM BY CITY ON REVOCATION.
(a) If the City revokes the franchise for cause, the grantee shall first offer the
CCS for sale to the City at an equitable price.
(b) If the determination of any equitable price cannot be negotiated or
determined, the price shall be determined by an impartial appraisal procedure
pursuant to Ch. 788, Wis. Stats., wherein the grantee and the City shall each
choose an appraiser and the appraisers chosen shall choose a third appraiser
and the price determined by such appraisers shall be considered the equitable
price at which the system will be offered to the City. The determination of the
price of the system shall be decreased y the amount of any damages sustained
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
19
by the City in connection with revocation, including without limitation,
payment made by the City to another person or entity to operate the CCS for a
temporary period after revocation. The cost of the appraisal procedure shall
be shared equally by the City and grantee.
(c) The City shall have 90 days commencing on the day the equitable price of the
system is determined either through negotiation or the appraisal procedure to
exercise its option to purchase. If the City does not exercise its option to
purchase, and the CCS is not sold to another operator who has obtained a
franchise from the City, the grantee, upon request by the City, shall promptly
remove all its plant, structures and equipment. While transfer of the system
and franchise is being negotiated, arranged or ordered, the grantee may be
required to continue service to the public unless for reasons beyond the
control of the grantee such operation will be economically infeasible to the
grantee.
(5) RESTORATION OF PROPERTY. In removing its plant, structures and equipment,
the grantee shall refill at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and
shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to
the company’s removal of its equipment and appliances, without affecting the electric
or telephone cables, wires or attachments. The City shall inspect and approve the
condition of the public ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and
poles after removal. Liability insurance and indemnity provided in SS18.17 and the
performance bond in SS18.19 shall continue in full force and effect during the period
of removal.
(6) RESTORATION BY CITY, REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS. If the grantee fails to
complete any work required by (4) above or any work required by City law or
ordinance within the time established and to the satisfaction of the City, the City may
cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the City the costs thereof
within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the City may recover
such costs as provided in SS18.19.
(7) EXPIRATION; EXTENDED OPERATION. Upon the expiration of the franchise
the City may by resolution, on its own motion or request of the grantee, require the
Grantee to operate the franchise for an extended period of time not to exceed 6
months from the date of any such resolution. All provisions of the franchise shall
continue to apply to operations during an extension period. The City shall serve
written notice at least 30 days prior to expiration of the original franchise or any
extensions thereof.
18.13 REGULATORY JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURES.
(1) CONTINUING REGULATORY JURISDICTION. The City shall have continuing
regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of the franchise and may
from time to time adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary for the conduct of the business contemplated thereunder.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
20
(2) REGULATORY BOARD. The continuing regulatory jurisdiction of the City shall
be exercised through the Regulatory Board. The Board shall have the responsibilities
and duties set forth in SS18.03.
(3) REGULATORY PROCEDURES. The Regulatory Board shall consider any inquiry
or proceeding requiring City Council action in accordance with normal City Council
procedures.
(4) FAILURE TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS. The grantee shall not be excused from
complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the
City upon one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such
terms or conditions.
(5) CONTRAVENTION OF PROVISIONS. The City may at its option, and in its sole
discretion, impose a liquidated damages in the amount of $5,000 penalty on the
grantee whose action or failure to act causes the City to bring a court action to enforce
any provision of this Chapter or the franchise agreement provided that the City’s
enforcement action is successful.
18.14 REPORTS AND RECORDS OF THE GRANTEE.
(1) ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORTS REQUIRED. The grantee shall file annually
with the City Clerk, not later than 3 months after the end of its fiscal year during
which it accepted this franchise and within 3 months after the end of each subsequent
fiscal year, 2 copies of:
(a) The report to its stockholders;
(b) An income statement identifying revenues, expenses and income applicable to
its operations under this franchise during the fiscal year or fraction thereof
and;
(c) A listing of his properties devoted to network operations together with an
itemization of its investment in each of such properties on the basis of original
cost, less depreciation. These reports shall include a balance sheet, listing of
substantial liabilities and such other reasonable information as the City may
request, and shall be certified by a certified public accountant.
(2) ANNUAL FACILITIES REPORTS. Upon request, the grantee shall file with the
City Clerk, within 30 days, 2 copies of a total facilities report setting forth the total
physical miles of plant installed or in operation during the fiscal year, a map showing
the location of same, and a current annual statement of cost of construction by
component category.
(3) ANNUAL SERVICE RECORD REPORT. Upon request, the grantee shall file with
the City Clerk, within 30 days, 2 copies of a list of all trouble complaints and system
“downtime” received or experienced during the fiscal year. All such submitted data
shall also include complaint disposition and response time. For the purposes of this
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
21
provision, certified copies of a “complaint” logbook reflecting all such incidents will
suffice. Also, if requested by the City, uncertified additions to the annual complaint
log shall be supplied in 2 copies to the City at intervals of not more than 90 days
following the filing of the annual report.
(4) ANNUAL MEASUREMENTS REPORT. Upon the request, the grantee shall file
with the City Clerk, within 30 days, 2 copies of a report on the system technical
measurements.
(5) ANNUAL OPERATIONS REPORTS. Upon the request, the grantee shall file with
the City Clerk, within 30 days, 2 copies of the following supplemental information:
(a) If a nonpublic corporation, a list of all current shareholders and bondholders
both of record or beneficial. If a public corporation, a list of all shareholders
who individually or as a concerted group hold 5% or more of the voting stock
of the corporation.
(b) A current list of all grantee’s officers and directors including addresses and
telephone numbers.
(c) Copies of all pertinent agreements or contracts, including pole-use
agreements, entered into by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of
its business under a franchise granted hereunder.
(d) The names of both business and residential addresses and telephone numbrs
of CCS resident manager and engineer.
(e) Two copies of all types of subscriber agreements. Copies of individual
subscribers’ agreements are not to be filed with the City.
(f) Copies of all rules and regulations promulgated by the grantee during the
fiscal year in the conduct of its business in accordance with the provisions of
SS18.10.
(g) A copy of the annual report of the parent firm which owns an interest of more
than 5% or more of the voting stock of the grantee, and such other annual
report of subsidiaries or divisions of the parent firm as the City deems
necessary.
(6) ANNUAL PROJECTED PLANS REPORT.
(a) Projected plans for the future including a projected plan of construction for
the next 2 years.
(7) REGISTRATION WITH THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.
The grantee shall give formal notice to the City that it is registering with the Federal
Communications Commission. Within 5 calendar days upon filing such registration
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
22
with the Federal Communications, the grantee shall file 2 copies of its registration
with the City Clerk.
(8) PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF REPORTS. Such reports as required under this
chapter must be available to the public in the office of the City Clerk, during normal
business hours. Subscribers shall be notified of the availability of such reports in
ways approved by the Regulatory Board.
(9) CORRESPONDENCE. The grantee shall simultaneously file with the City Clerk a
copy of each petition, application and communications transmitted by the grantee to,
or received by the grantee from, any federal, State or regulatory commissions or
agencies having competent jurisdiction to regulate and pertaining to the operations of
the CCS.
(10) CITY’S ACCESS TO RECORDS.
(a) The City reserves the right during the life of this franchise to have access,
including the right to copy, at all normal business hours and upon the giving
of reasonable notice, to the grantee’s contracts, engineering plans, accounting,
financial data, and service records relating to the property and the operations
of the grantee and to all other records required to be kept hereunder. Nothing
contained herein shall prevent the grantee from enjoining the City from
reviewing documents relating to proprietary interests not related to its
operation under this chapter in the City’s regulatory program.
(b) Records of subscriber lists and statistical data not otherwise required by this
chapter shall be made available only upon a ruling by a judge of competent
jurisdiction that such records are material to the City’s regulatory program.
(11) GRANTEE’S AGREEMENTS. The form of grantee’s agreements with its
subscribers shall be subject to the approval of the City Council and 2 copies of all
types of agreements used by the grantee shall be filed and maintained with the City
Clerk.
18.15 FRANCHISE PAYMENT.
(1) ACCEPTANCE FEE FOR NEW FRANCHISE. Upon the grant of a new franchise,
the grantee shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs – including but not
limited to attorney and consultant fees – incurred by the City relating to the grant of
the new franchise.
(2) ANNUAL FRANCHISE PAYMENT. The grantee shall pay to the City a franchise
fee in the amount designated in the franchise agreement. Unless otherwise specified
in the franchise agreement, such franchise fee shall be 5% of the grantee’s gross
revenues, or such other maximum amount as allowed by law. In the event that the
change in either state or federal law would allow the City to increase the franchise
fee above 5% of the grantee’s gross revenues, the grantee shall not be liable for such
increase until the City shall give grantee written notice of such change in the law.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
23
The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other payment owed to the
City by the grantee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of municipal
property taxes or other state, county or local taxes.
(3) METHOD OF COMPUTATIONS; INTEREST.
(a) Sales taxes or other taxes levied directly on a per subscription basis and
collected by the grantee shall be deducted from the local annual gross
revenues before computation of sums due the City is made. Payments due the
City under the provisions of (2) above shall be computed annually as of
December 31 for the preceding year and shall be paid simultaneously with the
filing of annual reports required in SS18.15 at the Office of the City Clerk
during his regular business hours. The City shall be furnished a statement
with each payment, reflecting the local amounts of annual gross revenues, and
the above charges, deductions and computations, for the annual payment
period covered by the payment.
(b) If any payment is not made as required, interest on the amount due, as
determined from the annual gross revenues as computed shall accrue from the
date of the required submittal at an annual rate of 12%. The grantee shall pay
an additional compensation to the City if the payment is late by 45 days or
more. Such additional compensation shall be equal to 2% of the amount due
in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the City by
reason of the delinquent payment.
(c) The percentage designated in this section may be amended no more than once
each year by the City Council, consistent with increased costs for municipal
facilities and supervision and applicable rules of other regulatory agencies.
(4) RIGHTS OF RECOMPUTATION. No acceptance of any payment by the City shall
be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may
have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for
the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. All amounts paid shall be
subject to audit and recomputation by the City.
(5) ALTERNATIVE FEE BASIS. In the event the franchise fee or payment established
under this chapter is ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable, the City may impose
and collect an equivalent charge on any legally permissible basis, provided such
charge does not exceed the previously allowed limit on franchise fees and payments.
18.16 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
(1) INDEMNIFICATION OF FRANCHISE. It is expressly understood and agreed by
and between the City and the grantee that the grantee shall save the City harmless
from all loss sustained by the City on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim
or demand which the City may legally be required to pay as a result of the enactment
of this chapter and the award of the franchise.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
24
(2) INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY IN FRANCHISE OPERATION. It is expressly
understood and agreed by and between the City and the grantee that the grantee shall
save the City and its agents and employees harmless from and against all claims,
damages, losses and expenses, including attorney’s fees sustained by the City on
account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of
but not limited to copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the
installation, operation, or maintenance of the CCS authorized herein, whether or not
any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
chapter. This provision shall not apply to acts of the City, its agents or employees.
(3) REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS. The grantee shall pay and be his acceptance of
this franchise agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the City in defending
itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in (1) and (2) above. These
expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as consultants or attorney
fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the City
Attorney or his staff or any other employee of the City.
(4) LIABILITY INSURANCE. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the
franchise, and any extensions thereto, or as required in SS18.13 herein, the insurance
policies described below. Such policies shall name as the additional insured the City,
its officer, boards, commissions, agents and employees, shall be primary to any
insurance carried by the City, and shall be obtained from a company or companies
approved by the Regulatory Board and in a form satisfactory to the Board. Such
policies shall be in amounts at least as follows:
(a) Comprehensive General Liability Insurance. General Comprehensive
Liability Insurance containing the following coverages: Premises/Operation;
Products/Completed Operation; Board Form Property Damage; Contractual
Liability; Coverage for Explosion, Collapse and Underground Hazards; and
Pollution Control Liability. The policy shall include limits of not less than
$1,000,000 for bodily injury (including death) and property damage for each
occurrence of not less than $2,000,000 in the aggregate.
(b) Worker’s Compensation. Worker’s Compensation Insurance in compliance
with Section 102.31 of the Wisconsin Statutes and in compliance with the
laws of each state having jurisdiction over each employee.
(c) Comprehensive Automobile Liability. Comprehensive Automobile Liability
including owned, non-owned, and hired vehicles with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 for bodily injury (including death) and $1,000,000 for bodily
injury (including death) and $1,000,000 for property damage for each
occurrence.
(d) Umbrella Liability. Umbrella Liability with limits of not less than
$8,000,000, which shall carry the following endorsement:
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
25
It is hereby understood and agreed that despite anything to the contrary where
underlying insurance, as described herein, provides greater protection or
indemnity to the insured than the terms and conditions of this policy, this
insurance shall pay on behalf of the insured the same terms, conditions and
coverages which apply to the basic underlying insurance. Where no such boarder
underlying insurance exists, this policy shall pay n behalf of the insured upon
terms and conditions and limitations of the carrier’s umbrella excess policy.
(5) NOTICE OF CANCELLATION OF REDUCTION OF COVERAGE. The insurance
policies mentioned above shall contain an endorsement stating that the policies are
extended to cover the liability assumed by the grantee under the terms of this chapter
and shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
amount of coverage thereof reduced until 30 days after receipt by the City Clerk by
registered mail of 2 copies of a written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the
coverage.
(6) EVIDENCE OF INSURANCE FILED WITH CITY INSURANCE ADVISOR. All
policies of insurance or certified copies thereof and written evidence of payment of
required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the City Insurance advisor
during the term of the franchise or any renewal thereof.
(7) NO WAIVER OF PERFORMANCE BOND. Neither the provisions of this chapter
nor any insurance accepted by the City pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered
by the City thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the
grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under this franchise or for damages, either
to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
18.17 PROPOSAL BOND.
(1) PROPOSAL BOND REQUIRED. Each applicant for the franchise hereunder shall
submit a proposal bond in a form acceptable to the City Attorney or a certified check
on a bank that is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, payable to
the order of the City in the amount of $10,000.
(2) FORFEIT OF PROPOSAL BOND. Should the applicant fail or refuse to accept a
franchise hereunder or fail or refuse to furnish the performance bond as set forth in
SS.18.19 within 30 days after written notification of the award of a franchise by the
City, such applicant will be considered to have abandoned the proposal and the City
shall enforce the proposal bond in accordance with its terms or to retain the proceeds
of the certified check.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
26
(3) RETURN OF PROPOSAL BOND. Proposal Bonds or certified checks received in
lieu thereof and written evidence of payment of required premium shall be filed and
maintained with the City Clerk during the term of any franchise granted hereunder or
any renewal thereof.
(4) BOND EVIDENCE TO BE FILED WITH CITY. Two copies of all bonds or
certified copies thereof and written evidence of payment of required premium shall be
filed and maintained with the City Clerk during the term of any franchise granted
hereunder or any renewal thereof.
18.18 PERFORMANCE BOND.
(1) In the event of the construction of a new cable system or if required by the Franchise
Agreement upon the rebuilding of all or a major part of the current cable
communications system, a faithful performance bond running to the City in the penal
sum of $100,000, conditional upon the faithful performance of the grantee of the
pledged construction or system rebuilt shall be maintained throughout the period of
construction until the project is judged completed by the Cable Commission.
(2) Two copies of the performance bond or certified copies thereof and written evidence
of payment of required premium shall be filed and maintained with the City Clerk.
18.19 RATES.
(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES. The grantee shall establish rates for its services
which shall be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis in the service area, except for
commercial and bulk account rates, which are negotiated individually. Pursuant to
federal law, the City reserves the right to assume regulation of rates paid by cable
subscribers; if so assumed, such rate regulation shall be performed by the City
Council in accordance with FCC Rules and Regulations “Part 76, Subpart N.” As
specified by the FCC’s Rules (Part 76, Subpart N), such rate regulation shall cover
basic service rates and customer premises installations and equipment rates (including
charges for, but not limited to: converter boxes, remote control units, connections for
additional television receivers and other cable home wiring).
(2) RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO REGULATE RATES. The City reserves the right
to further regulate rates pursuant to any additional powers granted it by either the
FCC or federal or state law.
(3) RATE REGULATION PROCEDURES. In the event that the City assumes rate
regulatory powers pursuant to the Cable Act, the following shall apply:
(a) Initial Procedures. The City shall notify the grantee of the City’s FCC
certification and of the City’s adoption of rate regulations which are consistent
with the FCC regulations and which provide for a reasonable opportunity for
consideration of the views of interested parties. Upon receipt of such
notification by the grantee, basic service regulation shall become effective.
The grantee shall be prohibited from raising basic service rates without the
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
27
approval of the City Council, and the grantee shall, within 30 days, submit for
review its basic service, installation and equipment rates and supporting
documentation using either the FCC’s benchmark calculations or the FCC’s
cost-of-service standards.
(b) Proprietary Information. To aid in the evaluation of the grantee’s proposed
rates, the City Council may require the production of proprietary information,
and in such cases will apply procedures analogous to those set forth in FCC
regulations, and consistent with federal and state law.
(c) Refunds. As specified in the FCC regulations, the City Council may order the
grantee to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates which
have been found to be unreasonable. Before ordering the grantee to refund
previously paid rates to subscribers, the City Council shall give the grantee
notice and opportunity to comment.
(d) Basic Service Rate Increases and Equipment Charges. The grantee shall not
file for increases in equipment charges and/or basic service rates more often
than allowed under FCC regulations. All subsequent requests by the grantee
for increases in equipment changes and/or basic service rates shall be subject
to the procedures outlined in this section.
(e) Service Disconnection. A subscriber shall have the right to have its service
disconnected without charge, except such charges as may be allowable under
F.C.C. rules or state or federal law, which shall include the removal of any
equipment owned by the grantee from the subscriber's residence. Such
disconnection shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case later than 30
days following written notice to the grantee of same. No grantee shall enter
into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge following
disconnection of service, except for reconnection and subsequent monthly or
periodic charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new
customers. This section shall not prevent a grantee from refusing service to
any person because of the grantee’s prior accounts with that person which
remain due and owing.
18.20 SERVICES, FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT, CHANNEL CAPACITY.
(1) SERVICES PROVIDED. The grantee shall provide, at a minimum, the initial
services listed in the franchise agreement. Such services shall include, but not be
limited to, basic cable service and additional services, as defined herein. Services
shall not be reduced without prior notification to the City.
(2) FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT PROVIDED. The grantee shall provide, at a
minimum, the initial facilities and equipment listed in the franchise agreement.
(3) PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT (PEG) ACCESS FACILITIES.
The grantee shall provide the PEG access facilities, including channel capacity,
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
28
necessary interface equipment and cabling to permit operation as specified in the
franchise agreement.
(4) PROGRAMMING PROVIDED. The grantee shall provide, at a minimum, the
categories of video programming listed in the franchise agreement.
(5) LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNELS. If local origination programming is
provided, the grantee shall operate any cable casting studios on a high-quality,
professional basis for the purpose of providing cable cast programming responsive to
local needs and interests.
(6) CABLE CHANNEL FOR COMMERCIAL USE. The grantee shall designate
channel capacity for commercial use as required by the Cable Act and applicable law.
18.21 EXTENSION OF SERVICE.
(1) SYSTEM EXTENSION IN ANNEXED AREAS. The grantee shall extend its cable
system to provide full service to all residents of newly annexed areas within a
reasonable length of time after such annexation, not to exceed six months, where a
density of 25 potential subscribers per cable mile can be obtained. Notwithstanding,
the density requirement the grantee shall extend and make available cable
communicating services to any dwelling unit within 300 feet of existing cable plant.
(2) SYSTEM EXTENSION ACROSS CITY BOUNDARIES.
(a) Before any subscriber located in a community other than the City is
allowed to connect to the CCS, the grantee shall be capable of furnishing
service to a “substantially completed” system for City residents unless a
waiver of this section has been granted by the City Council.
(b) A written waiver request must be made 30 days before requesting an
appearance before the City Council. Such waiver request shall clearly state
the potential impact of such occurrence on the operations and finances of the
grantee, the costs of such an extension and who is to bear such costs, and any
anticipated interconnection with such institutions, within the area to be served
by such system extension.
(c) If permission is granted by other jurisdictions, the grantee shall extend the
system or cooperate with other grantees in those jurisdictions to provide
service to institutions pursuant to this chapter, only upon approval of the City
Council.
18.22 TIME FOR PERFORMANCE.
(1) INITIAL FILINGS.
(a) It is hereby deemed in the public interest that the system be extended as
rapidly as possible to all citizens within the City with a density of 25 potential
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
29
subscribers per cable plant line mile. Within 30 days of the effective date of
this chapter, the grantee shall file with the appropriate authorities and utilities
all initial papers and applications necessary to comply with the terms of this
chapter including the proposal for franchise and any additions or amendments
thereto and shall thereafter diligently pursue all such applications.
(b) After the grantee has diligently pursued the acquisition of necessary pole
attachment contracts, or other necessary easements, and where such necessary
contracts have not been executed or easements obtained after a reasonable
period of time as determined by the City, the City may at its discretion,
provide assistance to insure the extension of the system to all citizens.
(2) COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. Within 120 days of the effective date
of FCC registration, the grantee shall initiate construction and installation of the
CCS. Such construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence.
(3) COMMENCEMENT OF OPERATION. Within 14 months of the effective date of
FCC registration, the grantee shall “commence operation” within the meaning set
forth in 18.02 of this chapter.
(4) SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION. Within 14 months of the
effective date of FCC registration, the grantee shall have “substantially completed”
construction of the “service area” within the meaning set forth in SS18.02 of this
chapter.
(5) PROVISION OF BASIC SERVICE. Within 24 months of the effective date of FCC
registration, the grantee shall have placed in use sufficient distribution facilities so as
to offer basic service to 100% of the dwelling units in the City, subject to the density
standard of 25 units per cable plant line mile.
(6) DELAYS AND EXTENSION OF TIME. The City may in its discretion extend the
time for grantee, acting in good faith, to perform any act required hereunder. The
time for performance shall be extended or excused, as the case may be, for any
period during which grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City Council that
grantee is being subjected to delay or interruption due to any of the following
circumstances if reasonably beyond its control:
(a) Necessary utility rearrangements, pole change-outs or obtainment of
easement rights.
(b) Governmental or regulatory restrictions.
(c) Labor strikes.
(d) War
(e) National emergencies.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
30
(f) Fire.
(g) Acts of God.
18.23 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
(1) ADDITIONAL STANDARDS MAY BE IMPOSED. Nothing in this Chapter shall
be construed to prohibit the grantee and City from agreeing to exceed the customer
service standards set out in this Chapter or the establishment or enforcement of any
state or local law or regulation concerning customer service or consumer protection
that imposes customer service standards or consumer protection requirements that
exceed the customer service standards set out in this Chapter or address matters not
addressed in this Chapter.
(2) LOCAL SERVICE OFFICE. The grantee shall maintain a local office, which shall
be open during normal business hours. This office shall accept subscriber payments,
handle new subscriptions, disconnections and adjustments to subscriber bills, respond
to installation, repair, and/or maintenance requests, and handle equipment returns.
(3) TELEPHONE AVAILABILITY.
(a) The grantee shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access
line which will be available to its subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day,
seven days a week. Trained representatives of the grantee will be available to
respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. After
normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an
automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries
received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained
representative of the grantee on the next business day.
(b) Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer
representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall
not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than
ninety (90) percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured
on a quarterly basis.
(c) The grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys
to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless a
historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
(d) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than three (3) percent of the time.
(4) INSTALLATIONS, OUTAGES, AND SERVICE CALLS. Under normal
operating conditions, each of the following (4) standards shall be met by the grantee
no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
31
(a) Standard installation will be performed within seven (7) business days
after an order has been placed. “Standard” installations are those that are
located up to one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the existing
distribution system.
(b) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the grantee, the grantee shall
begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than
twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known to the
grantee. The grantee must begin actions to correct other service problems
the next business day after receiving notification of the service problem.
(c) The “appointment window” alternatives for installations, service calls, and
other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a
four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The grantee may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
(d) The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the
close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
If the grantee’s representative is running late for an appointment with a
customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.
(5) REPAIR STANDARDS. The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians
who, under normal operating conditions, are capable of responding to subscriber
requests for service within the following time frames:
(a) Systems Service Interruption: Under normal operating conditions, within
two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscribers calls which by
number identify a system service interruption of sound and picture on one
(1) or more channels. This standard shall be met no less than ninety-five
(95) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
(b) Isolated Service Interruption: Within twenty-four (24) hours, including
weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated Service
Interruption (less than two (2) percent of subscribers) of sound or picture
for one (1) or more channels. This standard shall be met no less than
ninety-five (95) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
(c) Inferior Reception Quality. Within forty-eight (48) hours, including
weekends, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem
concerning picture or sound quality.
The grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service
under the provisions of this Section when a technician arrives at the
service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
32
subscriber not being home when the technician leaves written notification
of arrival.
(6) NOTIFICATION OF SERVICE INTERRUPTION TO CITY CLERK. The grantee
shall promptly notify the City Clerk, in writing, or, if appropriate, by oral
communication, of any significant interruption in the operation of the system. For the
purposes of this Section, a “significant interruption in the operation of the system”
shall mean any interruption of sound or picture on one (1) or more channels of a
duration of at least twenty-four (24) hours to at least five (5) percent of the
subscribers.
(7) SUBSCRIBER CREDIT FOR SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS. Upon service
interruption of the subscriber’s cable service, the following shall apply:
(a) For service interruptions of over four (4) hours and up to seven (7) days,
the grantee shall provide a credit to the subscriber of one-thirtieth (1/30) of
one month’s fee for affected service for each 24-hour period service is
interrupted for four (4) or more hours.
(b) For service interruptions of seven (7) days or more in one month, the
grantee, shall provide, a credit based on the hourly rate the subscriber pays
for all monthly service and the number of hours of the service interruption.
(8) UPGRADING OF FACILITIES AND SERVICE. The grantee shall upgrade its
facilities and service as subscribers’ demands dictate so that its system is as advanced
as the current state of technology with field-proven equipment will allow.
(9) SUBSCRIBER INFORMATION.
(a) Operating Policies. As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the
cable system, and at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon
request, the grantee shall provide each subscriber with written information
concerning products and services offered, prices and options for
programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and
other services, installation and service maintenance policies, instructions
on how to use the cable services, channel positions of programming
carried on the system, the procedures for billing and making inquiries or
complaints (including the name, address and local telephone number of
the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed) and also furnish information concerning
the City office responsible for administration of franchise including the
name and telephone number of the office. The notice shall also indicate
the grantee’s business hours, legal holidays and procedures for responding
to inquiries after normal business hours. The grantee shall provide all
subscribers and the City written notice no less than thirty (30) days prior
to any proposed change in these policies.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
33
(b) Rate, Programming Service, and Channel Position. A grantee, under
normal operating conditions, shall provide all subscribers and the City
with notice of any change in rates, programming services, or channel
position at least thirty (30) days prior to the change(s) through
announcements on the cable system and in writing.
(c) Copies to the City. Copies of all notices provided to subscribers shall be
filed concurrently with the City.
(10) SUBSCRIBER BILLING PRACTICES.
(a) Billing. Bills shall be clear, concise, understandable and shall include the
grantee’s toll free or collect telephone number for subscriber use. Bills
shall be fully itemized, with itemization including, but not limited to,
basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall
also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including
optional charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the
grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within
thirty (30 days). Refund checks will be issued promptly, and no later than
either (i) the customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or (ii) the return of the
equipment supplied by the grantee if service is terminated. Credits for
service shall be issued no later than the customer’s next billing cycle
following the determination that a credit is warranted.
(b) Late Charges. The account of a subscriber shall not be considered
delinquent until at least thirty (30) days have elapsed from the due date of
the bill, which shall be a date certain. The following provisions shall
apply to the imposition of late charges on subscribers:
(i) The grantee shall not impose a late charge on a subscriber
unless the subscriber’s account is delinquent, the grantee has
given the subscriber written notice of the delinquency in a clear
and conspicuous manner, and the subscriber has been given at
least eight (8) business days from the mailing of the notice to
pay the balance due.
(ii) A late charge of not more than $4.00 may be imposed
monthly.
(iii) No late charge may be assessed on the amount of a bill in
dispute if found in favor of the subscriber.
(iv) Any charge for returned checks shall be reasonably related to
the costs incurred by the grantee in processing such checks.
Adding these provisions to the ordinance requires that the following definitions be added
to the definition section of the ordinance:
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
34
Normal Business Hours. Those hours during which similar businesses in the City are
open to serve customers. In all cases, “normal business hours” must include some
evening hours at least one night per week and some weekend hours.
Normal Operating Conditions. Those service conditions which are within the control of
the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable
operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power
outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those
conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are
not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
18.24 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
(1) STANDARDS. The CCS shall be designed, constructed or operated so as to meet
those technical and performance standards set forth in the franchise agreement and as
required by the FCC’s rules and regulations relating to Cable Television Systems and
found in 47 C.F.R. SS 76.601 to 76.618, as amended, or as may, from time to time, be
amended.
(2) TESTS AND COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES. The grantee shall submit, within 60
days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a detailed test plan describing
the methods and schedules for testing the CCS on an ongoing basis to determine
compliance with this ordinance and the franchise agreement. The tests for basic cable
service shall be performed at intervals no greater than 12 months. The tests may be
witnessed by representatives of the City, and the grantee shall submit written test
reports to the City. If more than 10% of the locations tested fail to meet the
performance standards, the grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective
measures have been taken, and the entire test shall be repeated. Failure to take
corrective action may be considered a breach of the franchise.
(3) ADDITIONAL TESTING. At any time after commencement of service to
subscribers, the City may require the grantee to perform additional tests, full or partial
repeat tests, or tests involving service to a specific subscriber. Such additional tests
will be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating an
unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance with the technical standards
established in this ordinance and the franchise agreement.
(4) COST OF TESTS. The costs of all tests required in subsections (2) and (3) above,
and retesting as necessary, shall be paid by the grantee, except that if the City requires
the use of outside consultants or test personnel, then such costs shall be paid by the
City.
18.25 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(1) COMPLIANCE WITH SAFETY CODES. All construction practices shall be in
accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
35
1970 and any amendments thereto as well as all State and local codes where
applicable.
(2) COMPLIANCE WITH ELECTRICAL CODES. All installation of electronic
equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with
the applicable sections of the current edition of the National Electric Safety Code and
all State and local codes where applicable.
(3) ANTENNAS AND TOWERS. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be
designed for the proper loading zone and specified in Electronics Industry
Association’s R.S.-22A Specifications.
(4) COMPLIANCE WITH AVIATION REQUIREMENTS. Antenna supporting
structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance
with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aeronautical Agency, the
State Aeronautics Board governing the erection and operation of supporting structures
or television towers, and all other applicable local or State codes and regulations.
18.26 CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION.
(1) APPROVAL OF PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION.
(a) The grantee shall first obtain the approval of the City prior to commencing
construction on the streets, alleys, public grounds or places of the City.
Applications for approval of construction shall be in a form provided by the
City.
(b) The right of construction, including easements, is not implied except on
locations where the City has the authority to grant such rights and easements
and then only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. All other rights
of construction, including easements, shall be the responsibility of the grantee.
(2) EXCAVATION PERMITS. The grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any
street, sidewalk, driveway, or public place for any purpose without first having
obtained a permit to do so in the manner provided by code.
(3) CHANGES REQUIRED BY PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. The grantee shall, at its
expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other
public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the
grantee when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, water pipes, City-owned power or signal lines, and tracts or any other
type of structure of improvement by public agencies.
(4) USE OF EXISTING POLES OR CONDUITS. Nothing in this chapter shall
authorize the grantee to erect and maintain in the City, new poles where existing
poles are servicing the area. The grantee shall require permission from the City
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
36
before erecting any new poles, underground conduit or appurtenances where not exist
at the time the Grantee seeks to install his system.
(5) FACILITIES NOT TO BE HAZARDOUS OR INTERFERE.
(a) All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the grantee
shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or
unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic and travel
upon the streets and public places of the City.
(b) The grantee shall keep and maintain all its property in good condition, order
and repair. The City reserves the right hereunder to inspect and examine at
any reasonable time and upon reasonable notice the property owned or used,
in part or in whole by the grantee.
(c) The grantee shall keep accurate maps and records of all its facilities and
furnish copies of such maps and records as requested by the City under
SS18.15.
(d) The grantee shall not place poles or other equipment where they will interfere
with the rights or reasonable convenience of adjoining property owners, or
with any gas, electric or telephone fixtures or with any water hydrants or
mains. All poles or other fixtures placed in a street shall be placed in the
right-of-way between the roadway and the property, as specified by the City.
(6) METHOD OF INSTALLATION.
(a) All wires, cables, amplifiers and other property shall be constructed and
installed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be
installed parallel with existing telephone and electric wires whenever possible.
Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled, with
due respect for engineering and safety considerations.
(b) All installations shall be underground in those areas of the City where public
utilities providing both telephone and electric service are underground at the
time of installation.
(c) In areas where both telephone and electric utility facilities are above ground
provided that at such time as those facilities are required to be placed
underground by the City or are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise
place its services underground without additional cost to the City or to the
residents of the City other than as may be reflected in rates changed to
subscribers.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
37
(7) PROTECTION OF FACILITIES. Nothing contained in this section shall relieve any
person, company or corporation from liability arising out of the failure to exercise
reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee’s facilities while performing any work
connected with grading, regrading, or changing the line of any street or public place
or with the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system.
(8) NOTICE OF CITY IMPROVEMENTS. The City shall give the grantee reasonable
notice of plans for street improvements where paving and resurfacing of a permanent
nature in involved. The notice shall contain the nature and character of the
improvements, the streets upon which the improvements are to be made, the extent of
the improvements and the work scheduled for the project. The notice shall give the
grantee sufficient time to make any additions, alterations or repairs to its facilities as
it deems necessary in advance of the actual commencement of the work, so as to
permit the grantee to maintain continuity of service.
(9) REQUESTS FOR REMOVAL OR CHANGE. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising
or lowering the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee
shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be
given not less than 10 working days notice of any move contemplated to arrange for
temporary wire changes.
(10) AUTHORITY TO TRIM TREES ON OR OVERHANGING PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
(a) The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalk, and other public places of the City so as to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of
the grantee. All trimming is to be done under the supervision and direction of
the City after the explicit, prior written notification and approval of the City
and at the expense of the grantee.
(b) The grantee may contract for such services; however, any firm or individual
so retained shall receive City approval prior to commencing such activity.
(c) Required tree trimming on private property not affecting public property must
be negotiated between the grantee and the owner of the private property.
(11) RESTORATION OR REIMBURSEMENT.
(a) In the event of disturbance of any street or private property by the grantee, it
shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the City and the owner,
replace and restore such street or private property in as good a condition as
before the work causing such disturbance was done.
(b) If the grantee fails to perform such replacement or restoration, the City or the
owner shall have the right to do so at the sole expense of the grantee.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
38
Payment to the City or owner for such replacement or restoration shall be
immediate, upon demand, by the grantee. All requests for replacement or
restoring of such streets or private property as may have been disturbed must
be in writing to the grantee.
(12) OFFICE AND RECORDS IN CITY. The grantee shall at all times make and keep
at an office maintained by the grantee in the City, full and complete plans and records
showing the exact location of all CCS equipment installed or in use in the streets and
other public places of the City. Upon request, the grantee shall furnish the City a
current map or set of maps, drawn to scale, showing all CCS equipment installed and
in place in streets and other public places of the City.
(13) EMERGENCY REMOVAL OF PLANT. If, at any time, in case of fire or disaster
in the City, it shall become necessary in the reasonable judgment of the City to cut or
move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or appurtenances thereto of the
grantee, such cutting or moving may be done and any repairs rendered necessary
thereby shall be made by the grantee, at its sole expense provided that such repairs are
not necessitated by negligent act of the City, in which case, cost for repairs shall be
borne by the City.
(14) ALTERNATE ROUTING OF PLANT. If continued use of a street is denied to the
grantee by the City for any reason, the grantee will make every reasonable effort to
provide service over alternate routes.
(15) PROPORTIONAL EXPANSION OF CONSTRUCTION. Any construction and
installation of plant by the grantee shall be performed in such a way that the system is
installed and made operational, roughly in proportion to population, simultaneously
on both sides of the City.
18.27 INTERCONNECTION.
(1) NO PROHIBITION OF INTERCONNECTION. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed so as to prohibit the grantee from interconnecting its system with other
similar contiguous systems either in the City or in other municipalities, counties, or
states except as the provisions of SS18.22 apply.
(2) STUDY REQUIRED FOR INTERCONNECTION.
(a) The grantee shall, if requested by the City, unless owner of the system to
be interconnected with refuses such interconnection, conduct a technical and
economic feasibility study of any interconnection requested by the City. The
study shall be presented to the City, and if the study shows such
interconnection to be feasible, the grantee shall, if so instructed by the City,
accomplish such interconnection.
(b) If the study indicates technical feasibility only, the City may elect, but at
its sole discretion, to arrange for compensation to be paid to the grantee, in
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
39
amount sufficient to assure an economic “break even” by the grantee and so
order the interconnection.
(c) If the study fails to show technical feasibility the grantee shall have no
further responsibility for accomplishing such interconnection until such time
as improvements in technology permit such interconnection.
18.28 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS OR MODIFICATIONS.
(1) UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED. No firm, person, group,
company, corporation or governmental body or agency, without the expressed
consent of the grantee, shall make any connection, extension or division, whether
physically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of a
franchised CCS for any purpose whatsoever, except as may be provided in this
chapter.
(2) REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION PROHIBITED. No firm, persons, group,
company, corporation or government body or agency shall willfully interfere, tamper,
remove, obstruct or damage any part, segment or content of a franchised CCS for any
purpose whatsoever. This section shall in no way impair or infringe upon rights
presently enjoyed by utilities in the City.
(3) VIOLATION. Any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or governmental
body or agency convicted of a violation of this section shall for each offense, forfeit a
sum of not less than $20 nor more than $200 together with costs of such prosecution.
Each 24 hour period a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
18.29 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
(1) SERVICES TO BE EQUALLY AVAILABLE.
(a) The grantee shall not refuse cable television service to any person or
organization who requests such service for lawful purpose, nor shall a grantee
refuse any person or organization the right to cablecast pursuant to provisions
of this chapter.
(b) The grantee shall not, as to rate, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any unreasonable preference
or advantage, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage. The
grantee shall comply at all times with the Cable Act and all other applicable
Federal, State and local laws and regulations, and all executive and
administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby
incorporated and made part of this ordinance by reference.
(c) This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to
stimulate subscription to the system or other legitimate uses thereof.
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
40
(2) FAIRNESS OF ACCESSIBILITY. The entire system of the grantee shall be
operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility
of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens,
businesses, public agencies or other entities having a legitimate use for the system
and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use; allocation of use of such
facilities shall be made according to the rules or decisions or regulatory agencies
affecting the same, and where such rules or decisions are not effective to resolve a
dispute between conflicting users or potential users, the matter shall be submitted for
resolution by the Regulatory Board.
(3) EQUAL EMPLOYMENT. The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment
opportunity requirements of Federal, State and local law and regulations in effect on
the date of the franchise grant, and as amended from time to time.
18.30 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
(1) USE OF DATA FROM SUBSCRIBER. The grantee, City or any person shall not
initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring information or data from
cable subscribers, terminals by use of the cable system, without prior written valid
authorization from each subscriber so affected, except for purposes of routine
maintenance and monitoring of the system or to verify billing accuracy. Valid
authorization shall mean written approval from the subscriber for a period of time not
to exceed one year and shall not have been obtained from the subscriber as a
condition of service. Further, a grantee, without such authorization, shall not activate
and/or utilize any “television signal” in any manner from the subscribers’ premises.
In any case, the subscriber shall retain the right to deactivate his terminal.
(2) SUBSCRIBER DATA. The City, the grantee or any person shall not, without prior
written valid authorization from each subscriber so affected, provide any data
identifying or designating subscribers. Any data so authorized will be made available
to the authorizing subscriber in understandable fashion.
(3) SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENTS. Any agreement or contract such as is necessary for
(1) and (2) above shall not be part of any other contract or agreement and shall not be
a condition of subscribing to the system.
18.31 REMEDIES.
(1) LESSER REMEDIES. Nothing shall prohibit the City from invoking lesser remedies
than revocation for violations of the provisions of this Chapter or the franchise
agreement, including the shortening of the franchise term and imposing monetary
damages as set out below.
(2) MONETARY DAMAGES. If after notice to the grantee and opportunity for hearing,
the City determines that the grantee has failed to perform any material obligation
under this Chapter or the franchise agreement, or fails to do so in a timely manner, the
City may at its option, and in its sole discretion assess monetary damages against the
grantee as provided in this Section. This provision for assessment of damages is
City of Chilton Ch. 18 Cable Communications System
41
intended to be separate and apart from the City’s right to enforce the provisions of the
construction and performance bonds provided for in this Chapter and is intended to be
in addition to any other remedies. This provision is intended to provide compensation
to the City for actual damages.
(a) For failure to comply with any of the customer service standards adopted by
the City in this Chapter or set out in the franchise agreement, the grantee
shall pay to the City the sum of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each
day the grantee fails to comply.
(b) For failure to furnish, maintain, or offer cable services to any potential
subscribers within the territorial limits of the City upon order of the City,
the grantee shall pay to the City the sum of Two Hundred Dollars
($200.00) for any such occurrence.
(c) For failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance or other required
financial security, the grantee shall pay to the City the sum of Three
Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for any such occurrence.
(d) For failure to provide access to data documents, records or reports to the City
as required by this Chapter, the grantee shall pay to the City the sum of One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for any such occurrence.
(e) For failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance
standards, the grantee shall pay to the City the sum of Three Hundred Dollars
($300.00) for any such occurrence.
(f) Failure to comply with the rate decision or refund order issued by the City, the
grantee shall pay to the City the sum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for
any such occurrence.
18.32 SEPARABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity.
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
CHAPTER 19
FLOOD PLAIN ZONING
19.00 Statutory Authorization, Finding of Fact, Statement of
Purpose, Title and General Provisions 3
19.01 Statutory Authorization 3
19.02 Finding of Fact 3
19.03 Statement of Purpose 3
19.04 Title 3
19.05 General Provisions 4
(1) Areas to be Regulated
(2) Official Maps and Revisions
(3) Establishment of Floodplain Zoning Districts
(4) Locating Floodplain Boundaries
(5) Removal of Lands from Floodplain
(6) Compliance
(7) Municipalities and State Agencies Regulated
(8) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
(9) Interpretation
(10) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
(11) Severability
(12) Annexed Areas for Cities/Villages
19.06 General Standards Applicable To All Floodplain Districts 7
19.07 Hydraulic and Hydrologic Analyses 7
19.08 Watercourse Alterations 8
19.09 Chapter 30, 31, WI Statutes Development 8
19.10 Public or Private Campgrounds 8
19.11 Floodway District (FW) 9
19.12 Applicability 9
19.13 Permitted Uses 9
19.14 Standards for Development in the Floodway 10
19.15 Prohibited Uses 11
19.16 Floodfringe District (FF) 12
19.17 Applicability 12
19.18 Permitted Uses 12
19.19 Standards for Development in the Floodfringe 12
19.20 General Floodplain District (GFP) 15
19.21 Applicability 15
19.22 Permitted Uses 15
19.23 Standards for Development in the General Floodplain District 15
19.24 Determining Floodway/Floodfringe Limits 16
19.25 Nonconforming Uses 16
19.26 General 16
19.27 Floodway District 18
1
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
19.28 Floodfringe District 19
19.29 Administration 20
19.30 Zoning Administrator 20
19.31 Zoning Agency 23
19.32 Board of Adjustment/Appeals
24
19.33 To Review Appeals of Permit Denials 27
19.34 Floodproofing Standards for Nonconforming Structures or Uses 27
19.35 Public Information 28
19.36 Amendments 28
19.37 General 28
19.38 Procedures 29
19.39 Enforcement and Penalties 30
19.40 Definitions 30
(Revised in its entirety Ord. 1089 6/19/12)
2
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
19.00 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, STATEMENT OF
PURPOSE, TITLE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
19.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in ss. 61.35 and 62.23, for
villages and cities; 59.69, 59.692, and 59.694 for counties; and the requirements in s.
87.30, Stats.
19.02 FINDING OF FACT
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this municipality
would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and tax base.
19.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This ordinance is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
(1) Protect life, health and property;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
(3) Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the taxpayers;
(4) Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
(6) Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
(7) Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
(8) Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and result in
conflicts between property owners; and
(9) Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable alternative to
locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
19.04 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for Chilton,
3
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
Wisconsin.
19.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) AREAS TO BE REGULATED
This ordinance regulates all areas that would be covered by the regional flood or base
flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other maps approved by
DNR. Base flood elevations are derived from the flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and are shown as AE, A1-30, and AH Zones on the FIRM.
Other regulatory zones are displayed as A and AO zones. Regional Flood Elevations
(RFE) may be derived from other studies. If more than one map or revision is
referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
(2) OFFICIAL MAPS & REVISIONS
The boundaries of all floodplain districts are designated as A, AE, AH, AO or A1-30
on the maps based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed below. Any change to
the base flood elevations (BFE) or any changes to the boundaries of the floodplain or
floodway in the FIS or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must be reviewed
and approved by the DNR and FEMA through the Letter of Map Change process (see
s. 19.36 Amendments) before it is effective. No changes to RFE's on non-FEMA
maps shall be effective until approved by the DNR. These maps and revisions are on
file in the office of the city clerk, City of Chilton. If more than one map or revision is
referenced, the most restrictive information shall apply.
OFFICIAL MAPS: Based on the Calumet County Flood Insurance Study (FIS),
dated (February, 2009), volume (55015CV000A)
(a) Calumet County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers
(55015C0166E, 5501C0167E, 55015C0168E, and 55015C0169E) dated
February 4, 2009; with corresponding profiles that are based on the FIS.
(b) 100-year Dam Failure Floodplain Map dated (September 8, 1992) prepared by
McMahon and Associates along with the corresponding profile. Approved by
the DNR on September 21, 1992
(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN ZONING DISTRICTS
The regional floodplain areas are divided into three districts as follows:
(a) The Floodway District (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional
floodwaters and are contained within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM.
4
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(b) The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion between the regional flood limits
and the floodway and displayed as AE Zones on the FIRM.
(c) The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those areas that may be covered by
floodwater during the regional flood and does not have a BFE or floodway
boundary determined, including A, AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
(4) LOCATING FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES
Discrepancies between boundaries on the official floodplain zoning map and actual
field conditions shall be resolved using the criteria in subdivision (a) or (b) below. If
a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to s. 19.36
amendments. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary derived from a profile
elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a map amendment is
required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for documenting actual predevelopment
field conditions and the basis upon which the district boundary was
determined and for initiating any map amendments required under this section.
Disputes between the zoning administrator and an applicant over the district
boundary line shall be settled according to s. 19.32(3) and the criteria in (a) and (b)
below. Where the flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a
FIRM, FEMA must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to s. 19.36
Amendments.
(a) If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations shall determine
the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations shall govern if
there are any discrepancies.
(b) Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, the location of the boundary
shall be determined by the map scale
(5) REMOVAL OF LANDS FROM FLOODPLAIN
Compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be grounds for removing
land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet above the regional or base
flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land outside the floodplain, and the map is
amended pursuant to s. 19.36 amendments.
(6) COMPLIANCE
Any development or use within the areas regulated by this ordinance shall be in
compliance with the terms of this ordinance, and other applicable local, state, and
federal regulations.
(7) MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED
Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are
5
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
required to comply with this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State
agencies are required to comply if s. 13.48(13), Stats. applies. The construction,
reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the
Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt when s. 30.2022, Stats. applies.
(8) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
(a) This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under ss. 59.69, 59.692 or 59.694 for counties; s. 62.23 for
cities; s. 61.35 for villages; or s. 87.30, Stats., which relate to floodplains. A
more restrictive ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent
of the greater restrictions, but not otherwise.
(b) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. If this ordinance imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(9) INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance are the
minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and are
not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes.
If a provision of this ordinance, required by ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code, is
unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the
date of the adoption of this ordinance or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment to this ordinance.
(10) WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The flood protection standards in this ordinance are based on engineering
experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply or
guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from
flooding and flood damages. This ordinance does not create liability on the part of,
or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damage that may result from reliance on this ordinance.
(11) SEVERABILITY
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.
(12) ANNEXED AREAS FOR CITIES AND VILLAGES
The Calumet County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of
annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all
6
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets
the requirements of ch. NR 116, Wis. Adm. Code and 44 CFR 59-72, National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the
municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are
incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are on
file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps of
annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway location.
19.06 GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a
flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads; be constructed with flood-resistant materials;
be constructed to minimize flood damages and to ensure that utility and mechanical
equipment is designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the equipment during conditions of flooding.
Subdivisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the above standards. All subdivision
proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall include regional flood elevation
and floodway data for any development that meets the subdivision definition of this
ordinance and all other requirements in s. 19.30(2). Adequate drainage shall be provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards and all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages.
19.07 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSES
(1) No floodplain development shall:
(a) Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the
regional flood height; or
(b) Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain storage area
lost.
(2) The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the proposed
development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional flood height,
based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless the provisions of
s. 19.36 Amendments are met.
19.08 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS
7
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be
issued until the local official has notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the
Department and FEMA regional offices, and required the applicant to secure all necessary
state and federal permits. The standards of s. 19.07 must be met and the flood carrying
capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date of the watercourse
alteration or relocation and pursuant to s. 19.36 Amendments, the community shall apply
for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR through the LOMC process.
19.09 CHAPTER 30, 31, WI STATUTES DEVELOPMENT
Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Chapter 30 and 31,
Stats., such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and navigational aids, may be
allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and amendments to the floodplain zoning
ordinance are made according to s. 19.36 Amendments.
19.10 PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS
Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and shall meet the
following provisions:
(1) The campground is approved by the Department of Health Services.
(2) A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning administrator.
(3) The character of the river system and the campground elevation are such that a 72-
hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all campground occupants.
(4) There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that offers the
minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the campground. This
procedure shall include a written agreement between the campground owner, the
municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement
official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur,
personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems to
be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods and
personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation.
(5) This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which time the
agreement shall be reviewed and updated - by the officials identified in sub. (4) - to
remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including those of the state
Department of Health Services and all other applicable regulations.
(6) Only camping units that are fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use
are allowed.
8
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(7) The camping units shall not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180
consecutive days, at which time the camping unit must be removed from the
floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours.
(8) All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be issued a limited
authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of which is kept on file at
the campground. Such authorization shall allow placement of a camping unit for a
period not to exceed 180 days and shall ensure compliance with all the provisions of
this section.
(9) The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by the campground
operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section.
(10) All camping units that remain in place for more than 180 consecutive days must
meet the applicable requirements in either s. 19.11 or 19.16 or 19.20 for the
floodplain district in which the structure is located.
(11) The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances warning of the flood
hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood warning is issued.
(12) All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse collection, electrical service,
gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and wells shall be properly anchored and
placed at or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
19.11 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW)
19.12 APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodway areas on the floodplain zoning maps and those
identified pursuant to s. 19.24.
19.13 PERMITTED USES
The following open space uses are allowed in the Floodway District and the floodway
areas of the General Floodplain District, if
- They are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
- They meet the standards in s. 19.14 and 19.15; and
- All permits or certificates have been issued according to s. 19.30:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture
and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas
and airport landing strips.
9
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(3) Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities, hunting and fishing
areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to the fill limitations of s.
19.14(4).
(4) Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic structures
that comply with ss. 19.14 and 19.15.
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with s. 19.14(4).
(6) Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams, flowage
areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission lines, and
pipelines that comply with Chapters 30 and 31, Stats.
(7) Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with s. 19.14(3).
19.14 STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FLOODWAY
(1) GENERAL
(a) Any development in floodway areas shall comply with s. 19.06 and have a
low flood damage potential.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following data to determine the effects of the
proposal according to s.19.07:
1. A cross-section elevation view of the proposal, perpendicular to the
watercourse, showing if the proposed development will obstruct flow;
or
2. An analysis calculating the effects of this proposal on regional flood
height.
(c) The zoning administrator shall deny the permit application if the project will
cause any increase in the flood elevations upstream or downstream, based on
the data submitted for subd (b) above.
(2) STRUCTURES
Structures accessory to permanent open space uses or functionally dependent on a
waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the
following criteria:
10
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(a) Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood damage potential
and is constructed to minimize flood damage.
(b) Shall have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area, and the
bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
(d) Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or flood proofed to or above
the flood protection elevation; and
(e) It must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the regional flood.
(3) PUBLIC UTILITIES, STREETS AND BRIDGES
Public utilities, streets and bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
(a) Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood protection
elevation; and
(b) Construction meets the development standards of s. 19.07.
(4) FILLS OR DEPOSITION OF MATERIALS
Fills or deposition of materials may be allowed by permit, if:
(a) The requirements of s. 19.07 are met;
(b) No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is issued by the
Department pursuant to chapter 30, Stats., and a permit pursuant to s. 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.
1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other requirements have been met.
(c) The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by riprap,
vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulk heading; and
(d) The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
19.15 PROHIBITED USES
All uses not listed as permitted uses in s. 19.13 are prohibited, including the following
uses:
11
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(1) Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not
associated with permanent open-space uses;
(2) Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to property,
water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life;
(3) Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining districts;
(4) Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed
prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and Departmentapproved
campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and
ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code;
(5) Any public or private wells, which are used to obtain potable water, except those for
recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and chs. NR 811
and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code;
(6) Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
(7) Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s. NR
110.15(3)(b), Wis. Adm. Code; and
(8) Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or
proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the
regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
19.16 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF)
19.17 APPLICABILITY
This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on the floodplain zoning maps and
those identified pursuant to s. 19.24.
19.18 PERMITTED USES
Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in the Floodfringe District if the
standards in s. 19.19 are met, the use is not prohibited by this or any other ordinance or
regulation and all permits or certificates specified in s. 19.30 have been issued.
19.19 STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODFRINGE AREAS
S. 19.07 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the use
requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of s.
19.25 Nonconforming Uses.
12
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(1) RESIDENTIAL USES
Any structure, including a manufactured home, which is to be newly constructed, or
moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or exceed the following standards. Any
existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the requirements of s. 19.25
Nonconforming Uses.
(a) The elevation of the lowest floor shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation on fill unless the requirements of s. 19.19 (1) (b) can be met. The fill
shall be one foot or more above the regional flood elevation extending at least
15 feet beyond the limits of the structure.
(b) The basement or crawlway floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation
if it is floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. No basement or
crawlway floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation;
(c) Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to land outside
of the floodplain, except as provided in subd. (d).
(d) In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations make
compliance with subd. (c) impractical, the municipality may permit new
development and substantial improvements where roads are below the
regional flood elevation, if:
1. The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and emergency
services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s) by
wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or
2. The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan.
(2) ACCESSORY STRUCTURES OR USES
Accessory structures shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the
regional flood elevation.
(3) COMMERCIAL USES
Any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the floodfringe
shall meet the requirements of s. 19.19(1). Subject to the requirements of s.19.19
(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
(4) MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL USES
Any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or moved into
13
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in s. 19.34. Subject to the
requirements of s. 19.19(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other such uses
may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect
life and property.
(5) STORAGE OF MATERIALS
Materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or injurious to property, water
quality or human, animal, plant, fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the
flood protection elevation or floodproofed in compliance with s. 19.34. Adequate
measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will not enter the water body
during flooding.
(6) PUBLIC UTILITIES, STREETS AND BRIDGES
All utilities, streets and bridges shall be designed to be compatible with
comprehensive floodplain development plans; and
(a) When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would endanger public
health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed essential, construction or
repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if they are designed to comply
with s. 19.34.
(b) Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at lower elevations
if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood elevation.
(7) SEWAGE SYSTEMS
All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of flood water into the system, pursuant to s. 19.34 (3), to the flood protection
elevation and meet the provisions of all local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wis.
Adm. Code.
(8) WELLS
All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of flood waters
into the system, pursuant to s. 19.34(3), to the flood protection elevation and shall
meet the provisions of chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
(9) SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITES
Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is prohibited in floodfringe areas.
(10) DEPOSITION OF MATERIALS
14
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
Any deposited material must meet all the provisions of this ordinance.
(11) MANUFACTURED HOMES
(a) Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage, and prepare
secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular access and
escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
(b) In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement homes on
existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
1. Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation; and
2. Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally during a flood
(c) Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new manufactured
home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all new, replacement
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the residential
development standards for the floodfringe in s. 19.19(1).
(12) MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
All mobile recreational vehicles that are on site for 180 consecutive days or more or
are not fully licensed and ready for highway use shall meet the elevation and
anchoring requirements in s. 19.19(11)(b) and (c). A mobile recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
19.20 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP)
19.21 APPLICABILITY
The provisions for this district shall apply to all floodplains mapped as A, AO or AH
zones.
19.22 PERMITTED USES
Pursuant to s. 19.24, it shall be determined whether the proposed use is located within the
floodway or floodfringe.
Those uses permitted in the Floodway (s. 19.13) and Floodfringe (s. 19.18) Districts are
allowed within the General Floodplain District, according to the standards of s. 19.23,
provided that all permits or certificates required under s. 19.30 have been issued.
15
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
19.23 STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN THE GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
S. 19.11 applies to floodway areas, s. 19.16 applies to floodfringe areas. The rest of this
ordinance applies to either district.
(1) In AO/AH Zones the structure’s lowest floor must meet one of the conditions listed
below whichever is higher:
(a) At or above the flood protection elevation; or
(b) Two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade around the structure; or
(c) The depth as shown on the FIRM
(2) In AO/AH zones, provide plans showing adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters
around structures.
19.24 DETERMINING FLOODWAY AND FLOODFRINGE LIMITS
Upon receiving an application for development within the general floodplain district, the
zoning administrator shall:
(1) Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph or a plan which
shows the proposed development with respect to the general floodplain district
limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain developments, along with a legal
description of the property, fill limits and elevations, building floor elevations and
flood proofing measures; and the flood zone as shown on the FIRM.
(2) Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information deemed necessary
by the Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon flood height and
flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine floodway boundaries:
(a) A Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study as specified in 19.30(2) (c).
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent
structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of all proposed
and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of streets, water
supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent information;
(c) Specifications for building construction and materials, floodproofing, filling,
dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply and sanitary facilities.
16
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
19.25 NONCONFORMING USES
19.26 GENERAL
(1) APPLICABILITY
If these standards conform with s. 59.69(10), Stats., for counties or s. 62.23(7)(h),
Stats., for cities and villages, they shall apply to all modifications or additions to
any nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises
which was lawful before the passage of this ordinance or any amendment thereto.
(2) The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance may continue subject to the following
conditions:
(a) No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure shall be
permitted unless they comply with this ordinance. The words "modification"
and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition,
modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing
use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a
modification this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other
nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public
utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not
considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet and that is
adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an extension,
modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over a portion
of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the principal
structure.
(b) If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any
future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall
conform to the applicable requirements of this ordinance;
(c) The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming uses and
nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the cost of
all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the percentage
of the structure's total current value those modifications represent;
(d) No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any structure
with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would equal or
exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless
the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a
17
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with s. 19.19(1). The costs of elevating the
lowest floor of a nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming
use to the flood protection elevation are excluded from the 50% provisions of
this paragraph;
(e) No maintenance to any nonconforming structure or any structure with a
nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or exceed 50% of its
present equalized value, shall be allowed unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in
compliance with s. 19.19(1).
(f) If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done under (d) and (e)
equals or exceeds 50% of the present equalized assessed value the work shall
not be permitted unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this ordinance. Contiguous dry land access must be provided
for residential and commercial uses in compliance with s. 19.19(1).
(g) Except as provided in subd. (h), if any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is substantially damaged,
it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless the use and the structure
meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure is considered
substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to its predamaged
condition equals or exceeds 50% of the structure’s present equalized
assessed value.
(h) For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or destroyed by a
non-flood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such nonconforming
building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size and use in effect
prior to the damage event, provided that the minimum federal code
requirements below are met and all required permits have been granted prior
to the start of construction.
(1) Residential Structures
(a) Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts or perimeter walls.
Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of s. 19.34(2).
(b) Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods and materials
18
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
resistant to flood damage.
(c) Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(d) In A Zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data available from a
federal, state or other source.
(e) In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, meet the standards in s. 19.23(1).
(f) In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure.
(2) Nonresidential Structures
(a) Shall meet the requirements of s. 19.26(2)(h)1a-b and e-g.
(b) Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet the standards in s. 19.34(1) or (2).
(c) In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, meet the standards in s. 19.23(1).
(3) A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure, the
alteration will comply with s. 19.14(1), flood resistant materials are used, and
construction practices and floodproofing methods that comply with s. 19.34 are
used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be exempt from the
development standards of s. 19.26(2)(h)1if it is determined that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
19.27 FLOODWAY DISTRICT
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use in a Floodway District, unless such modification
or addition:
(a) Has been granted a permit or variance, which meets all ordinance
requirements;
19
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(b) Meets the requirements of s. 19.26;
(c) Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood height;
(d) Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed, pursuant to s.
19.34, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection elevation;
and
(e) If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation is enclosed,
the following standards shall apply:
1. The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or
engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without
human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided
with a minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one
square foot of the enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be
no more than 12 inches above the adjacent grade;
2. The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
3. Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or floodproofed to
or above the flood protection elevation; and
4. The use must be limited to parking or limited storage.
(2) No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-site sewage
disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a government agency
to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in Floodway District. Any
replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-site sewage disposal system in
a floodway area shall meet the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances
and s 19.34 and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(3) No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable water shall
be allowed in a Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an
existing well in a Floodway District shall meet the applicable requirements of all
municipal ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wis. Adm. Code.
19.28 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT
(1) No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or addition has been
granted a permit or variance by the municipality, and meets the requirements of s.
19.19 except where s. 19.28(2) is applicable.
(2) Where compliance with the provisions of subd. (1) Would result in unnecessary
20
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human habitation or be
associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of Adjustment/Appeals,
using the procedures established in s. 19.32, may grant a variance from those
provisions of subd. (1) For modifications or additions, using the criteria listed
below. Modifications or additions which are protected to elevations lower than the
flood protection elevation may be permitted if:
(a) No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for residential or
commercial structures;
(b) Human lives are not endangered;
(c) Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
(d) Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
(e) Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
(f) The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as described in s.
19.19(5).
(3) All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement, repair or
maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the applicable provisions
of all local ordinances, 19.34(3) and ch. SPS 383, Wis. Adm. Code.
(4) All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of a well shall meet
the applicable provisions of this ordinance, s. 19.34(3) and ch. NR 811 and NR 812,
Wis. Adm. Code.
19.29 ADMINISTRATION
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of adjustment/appeals has
already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under ss. 59.69, 59.692
or 62.23(7), Stats., these officials shall also administer this ordinance.
19.30 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
(1) DUTIES AND POWERS. The zoning administrator is authorized to administer this
ordinance and shall have the following duties and powers:
(a) Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing permit
applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation for the
proposed development is shown on all permit applications.
(b) Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions of this
ordinance, and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
21
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(c) Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine if
substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
(d) Keep records of all official actions such as:
1. All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
2. Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood elevations
3. Floodproofing certificates
4. Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances,
nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances
and amendments.
5. All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain structures.
6. List of nonconforming structures and uses.
(e) Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional office:
1. Within 10 days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on variances,
appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments;
2. Copies of case-by-case analyses and other information including an annual
summary of floodplain zoning actions taken.
3. Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all related
correspondence concerning the assessments.
(f) Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this ordinance to the
municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the reports
shall also be sent to the Department Regional office.
(g) Submit copies of amendments and biennial reports to the FEMA Regional
office.
(2) LAND USE PERMIT
A land use permit shall be obtained before any new development; repair,
modification or addition to an existing structure; or change in the use of a building
or structure, including sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. Application to
the zoning administrator shall include:
(a) GENERAL INFORMATION
22
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
1. Name and address of the applicant, property owner and contractor;
2. Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new construction or a
modification;
(b) SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A site plan drawn to scale shall be submitted with the permit application form
and shall contain:
1. Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
2. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting navigable
waterways;
3. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot lines
and street centerlines;
4. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private
water supply systems;
5. Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
6. Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from the
official floodplain zoning maps;
7. The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any fill
using the vertical datum from the adopted study – either National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD);
8. Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in NGVD or
NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or
not the requirements of s. 19.11 or 19.16 are met; and
9. Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge
according to s. 19.07. This may include any of the information noted in
s. 19.14(1).
(3) HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC STUDIES TO ANALYZE DEVELOPMENT
23
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
All hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer registered in the State. The study contractor
shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All studies shall be
reviewed and approved by the Department.
1. Zone A floodplains:
a. Hydrology
i. The appropriate method shall be based on the standards in ch. NR
116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Discharge.
b. Hydraulic modeling
The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in ch. NR
116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
.
i. Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model shall be based
on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam, bridge,
culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
ii. Channel sections must be surveyed.
iii. Minimum four foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used for the
development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping.
iv. A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is allowed in
developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required at
transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel at
each location.
v. The most current version of HEC_RAS shall be used.
vi. A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is required
at each structure.
vii. Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and upstream
limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet.
viii. Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when assigning
parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning’s N values,
expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base
model shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks
24
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
to determine the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data
is available, adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters
outside standard accepted engineering practices.
ix. The model must extend past the upstream limit of the difference in the
existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a tie-in to existing
studies. The height difference between the proposed flood profile and the
existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
c. Mapping
A work map of the reach studied shall be provided, showing all cross section
locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best available topographic
data, geographic limits of the proposed development and whether the
proposed development is located in the floodway.
i. If the proposed development is located outside of the floodway, then it is
determined to have no impact on the regional flood elevation.
ii. If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it must be
added to the base model to show the difference between existing and
proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain
the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on
standard accepted engineering practices is provided.
2. Zone AE Floodplains
a. Hydrology
If the proposed hydrology will change the existing study, the appropriate
method to be used shall be based on ch. NR 116.07(3), Wis. Admin. Code,
Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
b. Hydraulic model
The regional flood elevation shall be based on the standards in ch. NR
116.07(4), Wis. Admin. Code, Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
i. Duplicate Effective Model
The effective model shall be reproduced to ensure correct transference of
the model data and to allow integration of the revised data to provide a
continuous FIS model upstream and downstream of the revised reach. If
data from the effective model is available, models shall be generated that
duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations shown in the Floodway Data
Table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot.
25
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
ii. Corrected Effective Model.
The Corrected Effective Model shall not include any man-made physical
changes since the effective model date, but shall import the model into the
most current version of HEC-RAS for Department review.
iii. Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model.
The Existing Model shall be required to support conclusions about the
actual impacts of the project associated with the Revised (Post-Project)
Model or to establish more up-to-date models on which to base the
Revised (Post-Project) Model.
iv. Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model.
The Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model shall incorporate the
Existing Model and any proposed changes to the topography caused by
the proposed development. This model shall reflect proposed conditions.
v. All changes to the Duplicate Effective Model and subsequent models must
be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans,
construction plans and survey notes.
vi. Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream reach for
which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and
downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective
model and result in water surface elevations and topwidths computed by
the revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The Effective Model shall
not be truncated.
c. Mapping
Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted to the Department
for review which meet the following conditions:
i. Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised floodplain
and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic work
map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
construction plans, bridge plans.
ii. Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval, and a
planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the
map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more
easily revised.
iii. Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and 0.2% annual chance
floodplains and floodway boundaries.
26
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
iv. If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS or
CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) projection and State Plane Coordinate System in
accordance with FEMA mapping specifications.
v. The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective floodplain
boundaries.
vi. All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled in accordance
with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be included
to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
vii. Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the map.
viii. The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure stream
distances in the model shall be visible on the map.
(d) EXPIRATION
All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire no more than
180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended for a maximum of 180 days
for good and sufficient cause.
(3) CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed,
altered, added to, modified, repaired, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a
certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit
is required, subject to the following provisions:
(a) The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or part
thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of this ordinance;
(b) Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for a
permit;
(c) If all ordinance provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued
within 10 days after written notification that the permitted work is completed;
(d) The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor and floodproofing
elevations are in compliance with the permit issued. Floodproofing measures also
require certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
requirements of s. 19.34 are met.
27
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(4) OTHER PERMITS
Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the applicant must secure all
necessary permits from federal, state, and local agencies, including but not limited
to those required by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under s. 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
19.31 ZONING AGENCY
(1) The zoning administrator shall:
(a) Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator; and
(b) Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to this
ordinance, maps and text.
(2) This zoning agency shall not
(a) Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action by the Board
of Adjustment/Appeals; or
(b) Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the governing
body.
19.32 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT/APPEALS
The Board of Adjustment/Appeals, created under s. 59.694, Stats., for counties or
s. 62.23(7)(e), Stats., for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act
for the purposes of this ordinance. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by
Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The zoning administrator
shall not be the secretary of the Board.
(1) POWERS AND DUTIES
The Board of Adjustment/Appeals shall:
(a) Appeals - Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
(b) Boundary Disputes - Hear and decide disputes concerning the district
boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map.
(c) Variances - Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the ordinance
standards.
28
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(2) APPEALS TO THE BOARD
(a) Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer
or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the zoning
administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken
within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the board, by filing
with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board, a notice of
appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose decision is in
question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the matter appealed.
(b) Notice and Hearing For Appeals Including Variances
1. Notice - the board shall:
a. Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
b. Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing;
c. Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the
Department Regional office at least 10 days in advance of the
hearing.
2. Hearing - any party may appear in person or by agent. The board shall:
a. Resolve boundary disputes according to s. 19.32(3).
b. Decide variance applications according to s. 19.32(4).
c. Decide appeals of permit denials according to s. 19.33.
(c) Decision: The final decision regarding the appeal or variance application shall:
1. Be made within a reasonable time;
2. Be sent to the Department Regional office within 10 days of the decision;
3. Be a written determination signed by the chairman or secretary of the
Board;
4. State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board's decision;
5. Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of
jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application;
29
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
6. Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the hardship
demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly stated in
the recorded minutes of the Board proceedings.
(3) BOUNDARY DISPUTES
The following procedure shall be used by the Board in hearing disputes concerning
floodplain district boundaries:
(a) If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or detailed
floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in locating the
boundary. If none exists, other evidence may be examined.
(b) The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the Board; and
(c) If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the zoning
committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the
governing body for a map amendment according to s. 19.36 Amendments.
(4) VARIANCE
(a) The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of this
ordinance if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
1. Literal enforcement of the ordinance will cause unnecessary hardship;
2. The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and unique
property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such
case the ordinance or map must be amended;
3. The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
4. The variance is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance in s. 19.03.
(b) In addition to the criteria in subd (a), to qualify for a variance under FEMA
regulations, the following criteria must be met:
1. The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
2. Variances can only be granted for lots that are less than one-half acre
and are contiguous to existing structures constructed below the RFE;
and
3. Variances shall only be granted upon a showing of good and sufficient
30
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
cause, shall be the minimum relief necessary, shall not cause increased
risks to public safety or nuisances, shall not increase costs for rescue
and relief efforts and shall not be contrary to the purpose of the
ordinance.
(c) A variance shall not:
1. Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning district.
2. Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or loss.
3. Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
4. Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the area.
5. Allow actions without the amendments to this ordinance or map(s)
required in s. 19.37 Amendments; and
6. Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its use, which
would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure.
(d) When a floodplain variance is granted the Board shall notify the applicant in
writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood insurance
premiums could increase up to $25.00 per $100.00 of coverage. A copy shall
be maintained with the variance record.
19.33 TO REVIEW APPEALS OF PERMIT DENIALS
(1) The Zoning Agency (s. 19.31) or Board shall review all data related to the appeal.
This may include:
(a) Permit application data listed in s. 19.30(2).
(b) Floodway/floodfringe determination data in s. 19.24.
(c) Data listed in s. 19.14(1)(b) where the applicant has not submitted this
information to the zoning administrator.
(d) Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the Board with the
appeal.
(2) For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
(a) Follow the procedures of s.19.32;
(b) Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
31
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(c) Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
(3) For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board shall:
(a) Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an increase
in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the flood
profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all
adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of s. 19.36
Amendments; and
(b) Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly demonstrates
that the project does not cause an increase provided no other reasons for
denial exist.
19.34 FLOODPROOFING
(1) No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure designed to be
watertight below the regional flood elevation until the applicant submits a plan
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
measures will protect the structure or development to the flood protection elevation
and submits a FEMA Floodproofing Certificate.
(2) For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit or variance shall be
issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
(a) Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
(b) Meets or exceeds the following standards:
1. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
(a) Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact forces and other
regional flood factors;
(b) Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
(c) Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral movement; and
32
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
(d) Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters.
(e) Minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters.
19.35 PUBLIC INFORMATION
(1) Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the regional flood.
(2) All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and widely distributed.
(3) Real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any real property is
in.
19.36 AMENDMENTS
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made to this ordinance,
the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with s. 19.37.
(1) In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases shall be permitted
unless the applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and
amendments are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway
lines and water surface profiles, in accordance with s. 19.37. Any such alterations must
be reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
(2) In A Zones increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be permitted if the
applicant receives a Conditional Letter of Map Revision from FEMA and amendments
are made to this ordinance, the official floodplain maps, floodway lines, and water
surface profiles, in accordance with s. 19.37.
19.37 GENERAL
The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain zoning district boundaries
and this ordinance in the manner outlined in s. 19.38 below. Actions, which require an
amendment to the ordinance and/or submittal of a Letter of Map Change (LOMC) include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any increase in the
regional flood height;
(2) Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse alterations on the FIRM;
(3) Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed in 19.05 (2)(b);
(4) Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to a height at or above
33
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land lying outside the floodplain;
(5) Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and floodplain maps;
(6) Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by s. NR 116.05, Wis.
Adm. Code, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the municipality; and
(7) All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway lines or to remove
an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based on a base flood elevation
from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
19.38 PROCEDURES
Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party according to the
provisions of s. 62.23, Stats., for cities and villages, or 59.69, Stats., for counties. The
petitions shall include all data required by ss. 19.24 and 19.30(2). The Land Use Permit
shall not be issued until a Letter of Map Revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed
changes.
(1) The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a public hearing
and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and notice of public
hearing shall be submitted to the Department Regional office for review prior to the
hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the provisions of s. 62.23,
Stats., for cities and villages or s. 59.69, Stats., for counties.
(2) No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the
Department.
(3) All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow, causing any
increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding easements or other
appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected property owners and
notify local units of government before the amendment can be approved by the
governing body.
19.39 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance by any person shall be unlawful and shall
be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously prosecute all such violators.
A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not less than
$1.00 and not more than $50.00, together with a taxable cost of such action.
Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this
ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may
be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to
s. 87.30, Stats.
34
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
19.40 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this ordinance shall have their common
law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural
number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is
not discretionary.
1. A ZONE – Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which would
be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A
Zones. The A Zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the
availability of data for a given area.
2. AH ZONE – See “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”.
3. AO ZONE – See “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING”.
4. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE – A facility, structure, building or use which
is accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or building.
5. ALTERATION – An enhancement, upgrading or substantial change or modifications
other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure.
6. AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING – A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or
VO zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and
where velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
7. BASE FLOOD – Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a
FIRM.
8. BASEMENT – Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below
ground level, on all sides.
9. BUILDING – See STRUCTURE.
10. BULKHEAD LINE – A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has
been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant to
s. 30.11, Stats., and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line and the
original ordinary high-water mark, except where such filling is prohibited by the
floodway provisions of this ordinance.
35
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
11. CAMPGROUND – Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or
used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by 4 or more
camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
12. CAMPING UNIT – Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area, used
as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer, motor home,
bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if required, and ready for
highway use.
13. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE – A certification that the construction and the
use of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in
compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance.
14. CHANNEL – A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to
confine and conduct normal flow of water.
15. CRAWLWAYS OR "CRAWL SPACE" – An enclosed area below the first usable
floor of a building, generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing
and electrical utilities.
16. DECK – An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, but has a
permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
17. DEPARTMENT – The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
18. DEVELOPMENT – Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory
structures; the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or
renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement; the
placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site preparation; mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage,
deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or
removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
19. DRYLAND ACCESS – A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood
elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the
floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide
enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
20. ENCROACHMENT – Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the
floodway.
36
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
21. FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) – The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
22. FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – A map of a community on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
23. FLOOD or FLOODING – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
• The overflow or rise of inland waters;
• The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
• The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated
cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior; or
• The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of
nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
24. FLOOD FREQUENCY – The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined
from statistical analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually
expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of years or as a
percent (%) chance of occurring in any given year.
25. FLOODFRINGE – That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is
covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with standing water
rather than flowing water.
26. FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP – A map designating approximate flood
hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A-Zones and do not
contain floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for
both the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate Map.
27. FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY – A technical engineering examination, evaluation,
and determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those
areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and
base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are
designated as numbered and unnumbered A-Zones. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, that
accompany the Flood Insurance Study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program.
28. FLOODPLAIN – Land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the
regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe, and may include other
designated floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
29. FLOODPLAIN ISLAND – A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain
37
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
30. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT – Policy and procedures to insure wise use of
floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and
administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
31. FLOOD PROFILE – A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship
of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations
along a stream or river.
32. FLOODPROOFING – Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of
buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood
damage.
33. FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION – An elevation of two feet of freeboard above
the water surface profile elevation designated for the regional flood. (Also see:
FREEBOARD.)
34. FLOOD STORAGE – Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been
taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
35. FLOODWAY – The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain
adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
36. FREEBOARD – A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet
above a calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause
flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation,
wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of watershed
urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and aggregation of the
river or stream bed.
37. HABITABLE STRUCTURE – Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for
human habitation.
38. HEARING NOTICE – Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Ch. 985,
Stats. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7 days) before
the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a Class 2 notice,
published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at least a week (7 days)
before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require additional notice,
exceeding these minimums.
39. HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL – Damage that could result from flooding
that includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a
structure or building and its contents.
38
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
40. HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE – The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
41. HISTORIC STRUCTURE – Any structure that is either:
• Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
• Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
• Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
• Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state
program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or by the Secretary of the
Interior in states without approved programs.
42. INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT – A calculated upward rise in the
regional flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of existing
conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to development in
the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of mathematical variables such as
roughness factors, expansion and contraction coefficients and discharge.
43. LAND USE – Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate.
(Also see DEVELOPMENT.)
44. LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE – Elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any of the exterior walls of a building.
45. LOWEST FLOOR – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of 44 CFR 60.3.
46. MAINTENANCE – The act or process of restoring to original soundness, including
redecorating, refinishing, non structural repairs, or the replacement of existing
fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
47. MANUFACTURED HOME – A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" includes a mobile home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle."
39
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
48. MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
49. MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING – A
parcel of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the
effective date of this ordinance. At a minimum, this would include the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads.
50. MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING – The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of
utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the pouring if concrete
pads.
51. MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, lightduty
vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed or
carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or carried,
including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of "mobile recreational
vehicles."
52. MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE – A hydraulic engineering model that corrects
any errors that occur in the Duplicate Effective Model, adds any additional cross
sections to the Duplicate Effective Model, or incorporates more detailed topographic
information than that used in the current effective model.
53. MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE – A copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the
effective FIS and referred to as the effective model.
54. MODEL, EFFECTIVE – The hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce
the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
55. MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT) – A modification of the Duplicate Effective
Model or Corrected Effective Model to reflect any man made modifications that have
occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but prior to the
construction of the project for which the revision is being requested. If no
modification has occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model
would be identical to the Corrected Effective Model or Duplicate Effective Model.
40
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
56. MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT) – A modification of the Existing or Pre-
Project Conditions Model, Duplicate Effective Model or Corrected Effective Model
to reflect revised or post-project conditions.
57. MUNICIPALITY" or "MUNICIPAL – The county, city or village governmental units
enacting, administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance.
58. NAVD” or “NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM – Elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
59. NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM – Elevations referenced to
mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
60. NEW CONSTRUCTION – For floodplain management purposes, "new construction"
means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of floodplain zoning regulations adopted by this community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purpose of
determining flood insurance rates, it includes any structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
61. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE – An existing lawful structure or building
which is not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this
ordinance for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing
residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use. However, if the
lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is
nonconforming.)
62. NONCONFORMING USE – An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or
building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance for the area
of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.)
63. OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW – Any development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future development
will cause an increase in regional flood height.
64. OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP – That map, adopted and made part of
this ordinance, as described in s. 19.05(2), which has been approved by the
Department and FEMA.
65. OPEN SPACE USE – Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and
not involving structures.
66. ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK – The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive
41
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
67. PERSON – An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality or state agency.
68. PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM – A sewage treatment and disposal system serving
one structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as
the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by the
Department of Commerce, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil absorption
field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a system located on
a different parcel than the structure.
69. PUBLIC UTILITIES – Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission
lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems
such as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
70. REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING – Means base flood waters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that
any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed
buildings.
71. REGIONAL FLOOD – A flood determined to be representative of large floods
known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM,
the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
72. START OF CONSTRUCTION – The date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
73. STRUCTURE – Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, stream
bed or lake bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or
42
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
74. SUBDIVISION – Has the meaning given in s. 236.02(12), Wis. Stats.
75. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
76. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage,
any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work preformed.
The term does not, however, include either any project for the improvement of a
building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
77. UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP – Where special conditions affecting a particular
property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with restrictions
governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or
unreasonable in light of the purposes of the ordinance.
78. VARIANCE – An authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is
inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain zoning
ordinance.
79. VIOLATION – The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the floodplain zoning ordinance. A structure or other development without
required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or
required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
80. WATERSHED – The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
81. WATER SURFACE PROFILE – A graphical representation showing the elevation of
the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at
a certain flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in
regulating floodplain areas.
82. WELL – means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended
43
City of Chilton Ch. 19 Flood Plain Zoning
use.
44
City of Chilton Ch. 20 Construction and Effect of Ordinances
1
CHAPTER 20
CONSTRUCTION AND EFFECT OF ORDINANCES
Page
20.01 Rules of Construction 2
20.02 Conflict and Separability 2
20.03 Clerk to File Documents Incorporated by Reference 2
20.04 Penalty Provisions 3
20.05 Repeal of General Ordinances 4
20.06 Effect of Repeals 5
20.07 Title: Effective Date: Citation 5
20.08 Enforcement of Ordinances 5
City of Chilton Ch. 20 Construction and Effect of Ordinances
2
20.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. (1) In the construction of this Code of general
ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the ordinance.
(a) Wisconsin Statutes. The term “Wisconsin Statutes” wherever used in this
Code shall men the Wisconsin Statutes for the year 1973 and shall include the 1975 session laws.
(b) Gender: Singular and Plural. Every word in this Code and in any ordinance
importing the masculine gender may extend and be applied to females as well as males, and
every word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or
things as well as to one person or thing; provided that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any provisions which shall contain any express language excluding such construction
or when the subject matter or context of such provisions may be repugnant thereto.
(c) Person. The word “person” extends and applies to natural persons, firms,
corporations, associations, partnerships or other bodies politic and all entities of any kind capable
of being sued unless plainly inapplicable.
(d) Acts by Agents. When a provision requires an act to be done which may by
law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
20.02 CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY. (1) CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
If the provisions of the different chapters of this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the
provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject
matter of such chapter.
(2) SEPARABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS. If any section, subsection, sentence,
clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by reason
of any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any other section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion thereof. The Common
Council hereby declares that they would have passed this Code and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more section
subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof may be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
20.03 CITY CLERK TO FILE DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY
REFERENCE. Whenever in this Code any standard, code, rule, regulation or other written or
printed matter is adopted by reference, it shall be deemed incorporated in this Code as if fully set
forth herein and the City Clerk is hereby directed and required to file, deposit and keep in his
office a copy of the Code, standard, rule, regulation or other written or printed matter
as adopted. Materials so filed, deposited and kept shall be public records open for examination
City of Chilton Ch. 20 Construction and Effect of Ordinances
3
with proper care by any person during the City Clerk’s office hours, subject to such orders or
regulations which the City Clerk may prescribe for their preservation.
20.04 PENALTY PROVISIONS. (Ord. #818 6/4/96)
(1) GENERAL PENALTY. Except where a penalty is provided elsewhere in this Code,
any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be subject to a penalty, which shall be as follows:
(a) FIRST OFFENSE – PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less than One Dollar ($1.00) nor more than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00), together with the costs of prosecution. Any person who defaults in
the payment of such forfeiture or costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until said forfeiture
and costs are paid but not exceeding 90 days.
(b) SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES – PENALTY. Any person found
guilty of violating any ordinance or part of an ordinance of this Code who shall previously have
been convicted of a violation of the same ordinance within one year shall, upon conviction
thereof, forfeit not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00)
for each such offense, together with costs of prosecution. Any person who defaults in the
payment of such forfeiture or costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until said forfeiture
and costs are paid, but not exceeding 6 months.
(2) CONTINUED VIOLATIONS. Each violation and each day a violation continues or
occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this Code shall preclude the City from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of any provision of this
Code.
(3) OTHER REMEDIES.
(a) The City shall have any and all other remedies afforded by the Wisconsin Statutes
in addition to the forfeitures and costs or prosecution above.
(b) Execution against defendant’s property. Whenever any person fails to pay a
forfeiture and costs of prosecution upon the order of any court violation of any ordinance of the
City, the court may, in lieu of ordering imprisonment or the defendant, or after the defendant has
been released from custody, issue an execution against the property of the defendant for said
forfeiture and costs.
(4) RESTITUTION. Any violation of a provision of this Code similar to conduct
prohibited by state statute resulting in damage to property or physical injury to a person shall
require restitution to be made upon conviction thereof.
City of Chilton Ch. 20 Construction and Effect of Ordinances
4
(5) STATUTORY EQUIVALENT ORDINANCES. Notwithstanding other provisions
of this Code of Ordinances, when a violation of these ordinances is similar in nature to a
corresponding violation of the Wisconsin Statutes, the City official charging under these
ordinances may use the Wisconsin Judicial Conference uniform deposit schedule forfeiture
amount, including court costs and assessments, listed for the violation.
(6) OTHER SANCTIONS. Nothing herein shall preclude or affect the power of the
sentencing court to exercise additional authorities granted by the Wisconsin Statutes to suspend
or revoke the operating privileges of the defendant, order the defendant to submit to assessment
and rehabilitation programs or to attend traffic safety school in addition to payment of a
monetary penalty or in lieu of imprisonment.
20.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES. All ordinances heretofore adopted by the
Common Council of the City are hereby repealed, except all ordinances or parts of ordinances
relating to the following subjects and not conflicting with any of the provisions of this Code:
The issuance of corporate bonds and notes of the City of whatever
name or description.
The establishment of grades, curb lines and widths of sidewalks
in the public streets and alleys.
The fixing of salaries of public officials and employees.
Rights, licenses or franchises or the creation of any contract
with the City.
The lighting of streets and alleys.
The annexation of territory to the City.
The naming and changing of names of streets, alleys, public grounds
and parks.
The letting of contracts without bids.
The establishment of aldermanic districts, aldermanic
district boundaries and election precincts.
Tax and special assessment levies.
Release of persons, firms or corporations from liability.
Construction of any public works.
City of Chilton Ch. 20 Construction and Effect of Ordinances
5
Water, sewer and electric rates, rules and regulations and sewer
and water main construction.
Budget ordinances, resolutions and actions.
The Zoning ordinance which is reenacted with all amendments thereto.
20.06 EFFECT OF REPEALS. The repeal or amendment of any section or provision of
this Code or of any other ordinances or resolutions of the Common Council shall not:
(1) By implication be deemed to revive any ordinance not in force or existing at the time
at which such repeal or amendment takes effect.
(2) Affect any vested right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred
under any enactment so repealed or amended, unless the privilege of repealing such obligation or
privilege has been reserved by the City.
(3) Affect any offense committed or penalty or forfeiture incurred, previous to the time
when any ordinance shall be repealed or amended, except that when any forfeiture or penalty
shall have been mitigated by the provisions of any ordinance, such provisions shall apply to and
control any judgment to be pronounced after such ordinance takes effect for any offense
committed before that time.
(4) Affect any prosecution for any offense, or the levy of any penalty or forfeiture
pending at the time when any ordinance aforesaid shall be repealed or amended, but the right of
action shall continue and the offender shall be subject to the penalty as provided in such
ordinances, and such prosecution shall proceed, in all respects, as if such ordinance or ordinances
had not been repealed, except that all such proceedings had after the time this Code shall take
effect, shall be conducted according to the provisions of this Code.
20.07 TITLE: EFFECTIVE DATE: CITATION. These ordinances shall be known as
the “Municipal Code of the City of Chilton” and shall take effect from and after passage and
publication as provided in sec. 66.035, Wis. Stats. All references thereto shall be cited by
section number (example: section 13.06, Municipal Code of the City of Chilton).
20.08 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES (Created Ord. #819 6/4/96)
(1) The City of Chilton hereby elects to use the citation method of enforcement of
ordinances. All City law enforcement officers, City personnel and any other personnel charged
with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of the Code of Ordinances are hereby
authorized pursuant to Section 66.119(1)(a), Wisconsin Statutes, to issue citations for violations
of this Code of Ordinances, including ordinances for which a statutory counterpart exists.
(2) INFORMATION CONTAINED IN CITATION. The citation shall contain the
following:
City of Chilton Ch. 20 Construction and Effect of Ordinances
6
(a) The name and address of the alleged violator.
(b) Factual allegations describing the alleged violation.
(c) The time and place of the offense.
(d) The section of the ordinance violated.
(e) A Designation of the offense in such manner as can readily
be understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so.
(f) The time at which the alleged violator may appear in court.
(g) A statement which in essence informs the alleged violator:
1. That a cash deposit based on the schedule of deposits established by this ordinance
may be made which shall be delivered or mailed to the Clerk of Court prior to the time of the
scheduled court appearance.
2. That if a deposit is made, no appearance in court is necessary unless he is
subsequently summoned.
3. That if a cash deposit is made and the alleged violator elects to make a cash deposit,
the statement which accompanies the citation shall be signed to indicate that the statement
required under subsection (a) above has been read. Such statement shall be sent or brought with
the cash deposit.
(i) Such other information as the City deems necessary.
(3) FORM OF CITATION. The form of the citation to be used shall be the Wisconsin
Uniform Citation, or any other form that is substantially similar thereto.
(4) SCHEDULE OF DEPOSITS.
(a) The cash deposit for violation of an ordinance that adopts a Wisconsin Statute shall
be equal to the cash deposit established by the Wisconsin Judicial Conference uniform deposit
schedule for violation of that statute, plus all court costs and assessments.
(b) The cash deposit for all other ordinance violations shall be equal to 100% of the
maximum forfeiture for that violation, plus all court costs and assessments.
(5) ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
(a) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer may issue
citations authorized under this Chapter, including any law enforcement agencies or officers that
are under contract with the City to provide law enforcement services.
City of Chilton Ch. 20 Construction and Effect of Ordinances
7
City of Chilton Ch. 22 Park Regulations
Updated 11/22/11
CHAPTER 22
PARK REGULATIONS
Page
22.01 Purpose 2
22.02 Use of Park Lands 2
22.03 Park Regulations 2
22.04 Penalty 3
1
City of Chilton Ch. 22 Park Regulations
22.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for
the control of activities in the City parks in the City of Chilton.
22.02 USE OF PARK LANDS. The public parks of the City of Chilton shall be open
for use for the general public during the hours provided herein. Should any person wish
to have the exclusive use of any portion of the City parks such person shall make a
request in writing to the Director of Public Works within 90 days of such intended use.
The Director of Public Works shall then issue a permit for such usage. Such permit shall
be issued upon the condition that all litter and trash be cleaned up and deposited in proper
containers prior to leaving said premises. Such permit shall entitle such person to
exclusive usage of the area as set forth in the permit.
22.03 PARK REGULATIONS. No person shall do any of the following in any of the
public parks of the City:
(1) Operate any vehicle or ride horses except upon clearly marked public roadways.
(2) Park any vehicle or loiter or lounge between 11:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. except as
allowed by permission issued by the City. (Ord. # 1061 7/6/2010)
(3) Carry, keep or use any bow and arrow, slingshot, trap or other shooting device not
defined as a firearm under Section 66.0409 of the Wisconsin Statutes, except as
authorized and approved by the City. No person shall possess or control a firearm,
as defined in Section 66.0409 of the Wisconsin Statutes, in a city park unless that
firearm is unloaded and enclosed within a carrying case unless an individual possess
a conceal carry permit. (Ord. # 1084 11/15/2011, Ord. #1055 1/19/2010)
(4) Disturb, molest, deface, remove or destroy any trees, shrubs, plants or other natural
growth; carve or paint on any rocks, signs, walls or structures; drive nails in trees, or
injure or deface in any manner, any park building, signs, fences, tables or other City
property.
(5) Build any fires except in fireplaces or approved grills or dispose of live embers of
any fire where they may start a grass or forest fire or endanger public health or
safety.
(6) Leave, throw or break any bottle, box, can, garbage or other objects except in clearly
marked refuse receptacles.
(7) (#864 7/21/98) Prohibited areas for animals. No person owning, keeping, or in
charge of any animal shall permit such animal to be in any public park in the City or
river walkway that has not been designated as a pet run area excepting that these
areas may be crossed using a sidewalk or paved trail with the pet on a suitable leash
(as required by Sec. 8.02(2) (g). Revised 11/15/2011
2
City of Chilton Ch. 22 Park Regulations
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable in cases in which a person is
being assisted by a seeing-eye dog or for a special event allowed or permitted by the
City.
(8) Be intoxicated, use profane language, practice rowdyism, or otherwise conduct
himself in a disorderly manner.
(9) Use any public facility in any manner, which is destructive to that facility.
(10) Ride any bicycles except in the parking area and other roadway areas.
(11) (#590 3/1/83) Ride any snowmobile except in Hobart Park, as restricted under
Section 5.081(2) (a) of this Municipal Code.
22.04 PENALTY. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a forfeiture of not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00 together with
the costs of prosecution and in default thereof, shall be imprisoned in the Calumet
County Jail until such forfeiture and the said costs together with the subsequent
costs, are paid but in any event for a term not greater than 90 days. Each day of
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a separate violation and
shall be punished as such.
3
City of Chilton CH. 21 Cemeteries
1
CHAPTER 21
CEMETERIES
Page
21.01 City Cemeteries 2
21.02 Cemetery Committee 2
21.03 Superintendent of Cemeteries 2
21.04 Sale of Lots 2
21.05 Conveyance of Lots 2
21.06 Interment and Disinterment 3
21.07 Grave Regulations 3
21.08 Monuments, Markers and Vaults 4
21.09 Conduct in Cemeteries 5
21.10 Council Authority 6
21.11 Perpetual Care 6
21.12 Penalty 6
City of Chilton CH. 21 Cemeteries
2
21.01 CITY CEMETERIES. This chapter shall create rules and regulations with regard to
properties known as Hillside Cemetery which have been transferred to the City by the
Chilton German Ladies Aid Society and such cemetery shall be subject to the provisions
herein.
21.02 CEMETERY COMMITTEE. The Public Works Committee created under Section 2.02(3)
of the Municipal Code shall be responsible for the operation of the cemetery. (Ord. #981
12/21/04)
21.03 SUPERINTENDENT CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT
(Ord. #981 12/21/04, Ord. #1120 9/01/15)
(1) The Director of Public Works shall act as the Cemetery Superintendent.
(2) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Cemetery Superintendent shall:
(a) Have general supervision and charge of cemetery grounds, and the laying out
of cemetery lots, the sale thereof, and the recording of ownership of all lots.
(b) Keep all necessary records of all burials, of all monument permits, and of the
transfer of ownership of cemetery lots.
(c) Be directly responsible to the Public Works Committee of the Council, and
shall abide by such rules and regulations as may be promulgated from time to
time by the Public Works Committee and approved by the Council.
21.04 SALE OF LOTS. All sales of cemetery lots in the City cemeteries shall be governed by
this section. (Ord. #985 5/17/05, Ord. #1120 9/01/15)
(1) The Council shall establish the price of lots and permit fees by resolution from time
to time, and such price shall include perpetual care.
(2) All applications for the purchase of lots in the cemeteries shall be made to the City of
Chilton.
(3) (a) There will be a limit of four (4) urns per gravesite for cremation.
(b) There will be a limit of one (1) vault and two (2) urns per gravesite.
(Ord. #663 5/5/87, Ord. #985 5/17/05)
21.05 CONVEYANCE OF LOTS. Cemetery lot conveyances shall be made as follows:
(Ord. #592 6/7/83, Ord. #1120 9/01/15)
(1) All lots sold in the cemetery shall be conveyed by deed. The purchaser acquires the
title and fee to the lot, subject to the conditions, limitations and reservations established
by this chapter or those, which may hereafter be established for the government or
maintenance of Chilton Hillside Cemetery.
(2) Any transfer of ownership of a gravesite, if there has been no interment therein, shall
be made subject to the written approval of the Cemetery Superintendent. If a lot has
City of Chilton CH. 21 Cemeteries
3
interment therein, then a transfer of ownership is subject to Wisconsin Statute Section
157.10.
(3) Lots can only be sold in one quarter, one-half, three fourths or whole sections.
Sections 24, 25, 76, 77 and 128 shall be restricted to single interments. (Ord. #985
5/17/05)
21.06 INTERMENT AND DISINTERMENT. (Ord. #1120 9/01/15)
The Cemetery Superintendent may allow interment upon request by the owner of the
gravesite and/or next of kin of the deceased. The request must be given in writing and
filed with the Cemetery Superintendent. Interment shall be made in a concrete or better
quality crypt (vault) or box. The material should not be ceramic or anything that will
deteriorate or break.
Disinterment of a body within the City Cemetery to another gravesite located within the
City Cemetery shall not be made without permission from the Cemetery Superintendent,
the owner of the gravesite and/or the next of kin of the deceased.
The Cemetery Superintendent shall follow all local laws and state statutes pertaining to
disinterment when a body is removed from the City Cemetery to be buried in another
location outside of the City Cemetery. (Ord. #592 6/7/83, Ord. #985 5/17/05)
21.07 GRAVE REGULATIONS. (Ord. #592 6/7/83, Ord. #985 5/17/05, Ord. #1120 9/1/15)
(1) All graves dug in any lot of the City cemeteries shall be headed towards the west and
headstones erected thereon shall be placed at the West End of such graves that being
the head end of the grave. Engraving on the monument must face west in the First
Addition to Hillside Cemetery except that individual name may be engraved on the
East Side of the monument.
Each monument shall be placed on a concrete slab 4 inches thick, with a minimum of
3 reinforcing rods no smaller than one half inch in size, 2 rods of which shall be
spaced 6 inches from the outside edge and the third in the center of the slab laying
parallel to the other two.
Such slab shall be no wider than 24 inches and no longer than 48 inches for single
interment and shall be installed at ground level for maintenance purposes.
Slabs for family monuments shall be no wider than 24 inches and no longer than 72
inches and shall be installed at ground level.
Each monument slab shall be placed at the West End of the plat with the West End of
the slab on the lot line.
(2) All monuments shall be installed on concrete slabs as provided herein and shall be so
located on the slab so as to maintain a 6-inch lip on all sides of the concrete slab.
Monuments shall not exceed 8 inches in width and 30 inches in height. (#985 5/17/05)
City of Chilton CH. 21 Cemeteries
4
(3) Before any grave is dug in any City Cemetery, the owner of the lot upon which it is
to be placed shall consult with the Cemetery Superintendent, and shall follow his
directions relating to the position upon which the grave shall be placed. The required
fee for a monument permit must be paid beforehand. Any person erecting a
headstone upon any grave in the City cemeteries shall consult the Cemetery
Superintendent prior to erecting said headstone. (Ord. #637 10/15/085, Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(4) No grave in the City Cemetery shall be made or maintained above the level of the
remaining portions of the lot upon which it is placed. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(5) The planting of trees, shrubs, perennials or annuals or a tall growth on graves is not
permitted. One flower or plant shall be placed at the base of the monument.
Additional items are allowed to be temporarily placed on the monument but may not
extend over the base of the monument slab. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(6) Each marker shall be placed on a concrete slab 4 inches thick with a minimum of 3
reinforcing rods no smaller than 3/8 inches in diameter, 2 rods of which shall be
spaced 6 inches from the outside edge of said slab and the third in the center of the
slab and laying parallel to the other two. Such slabs shall not exceed 24 inches in
width and 48 inches in length for a single marker and not to exceed 72 inches in
length for a family marker and shall be installed at ground level.
21.08 MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND VAULTS. (Ord. #637 10/15/85, Ord. #985 5/17/05,
Ord. 31120 9/1/15)
(1) No monument or grave marker shall be erected or placed upon a lot by any person
without first having obtained a monument permit from the City of Chilton
(2) Dealers' or manufacturers’ cards or advertisements shall not be marked on any stone
or placed anywhere within the cemetery limits.
(3) Workmen engaged in placing stones, or removing excess ground, shall provide
suitable boards on which to move the same, or on which to run trucks, and
immediately after work is completed rubbish is to be cleared away and the ground left
clean and in good condition. Adjoining lots, paths or roads where work is being done
must not be blocked or damaged. All workmen engaged in erecting monuments or
other structures are prohibited from tying ropes to trees, shrubs or other objects. The
workmen shall not litter the grounds longer than necessary. Surrounding lots are to
be restored to their proper condition. In cases of neglect, removal or repair work will
be made by cemetery employees at the expense of the lot owner or contractor.
(4) The Council or the Cemetery Superintendent shall have the right to enter and remove
from any lot, any monument, effigy or enclosure, or any structure, which shall be
determined by them to be improper, offensive, or injurious to the appearance of the
cemeteries.
(5) The placing of boxes, shelves, ornaments, lighted ornaments, banners, chairs, settees,
glass, wood, or iron cases and similar articles upon a lot shall not be permitted, and if
City of Chilton CH. 21 Cemeteries
5
so placed the Council or Cemetery Superintendent shall reserve the right to remove
the same. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(6) The cemetery authorities will not be responsible for any damages to the lots or
structures thereon, or for flowers or plants removed from any lot. Any damage or
loss shall be reported to the Superintendent, who shall endeavor to discover the
offender.
(7) Lot owners are prohibited from placing any curbing or fencing around their lot. The
Council may remove curbs or fences at the cost of the owner of the lot in case of
violation of this section.
21.09 CONDUCT IN CEMETERIES.
The following regulations shall govern the public in the cemeteries of the City:
(1) No person shall loiter on the cemetery grounds after dark.
(2) Visitors shall keep on the paths and avenues and not walk over lots to take a shortcut
through the cemetery.
(3) Automobiles or other motor vehicles shall not be operated or driven within the
cemetery at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour.
(4) Cemetery roads shall not be used as a public thoroughfare or as shortcuts from one
street to another.
(5) No person driving in the cemetery shall make a “U” turn in the avenues.
(5) Animals are not allowed in the cemetery. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(7) No person shall throw rubbish on the avenues, walks, or any part of the cemetery
grounds.
(8) No person shall pluck or remove flowers, either wild or cultivated, or break any tree,
shrub or plant, or write upon, deface, or injure any marker, monument, or structure in or
belonging to the cemetery.
(9) Unsupervised minors are not allowed in the cemetery. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(10) Firearms are not permitted in the cemeteries, except those used by law enforcement
and military companies. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(11) No person shall disturb the quiet and good order of the cemeteries by noise or other
improper conduct. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
(12) No person shall erect or maintain any advertising sign upon cemetery grounds.
(Ord. #985 5/17/05)
City of Chilton CH. 21 Cemeteries
6
(13) No person shall ski, sled ride, snowmobile or in any other way use the cemetery
property for recreational activities that would tend to disrupt the quiet and good order of
such cemetery. (Ord. #985 5/17/05)
21.10 COUNCIL AUTHORITY. The Council shall, from time to time, lay out or alter avenues
or walks, and make such rules and regulations for the governing of the cemetery grounds,
as it may deem proper and expedient. All lot owners are subject to such rules, conditions,
limitations and regulations as the Council may make from time to time, for the governing
and improvement of cemetery grounds. The Council or the Superintendent of Cemeteries
shall have the right to enter upon any lot and remove therefrom any tree or shrubs in such
lot, when they become detrimental to adjacent lots or avenues or cause inconvenience to
passers-by by reason of roots, branches or otherwise.
21.11 PERPETUAL CARE.
(1) DEFINITION. Perpetual care means the cutting and sprinkling of grass at reasonable
intervals; the raking and cleaning of the lot or grave, the pruning of the shrubs and trees;
also includes capital improvements to buildings and grounds and such work as may be
necessary to keep the lot or grave in good and neat condition in a manner as is now
regularly done upon the lots or graves. It also includes the removal of snow from the
roadway to the cemetery lot and the clearance of a sufficient space adjacent to the lot to
facilitate the conducting of a burial. The repair or replacement of any foundation marker
or monumental structure, the planting of flowers or plants, or any special work, or the
cleaning of monuments or stones is not included in the term perpetual care. The same
service given to lots upon which Perpetual care has been placed shall be given to lots
which are on the annual assessment plan. Perpetual care also includes capital
improvements to buildings and grounds.
(2) The City shall provide all perpetual care as described in (1) in perpetuity for those
graves in the cemetery. (Ord. #866 9/1/88)
(3) INVESTMENT OF PERPETUAL CARE FUNDS. The City shall establish and
maintain a non-lapsing account in its general fund for purposes of receiving and
depositing monies from any person for the purpose of perpetual care of the Hillside
Cemetery and the graves located therein. In addition, proceeds from the sale of cemetery
lots shall be deposited in this account. (Ord. #866 9/1/98)
21.12 PENALTY. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in Sec. 20.04 of this Municipal Code.
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
1
Updated 5/5/08
CHAPTER 23
REGULATE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
Page
23.01 Statutory Authorization 2
23.02 Purpose 2
23.03 Definitions 2
23.04 Licensing 3
23.05 License Application Procedure 4
23.06 Performance Standards for Licensing 7
23.07 Insurance and Indemnification 11
23.08 Repair and Replacement 12
23.09 Amendment or Revocation of License 12
23.10 License Expiration 13
23.11 Abandonment 14
23.12 Severability 14
23.13 Penalties 14
Entire Chapter Created 4/15/2008
23.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION. This Chapter is enacted pursuant to '66.0401 of the
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
2
Wisconsin Statutes.
23.02 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a regulatory scheme for the
construction and operation of Wind Energy Facilities in the City of Chilton, whose
primary purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customer(s), subject to reasonable
restrictions that will preserve the public health and safety or that do not significantly
increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency. In this regard, the
City adopts and incorporates by reference a report issued by the National Research
Council entitled Environmental Impacts of Wind-Energy Projects, May 2007 ("2007
NRC Report").
23.03 DEFINITIONS.
Applicant: The Person that seeks to secure a license under this Chapter.
City: The City of Chilton.
Council: The Common Council of the City of Chilton.
Decommissioning: The process of use termination and removal of all or part of a Wind
Energy System by the Licensee or assigns of a Wind Energy Facility.
Good Utility Practice: Good Utility Practice means any of the practices, methods and
acts with respect to the safe operation of a Wind Energy Facility engaged in or approved
by a significant portion of the electric utility industry and, in particular, those portions of
the industry with experience in the construction, operation and maintenance of Wind
Energy Systems during the relevant time period; or any of the practices, methods and acts
which, in the exercise of reasonable judgment in light of the facts known at the time the
decision was made, could have been expected to accomplish the desired result at a
reasonable cost consistent with good business practices, reliability, safety and expedition.
Good Utility Practice is not intended to be limited to the optimum practice, method, or
act to the exclusion of all others, but rather to be acceptable practices, methods or acts
generally accepted in the region. Karst Feature: An area of surficial geologic feature
subject to bedrock dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and
may include areas with soils less than 60 inches thick over bedrock, caves, enlarged
fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces, sinkholes, springs, seeps, swallets,
and depressional areas with no surface drainage.
Landowner: The Person who owns the property on which a Wind Energy System is
located.
Licensee: The Applicant and/or successor who has been granted a license under this
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
3
Chapter to develop, operate or own a Wind Energy System.
Person: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or
association, or other legal entity.
Plan Commission: The City of Chilton Plan Commission.
Shadow Flicker: The on and off flickering effect of a shadow caused when the sun
passes behind the rotor or the blades of a Wind Energy System.
Stray Voltage: Means neutral-to-earth voltage measured from the electrical system
neutral and/or any structure bonded to this neutral to earth that adversely affects humans
or animals.
Total Height: When referring to a Wind Energy System, the distance measured from
ground level to the blade extended at its highest point.
Tower: The monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a wind generator.
Wind Energy Facility: One or more Wind Energy Systems under common ownership or
operating control, and includes substations, cables/wires and other buildings accessory to
such facility, whose main purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customer(s).
Wind Energy Siting Permit: A construction and operating permit granted by the Council
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and Wis. Stats. '66.0401 Or any
successor statutes.
Wind Energy System: A wind energy conversion system that converts the energy in the
wind into electricity through the use of a wind generator, and includes the Tower, blade,
foundation, controller or inverter, and utility interface equipment.
23.04 LICENSING.
(1) License Required. From and after the effective date of this Chapter, no Wind
Energy System shall be operated or maintained in the City without first obtaining
a license to operate issued by the City.
(2) Effect of Other Licenses. The fact that a Person possesses any other valid license
or permit required by law, does not exempt that Person from the requirement of
obtaining a Wind Energy System license under this Chapter.
(3) Non-Assignability of Licenses. The license is not assignable or transferable to
any other Person, without the express prior written consent of the City, such
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
4
consent not to be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, the Licensee may
assign the license once to a new entity, upon notice to the City, if the Licensee
submits an affidavit demonstrating the following:
(a) The new entity is wholly owned by the Licensee.
(b) The new entity is properly formed and authorized to do business in
Wisconsin.
(c) The written assignment requires the new entity to assume all of the
Licensee's rights, duties and obligations under the license including but
not limited to the letter of credit requirements and the certificate of
insurance requirements.
23.05 LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(1) Any Person desiring to secure a Wind Energy System license shall file an
application with the City.
(2) The application shall be on a form provided by the City.
(3) The following information shall be required of each Applicant, and must be
provided under oath or affirmation:
(a) Name, address, and phone number.
(b) If the Applicant is a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or
limited liability partnership, the application shall include the name of the
business entity; the date of incorporation, registration or organization; the
state in which the entity was incorporated, registered or organized; the
name and address and home numbers of the registered agent where
applicable; the names and addresses of all officers and directors; operating
or managing partners or general partners; managing members or
managers, whichever is applicable for the particular form of business
entity.
(c) Name and address of any other current or past Wind Energy System
operated by the Applicant whether in this state or any other state or district
within the United States.
(d) Name, address and phone number of an individual who is responsible for
the day-to-day operation of the facility and who will be the contact Person
for the City.
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
5
(e) A site plan of the Wind Energy Facility, including total acreage occupied
by the facility. The application shall also be accompanied by a detailed
map of the area showing parcel boundaries, individual Wind Energy
System locations and accessory structures such as transmission lines and
substations. Said map should include the location of:
(i) All public roads, including future proposed public roads shown on
the City's official map.
(ii) Existing buildings and structures within a one-half mile radius,
including residences, schools, hospitals, churches, businesses and
public libraries.
(iii) Karst Features, including sink holes and visible cracks, in the
ground or rock surface on the proposed site. (Said Karst
information must be provided by a professional geologist, licensed
professional engineer, or the Plan Commission's designee.)
(iv) All property lines.
(v) All communication and electrical lines.
(vi) Location of microwave signal paths within a one-half mile radius.
The City reserves the right to require the preparation of a pre-construction
noise survey for each proposed Wind Energy System location showing
ambient background noise levels over a reasonable period of time prior to
final layout and construction, and an environmental study evaluating the
impact the project may have on groundwater in the vicinity of the
proposed Wind Energy System location.
(f) A statement from the Applicant that all Wind Energy System(s) will be
installed in compliance with manufacturer's specifications, and a copy of
those manufacturer's specifications.
(g) A copy of the lease with the Landowner if the Applicant does not own the
land for the proposed Wind Energy Facility, and a statement from the
Landowner of the leased site that he/she will abide by all applicable terms
and conditions of the Wind Energy Siting Permit.
(h) A statement indicating what hazardous materials will be used and stored
on the site, and how those materials will be stored.
(i) A statement indicating how the Wind Energy Facility will be lit, if
applicable.
(j) A Decommissioning plan which shall describe how the site shall be
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
6
restored when the Wind Energy Facility is no longer in operation in
accordance with Section 11.1. The plan shall be updated and resubmitted
every 10 years and shall include:
(i) The anticipated life of the Wind Energy Facility.
(ii) The estimated Decommissioning costs in current dollars.
(iii) How said estimate was determined.
(iv) The method of ensuring that the funds will be available for
Decommissioning and restoration.
(k) A Shadow Flicker model to include a description of the zones where
Shadow Flicker will likely be present within the project boundary and a
one-half mile radius beyond the project boundary, the expected durations
of the Shadow Flicker at these locations, and the calculation of the total
number of hours per year of Shadow Flicker at all locations.
(l) Certificates of insurance complying with Section 7.1.
(m) The City shall require an irrevocable letter of credit, bond, cash escrow,
and/or personal guarantee, held in trust in favor of the City to recover the
costs associated with removal of a terminated Wind Energy Facility
("Security"). The amount shall be negotiated by the City prior to permit
approval and shall remain in effect until released by the City. The Council
will determine which method will be allowed.
(n) The City may require additional conditions and information to ensure
safety and proper land use fit to the surrounding area.
(4) Each application shall be signed by the Applicant.
(5) Each application shall be accompanied by payment of a non-refundable
application fee to be determined from time to time by separate resolution of the
City. Filing of the application does not occur until this fee has been paid.
(6) No action will be taken on an application until the completed application and all
supporting documentation is received by the City.
(7) The Council may, but shall not be obligated, to refer the application to the Plan
Commission for review and recommendation. The Plan Commission or the
Council may refer the application to a qualified consulting engineer for further
review.
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
7
(8) The Council may, but shall not be obligated to, refer the application to a public
hearing for purposes of receiving public comment.
(9) Following review, the Council shall either grant the license or deny the
application after reviewing the application for compliance with the licensing
standards found in this Chapter and under state law. A license may be granted
with conditions.
(10) If the license is granted by the Council, then the City shall issue the license on the
next business day. The Council for good cause may revoke a license at any time,
after first providing the Applicant with a hearing. If substantial construction has
not begun within one year of the issuance of the license, the license shall expire
and the Applicant shall be required to re-apply for a new license. The preceding
one-year deadline may be extended if the Applicant is able to demonstrate that the
delay in construction is caused by circumstances beyond the Applicant's
reasonable control. However, the Applicant shall not be excused from the
preceding deadline if the delay arises from the Applicant's negligence or failure to
reasonably anticipate ascertainable events or its failure to utilize commercially
reasonable alternate solutions.
(11) If the Council denies the application for a license, the City shall immediately
notify the Applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. Such notice shall be sent
to the Applicant within five days of the decision by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
(12) Any Applicant or other person aggrieved by such a decision of the Council,
including any resident or owner of property in the City, shall be entitled to
immediately appeal the Council's decision in circuit court. Such an appeal must
be made within 30 days of the date of the written decision by the Council. The
City explicitly elects not to be governed by Chapter 68 of the Wisconsin Statutes,
and to provide the review procedures described in this Section.
23.06 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR LICENSING.
(1) Safety.
(a) All wiring between Wind Energy System(s) and the Wind Energy System
substation shall be underground.
(b) All Wind Energy System(s) shall be reasonably protected from
unauthorized access up to 15 feet above ground level and must be located
inside the Tower.
(c) All access to doors to Wind Energy System(s) and electrical equipment
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
8
shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access. All substations shall be
fenced to prevent public access.
(d) Appropriate warning signage shall be placed on Wind Energy System(s),
electrical equipment, and Wind Energy System entrances.
(e) No blasting shall occur in connection with the construction of the Wind
Energy Facility unless the Licensee has provided prior notification to the
Landowner, any abutting property owners, property owners within 1,500
feet of the blasting site, and the City. All blasting shall be done in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
(f) The Licensee shall ensure that ice from the wind turbine blades does not
impact any property beyond the setback.
(g) The Licensee shall provide qualified personnel to conduct training
sessions to emergency responders when requested by the Council.
(h) The Licensee shall provide a representative to accompany the local fire
department inspector during site visits. The Licensee shall comply with all
applicable laws regarding those inspections.
(2) Signage and Fencing. The Licensee shall provide reasonable signage at the Wind
Energy Facility providing appropriate safety notices and warnings against
trespassing. The no trespassing signs shall be posted around the entire premises
at an appropriate distance for posting but no less than two conspicuous places for
every 10 acres within the Wind Energy Facility. Signs should be sized at a
minimum to meet the provisions of ' 943.013(2), Wis. Stats.
(3) Stray Voltage. The Licensee shall utilize Good Utility Practice to minimize, to
the extent practicable, the impact, if any, of Stray Voltage caused by the Wind
Energy Facility.
(4) Signal Interference. The Licensee shall minimize or mitigate any interference
with communications such as electromagnetic and microwave, and including
radio, telephone, or television signals caused by any Wind Energy System. If the
Licensee is a public utility, s. PSC 113.0707, Wisconsin Administrative Code,
also applies.
(5) Noise.
(a) The noise generated by the operation of a Wind Energy System may not
exceed the ambient noise level by more than 50 dBA as measured at any
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
9
point on property adjacent to the parcel on which the Wind Energy
Facility
is located. The noise level generated by the operation of a Wind Energy
Facility will be determined during the investigation of a noise complaint
by comparing the sound level measured when the wind generator blades
are rotating to the sound level measured when the wind generator blades
are stopped.
(b) In the event audible noise to Wind Energy Facility operations contains a
steady, pure tone, such as a whine, screech, or hum, the standards for
audible noise set forth in subparagraph (a) of this subsection shall be
reduced by 5 dBA. A pure tone is defined to exist if the one-third octave
band sound pressure level in the band, including the tone, exceeds the
arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous onethird
octave bands by 5 dBA for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above,
by 8 dBA for center frequencies between 160 Hz and 400 Hz, or by 15
dBA for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
(c) In the event the ambient noise level (exclusive of the development in
question) exceeds the applicable standard given above, the applicable
standard shall be adjusted so as to equal the ambient noise level. The
ambient noise level shall be expressed in terms of highest whole number
sound pressure level in dBA, which is succeeded for more than five
minutes per hour. Ambient noise levels shall be measured at the exterior
of potentially affected existing residences, schools, hospitals, churches,
and public libraries. Ambient noise level measurement techniques shall
employ all practical means of reducing the effect of wind-generated noise
at the microphone. Ambient noise level measurements may be performed
when wind velocities at the proposed project site are sufficient to allow
Wind Energy Facility operation, provided that the wind velocity does not
exceed 30 mph at the ambient noise measurement location.
(d) Any noise level falling between two whole decibels shall be the lower of
the two.
(e) In the event the noise levels resulting from the Wind Energy Facility
exceed the criteria listed above, a waiver to said levels may be granted by
the City provided that the following has been accomplished:
(i) Written consent from the affected property owners has been
obtained stating that they are aware of the Wind Energy Facility
and the noise limitations imposed by this Chapter, and that consent
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
10
is granted to allow noise levels to exceed the maximum limits
otherwise allowed; and,
(ii) If the Applicant wishes the waiver to apply to succeeding property
owners, a permanent noise impact easement has been recorded in
the Office of the Calumet County Register of Deeds which
describes the benefitted and burdened properties and which advises
all subsequent owners of the burdened property that noise levels in
excess of those permitted by this Chapter may exist on or at the
burdened property.
(f) The burden of proof that a Wind Energy Facility is exceeding the allowed
decibel levels shall be the responsibility of the party making such
allegations.
(6) Shadow Flicker. The Licensee must take reasonable steps as are necessary to
prevent, mitigate, or eliminate Shadow Flicker on any residence located within
one-half mile.
(7) Minimum Ground Clearance. The blade tip on any Wind Energy System shall, at
its lowest point, have a ground clearance of no less than 75 feet.
(8) Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to all Wind Energy Systems.
Setbacks shall be measured from the outermost edge of the closest of the circular
path of the wind turbine rotor blade. The Council may increase the following
minimum setbacks on a case-by-case basis, in order to protect public health and
safety.
(a) Property Line: 1,800 feet from any property line, unless the owner of the
adjacent property grants an easement for a lesser setback. The easement
must be recorded at the Office of the Calumet County Register of Deeds
and may not provide for a setback that is less than 2.0 times the Total
Height of the Wind Energy System.
(b) Public Roads: 1,800 feet. Public roads shall include any future roads
shown on the City's official map at the time the license is granted.
(c) Above Ground Power/Telephone Lines: 1,800 feet from the nearest
above ground public electric power line or telephone line.
(d) Residences & Other Buildings: 1,800 feet from the nearest residence,
business, school, daycare facility, church, hospital and other structures
that are routinely occupied by individuals.
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
11
(e) Wetlands: 1,800 feet from all sinkholes and wetlands.
(f) Water Bodies Setbacks: 1,800 feet from the ordinary high water mark of
all navigable water bodies.
(g) Parks & Public Property: 1,800 feet from any town, county or state park,
property, recreational or rest area.
(h) Spacing and Density: Minimum setback distances between turbines shall
be two times the Total Height of each Wind Energy System.
(9) Groundwater Protection. The Licensee shall operate the Wind Energy Facility so
as not to cause groundwater contamination in violation of applicable law. Nothing
contained in the license is intended to authorize or permit any degradation of the
quantity or quality of the groundwater. Furthermore, no wells may be drilled
within the boundaries of the Wind Energy Facility site. In addition, the Licensee
shall complete a plan for managing surface water runoff to prevent pollution of
groundwater through sinkholes and infiltration through the soil and underlying
bedrock in the vicinity of each Wind Energy Facility.
23.07 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION
(1) Insurance. The Licensee shall maintain the following insurance coverages
commencing upon construction of the facility.
(a) The Licensee shall, at its expense, maintain a broad form comprehensive
coverage policy of public liability insurance insuring Licensee against loss
or liability caused by Licensee in an amount not less than $5,000,000 of
combined single limit liability coverage per occurrence, accident or
incident, which has a commercially reasonable deductible.
(b) Worker's compensation coverage in an amount required by Wisconsin
law. Licensee shall require subcontractors and others not protected under
its insurance to obtain and maintain worker's compensation and
employers' liability insurance.
(c) Certificates of insurance evidencing compliance with these requirements
shall be provided upon request of the City. The insurer will provide notice
to the City in the event there is a lapse in coverage exceeding 30 days.
(d) All policies other than worker's compensation shall be written on an
occurrence and not on a claim-made basis. Each renewal period will
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
12
require a copy of the certificate of insurance be provided to the City. An
expired insurance certificate or an unacceptable liability coverage amount
is grounds for revocation of the permit.
(2) The Licensee shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officials,
employees and agents from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits,
causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses and liabilities whatsoever,
including reasonable attorneys' fees (such liabilities together known as
"Liability") arising out of Licensee's selection, construction, operation and
removal of the Wind Energy System and affiliated equipment including, without
limitation, Liability for property or personal injury (including death), whether said
Liability is premised on contract or on tort (including without limitation strict
liability or negligence). This general indemnification shall not be construed as
limiting or qualifying the City's other indemnification rights available under law.
23.08 REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT. The Licensee shall be authorized to repair and replace
the Wind Energy System consistent with Good Utility Practice as needed to keep it in
good repair and operating condition. However, no such repair or replacement shall
entitle the Licensee to any extension of the term of this license, even if it extends the
useful life of the Wind Energy System. If the Licensee desires to extend the term of this
license in the future, the Licensee shall be required to apply for such extension or
amendment of this license in accordance with the terms of this Chapter.
23.09 AMENDMENT OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(1) Amendment. Following the granting of a license, any Licensee who wishes to
materially alter any aspect of the license shall apply to the City for an amendment
to the license. The application shall explain the nature of the amendment and the
reasons therefore, and include a new non-refundable application fee. The Council
shall act on the amendment application consistent with the terms of this Chapter.
(2) Revocation of License. Each of the following occurrences shall constitute a
violation of the terms and conditions of this license (a "Violation") and any such
Violation shall be grounds for revocation of this license (whatever the reason for
such an event of default and whether it shall be voluntary or involuntary or be
effected by operation of law or pursuant to any judgment, order or regulation)
after the expiration of the notice and cure period and revocation hearing as set
forth below:
(a) If the Licensee abandons the Wind Energy System located on the premises
for a period of one year or more; or
(b) If the Licensee fails to observe or perform any material condition or
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
13
provision of this license for a period of 30 days after it has received
written notice of such failure from the City; provided, however, that a
Violation shall not occur if the Licensee commenced performance of such
obligation within such 30-day period and is diligently proceeding to
complete such performance; or
(c) If there is a material failure by the Licensee to comply with any statute,
regulation, rule, or license administered by any federal, state or county
department, agency, or commission directly related to the operation of the
Wind Energy System, and if the Licensee fails to cure the material failure
to comply for a period of 30 days after the date Licensee receives written
notice of such failure from the City, or the federal, state or local
governmental body or agency with jurisdiction; provided, however, that a
Violation shall not occur if Licensee commences performance of such
obligation within such 30- day period and is diligently proceeding to
complete such performance.
(3) Hearing. The City shall not revoke any license without first providing the
Licensee a hearing and the right to respond, including the right to present
evidence regarding any defenses or extenuating circumstances (such as Licensee's
prompt commencement of remedial measures that cannot reasonably be
concluded within 30 days) regarding the alleged Violations.
(4) Judicial Review. The Licensee shall have the right to appeal any revocation to
circuit court within 30 days of the date of the revocation.
23.10 LICENSE EXPIRATION. Unless the Council authorizes a different term based upon
analysis of the useful life of the Wind Energy System, every license issued pursuant to
this Chapter will terminate upon the expiration of 30 years from the date of issuance.
23.11 ABANDONMENT.
(1) The Licensee shall notify the City when the Wind Energy System is no longer in
operation. Within 12 months of cessation of operations, unless the Council
approves a time extension if the Licensee provides good cause, the Licensee shall
do the following:
(a) All obsolete, damaged, unused, or abandoned Wind Energy Systems and
accessory facilities shall be removed; and
(b) All foundation, pads, and underground electrical wires shall be removed to
City of Chilton CH. 23 Wind Energy Systems
14
a depth of four feet below the surface of the ground; and
(c) All hazardous materials shall be removed from the property and disposed
of in accordance with federal and state laws.
(d) Any access roads shall be removed, cleared, and graded by the Licensee,
unless the Landowner wants to keep the access road. The City will not be
assumed to take ownership of any access road unless through official
action of the Council.
(2) If removal and/or restoration are not completed, the City may order removal
utilizing the Security required under Section 5.3(m).
23.12 SEVERABILITY. The provisions of this Chapter are severable, and the invalidity of any
section, subdivision, paragraph, or other part of this Chapter shall not affect the validity
or effectiveness of the remainder of the Chapter.
23.13 PENALTIES.
(1) Any Person who fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall be
subject to the penalties described in Section 23.06 of the Municipal Code of the
City of Chilton. Each day of such failure shall be deemed a separate offense.
(2) Any Wind Energy System or portion of a Wind Energy Facility built or erected or
structurally altered in violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance
and subject to all applicable nuisance abatement laws.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
1
CHAPTER 24
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING
(Ord. #1106 6/17/2014, Ord. #667 8/4/87)
Page
24.01 Statutory Authorization 2
24.02 General Provisions 2
24.03 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District 3
24.04 Nonconforming Structures and Uses 8
24.05 Administrative Provisions 9
24.06 Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations 13
24.07 Enforcement and Penalties 14
24.08 Definitions 15
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
2
24.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
(1) This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization in sections 62.23, 62.231,
62.233, 87.30 and 281.31, Wis. Stats.
(2) FINDINGS OF FACT. Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and the pollution
of the navigable waters of the City of Chilton would adversely affect the public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and impair the tax base. The
Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all municipalities to further
the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; prevent and control water pollution;
protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life; control building sites, placement of
structures and land uses; and preserve shore cover and natural beauty.
(3) PURPOSE. To promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare,
this ordinance has been established to:
(a) Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
(b) Prevent and control water pollution by filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients,
heavy metals or organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable
waters and to maintain storm and flood water capacity;
(c) Protect fish spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life and wildlife by preserving
wetlands and other fish and aquatic habitat;
(d) Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
(e) Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal of natural
shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation, filling and other
earth moving activities.
(4) TITLE. Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Ordinance for the City of Chilton, Wisconsin.
24.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(1) COMPLIANCE. The use of wetlands, and the alteration of wetlands within the
shoreland area of the City of Chilton shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (However, see
section 24.04 of this ordinance, for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.)
All permitted development shall require the issuance of a building permit unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this ordinance.
(2) MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED. Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to comply with
this ordinance and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply
if Section 13.48(13), Wis. Stats., applies. The construction, reconstruction,
maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department
of Transportation are exempt when Section 30.12(4) (a), Wis. Stats., applies.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
3
(3) ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
(a) This ordinance supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning ordinance
enacted under Section 62.23 or 87.30, Wis. Stats., which relate to shorelandwetlands,
except that where another municipal zoning ordinance is more
restrictive than the provisions contained in this ordinance, that ordinance shall
continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not
otherwise.
(b) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing deed
restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this ordinance imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(4) INTERPRETATIONS. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to the minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed
in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by the Wisconsin Statutes. Where a provision of this
ordinance is required by a standard in Chapter NR117, Wis. Adm. Code, and where
the ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the
Chapter NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance or
in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this ordinance.
(5) SEVERABILITY. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid or
unconstitutional for any reason, by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this ordinance shall not be affected.
24.03 SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING DISTRICT.
(1) PURPOSE. This ordinance is adopted to maintain safe and healthful conditions, to
prevent and control water pollution, to protect fish spawning grounds, fish and
aquatic life and wildlife habitat, to preserve shore cover and natural beauty and to
control building and development in wetlands whenever possible. When
development is permitted in a wetland, the development should occur in a manner
which minimizes adverse impacts upon the wetland.
(2) OFFICIAL SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING MAPS. The following maps are
hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance and are on file in the office of the
Clerk for the City of Chilton, Wisconsin:
Wisconsin Wetland Inventory Map(s), stamped “FINAL” on October 9, 1985, USCG
Topographical Maps
(3) DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
(a) The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all wetlands in the City of
Chilton, Wisconsin which are five acres or more and are shown on the final
Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted and made a part of this ordinance
in Section 24.03(2) and which are:
1. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the City
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
4
of Chilton shall be presumed to be navigable if they are listed in the
Department publication “Surface Water Resources of Calumet County” or
are shown on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or
other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and
made a part of this ordinance in Section 24.03(2) of this ordinance.
2. Within three hundred (300) feet of the ordinary high-water mark of
navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the flood plain,
whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent
waterways on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps or
other zoning base maps which have been incorporated by reference and
made a part of this ordinance in Section 24.03(2) of this ordinance. Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps, Flood Insurance Rate Maps, County Soil Survey
Maps or other existing community flood plain zoning maps used to
delineate flood plain area which have been adopted by the City of Chilton,
shall be used to determine the extent of flood plain areas in the City of
Chilton.
(b) Determination of navigability and ordinary high-water mark shall initially be
made by the Building Inspector. When questions arise, the Building Inspector
shall contact the appropriate district office of the Department for a final
determination of navigability or ordinary high-water mark.
(c) When an apparent discrepancy exists between the shoreland-wetland district
boundary shown on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps and the actual
field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the Building Inspector
shall contact the appropriate district office of the Department to determine if
the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped, is in error. If the
Department staff concur with the Building Inspector that a particular area was
incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the Building Inspector shall have the
authority to immediately grant to deny land use or building permit in
accordance with the regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In
order to correct wetland mapping errors shown on the official shorelandwetland
zoning maps, the Building Inspector shall be responsible for initiating
a shoreland-wetland map amendment within a reasonable period.
(4) SETBACK AREA. There shall be a minimum shoreland setback area of at least
fifty feet (50') from the ordinary high water mark, except that construction or
placement of a principal building within the shoreland setback area may be
allowed if all the following apply:
(a) The principal building is constructed or placed on a lot or parcel of land that
is immediately adjacent on each side to a lot or parcel of land containing a
principal building.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
5
(b) The principal building is constructed or placed within a distance equal to the
average setback of the principal building on the adjacent lots or 35 feet from
the ordinary high-water mark, whichever distance is greater.
(5) VEGETATION. Within the District Boundaries, properties that contain vegetation
shall maintain that vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone along the entire shoreline
of the property and extending thirty-five feet (35') inland from the ordinary high
water mark of the navigable water, except as provided in the following:
(a) If the vegetation in a vegetative buffer zone contains invasive species or dead
or diseased vegetation, the owner of the property may remove the vegetation,
except that if the owner removes all the vegetation in the vegetative buffer zone,
the owner shall establish a vegetative buffer zone with new vegetation.
(b) A property that is required to maintain or establish a vegetative buffer zone
under this section may remove all of the vegetation in a part of that zone in order
to establish a viewing or access corridor that is no greater than thirty feet (30')
wide for every one hundred feet (100') of shoreline frontage and that extends no
more than thirty-five feet (35') inland from the ordinary high water mark.
(6) PERMITTED USES. The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
chapters 30 and 31 of the Wis. Stats., and the provisions of other local, state and
federal laws, if applicable:
(a) Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a building permit,
provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
1. Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
boating;
2. The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild rice,
berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to the
natural reproduction of such crops;
3. The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timber;
4. The pasturing of livestock;
5. The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
6. The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
(b) Uses which do not require the issuance of a building permit and which may
involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
1. The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water level
stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
6
dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of
silvicultural activities if not corrected;
2. The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland alterations
necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
3. The maintenance and repair of existing drainage ditches, where
permissible under section 30.20, Wis. Stats., or of other existing drainage
systems (such as tiling) to restore pre-existing levels of drainage,
including the minimum amount of filling necessary to dispose of dredged
spoil, provided that the filling is permissible under Chapter 30, Wis. Stats.,
and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where possible;
4. The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such
construction or maintenance;
5. The construction and maintenance of piers, docks and walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges build on pilings, including limited
excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
6. The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district provided that
such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland
listed in section 24.06 of this ordinance; and
7. The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing
highways and ridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary
for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction.
(c) Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a building or conditional use
permit and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically
provided below:
1. The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for the
continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential utility
and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under
Section 24.03(4), of this ordinance, provided that:
a. The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
b. The road is designed and constructed to minimize the adverse impact
upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in Section 24.06(c)
of this ordinance;
c. The road is designed and constructed with the minimum crosssectional
area practical to serve the intended use;
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
7
d. Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate area of
the road bed only; and
e. Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or
maintenance of the road.
2. The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings
provided that;
a. The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted in
the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows
or other wetland or aquatic animals;
b. The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
c. The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
d. Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide structural
support for the building is allowed.
3. The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and
scientific areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife
habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife
preserves and public boat launching ramps, provided that:
a. Any private development allowed under this paragraph shall be used
exclusively for the permitted purpose;
b. Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development
of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the
construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed;
c. The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses
permitted under this paragraph are allowed only where such
construction and maintenance meets the criteria in Section
24.03(4) (c) of this ordinance; and
d. Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal
farms, wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving
wildlife habitat or to otherwise enhance wetland values.
4. The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines and water, gas and sewer distribution lines, and
related facilities provided that;
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
8
a. The transmission and distribution lines and related facilities cannot,
as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
b. Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such construction or
maintenance is allowed; and
c. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the
wetland listed in Section 24.06(c) of this ordinance.
5. The construction and maintenance of railroad lines provided that:
a. The railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
b. Only limited wetland alteration necessary for such construction or
maintenance is allowed; and
c. Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
minimize the adverse impact upon the natural functions of the
wetland as listed in Section 24.06(c) of this ordinance.
(7) PROHIBITED USES.
(a) Any use not listed in Section 24.03(6) of this ordinance is prohibited, unless
the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by amendment of this
ordinance in accordance with Section 24.06 of this ordinance.
(b) The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high-water mark
of any navigable waters are prohibited.
24.04 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.
(1) The existing lawful use of a structure, building or property, or its accessory
use, which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
(2) Notwithstanding Section 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., the repair, reconstruction,
renovation, remodeling or expansion of a legal nonconforming structure in
existence at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance
adopted under section 62.231, Wis. Stats. or of an environmental control facility
in existence on May 7, 1982, related to that structure, is permitted under section
62.231(5), Wis. Stats. Section 62.23(7)(h), Wis. Stats., applies to any
environmental control facility that was not in existence on May 7, 1982, but was
in existence on the effective date of this ordinance or amendment.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
9
24.05 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
(1) BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector shall have the following duties
and powers:
(a) Advise applicants as to the provisions of this ordinance and assist them in
preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
(b) Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties for
compliance with this ordinance.
(c) Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved and
other official actions.
(d) Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of 8 A.M. and
6 P.M. for the purpose of performing these duties.
(e) Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits, appeals
for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within 10 days
after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office of the
Department.
(f) Investigate and report violations of this ordinance to the appropriate City
planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or municipal
attorney.
(2) ZONING/LAND USE/BUILDING PERMITS.
(a) WHEN REQUIRED. Unless another section of this ordinance specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning/land use
building permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector before any new
development, as defined in Section 24.08(a), of this ordinance, or any change in
the use of any existing building or structure is initiated.
(b) APPLICATION. An application for a building permit shall be made to the
Building Inspector upon forms furnished by the City and shall include, for the
purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the following information:
1. GENERAL INFORMATION.
a. Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property
owner and contractor, where applicable.
b. Legal description of the property and a general description of the
proposed use or development.
c. Whether or not a private water or sewage system is to be
installed.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
10
2. SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The site development plan shall be
drawn to scale and submitted as a part of the permit application form and
shall contain the following information:
a. Dimensions and area of the lot;
b. Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot
lines and center line of all abutting streets or highways;
c. Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
d. Location of the ordinary high-water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
e. Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
f. Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover;
g. Location of flood plain and floodway limits on the property as
determined from flood plain zoning maps used to delineate flood
plain areas;
h. Location of existing or future access roads; and
i. Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration.
(3) EXPIRATION. All permits issued under the authority of this ordinance shall expire
one (1) year from the date of issuance.
(4) CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
(a) Except where no building permit or conditional use permit is required, no
land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter constructed,
altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied, until a
certificate of compliance is issued by the Building Inspector subject to the
following provisions:
1. The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or premises or
part thereof and the proposed use thereof, conform to the provisions of this
ordinance.
2. Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the application for
a building permit.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
11
3. The certificate of compliance shall be issued within 10 days after the
completion of the work specified in the building/conditional use permit,
providing the building or premises or proposed use thereof conforms with all
the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The Building Inspector may issue a temporary certificate of compliance for a
building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and regulations established
therefore, by the City Council.
(c) Upon written request from the owner, the Building Inspector shall issue a
certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the time of the
adoption, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of use made of the
building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to the provisions of
this ordinance.
(d) APPLICATION. Any use listed as a conditional use in this ordinance shall
be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Building
Inspector and a conditional use permit has been granted by the Board of Appeals
following the procedures in Sections 24.05(8)(b), (c), and (d), of this ordinance,
for hearing and deciding appeals.
(e) CONDITIONS. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the permitted uses in Section 24.03(4)(c) of this ordinance,
the Board of Appeals shall attach such conditions to a conditional use permit, in
addition to those required elsewhere in this ordinance, as are necessary to further
the purposes of this ordinance as listed in Section 24.01(3) of this ordinance.
Such conditions may include specifications for, without limitation because of
specific enumeration: type of shore cover; erosion potential; increased side yard
setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and
planting
Screens; period of operation; operational control; sureties; deed restrictions;
location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs; and type of construction. To
secure information upon which to base its determination, the Board of Appeals
may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a
building permit, other pertinent information which is necessary to determine if the
proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance.
(5) FEES. NOTE: The City Council may, by resolution or ordinances adopt fees
for the following:
(a) Building Permits
(b) Certificates of Compliance
(c) Public hearings
(d) Legal notice publications.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
12
(e) Conditional Use Permits.
(6) RECORDING. Where a building permit or conditional use permit is approved, an
appropriate record shall be made by the Building Inspector of the land use and structures
permitted.
(7) REVOCATION. Where the conditions of a building permit or conditional use permit
are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Board of Appeals.
(8) BOARD OF APPEALS. The Board of Appeals shall be that body created pursuant
to Section 16.20.
(a) POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board of Appeals shall:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official
in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
2. Hear and decide applications for conditional use permits.
3. May authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the
terms of the ordinance as shall not be contrary to the public interest, where
owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the ordinance will
result in unnecessary hardship. In the issuance of a variance, the spirit of
the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. No variance
from the terms of this ordinance shall be granted which is contrary to the
public interest. A variance may be granted where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would
result in unnecessary hardship. The granting of a variance shall not have
the effect of granting or extending any use of property which is prohibited
in that zoning district by this ordinance.
(b) APPEALS TO THE BOARD. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken
by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
community affected by any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
building inspector or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be taken
within twenty (20) days time as provided by the rules of the Board by filing with
the official from whom the appeal is taken, and with the Board of Appeals, a
notice of appeal specifying the reasons therefor. The Building Inspector or other
official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record on which the appeal action was taken.
(c) PUBLIC HEARINGS.
1. Before making a decision on an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall,
within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The Board shall
give public notice of the hearing by publishing a Class 2 Notice under Ch.
985, Stats., specifying the date, time and place of the hearing and the
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
13
matters to come before the Board. At the public hearing, any party may
appear in person, by agent or by attorney and present testimony.
2. A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest and the
appropriate district office of the Department at least 10 days prior to all
public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning.
(d) DECISIONS.
1. The final disposition of an appeal or application for a conditional use
permit, to the Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a written decision,
made within a reasonable time after the public hearing, signed by the
Board chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which are
the basis of the Board’s determination and shall either affirm, reverse, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in
whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or persecution,
or grant the application for a conditional use permit.
2. A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest and
the appropriate district office of the Department within 10 days after the
decision is issued.
24.06 AMENDING SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING REGULATIONS.
The City may from time to time, alter, supplement or change the district boundaries and
the regulations contained in this ordinance in accordance with the requirements of
Section 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats., and the following:
(a) A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to the
appropriate district office of the Department within 5 days of the submission of
the proposed amendment to the City Planning agency;
(b) All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning
regulations shall be referred to the city planning agency, and a public hearing
shall be held as required by Section 62.23(7)(d)2, Wis. Stats. The appropriate
district office of the Department shall be provided with written notice of the
public hearing at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
(c) In order to insure that the shoreland protection objectives in Section 144.26,
Stats., will be accomplished by the amendment, the City Council may not rezone
a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning district, or any portion thereof, where the
proposed rezoning may result in a significant adverse impact upon any of the
following;
1. Storm and flood water storage capacity;
2. Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to
another area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
14
3. Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic
compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
4. Shoreline protection against soil erosion;
5. Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
6. Wildlife habitat; or
7. Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest, including
scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
(d) Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed in
Section 24.06(c), of this ordinance, the Department shall so notify the City of its
determination either prior to or during the public hearing held on the proposed
amendment. The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided
with:
1. A copy of the recommendations and report, if any, of the City planning
agency on the proposed text or map amendment, within 10 days after the
submission of those recommendations to the City Council; and
2. Written notice of the City Council’s action on the proposed text or map
amendment within 10 days after the action is taken.
(e) If the Department notifies the City Planning agency in writing that criteria
listed in Section 24.06(c), of this ordinance, that proposed amendment, if
approved by the City Council, may not become effective until more than 30 days
have elapsed since written notice of the City Council approval was mailed to the
Department, as required by Section 24.06(1) of this ordinance. If within the 30
days period, the Department notifies the City Council that the Department intends
to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the City under
Section 62.231, Wis. Stats., the proposed amendment may not become effective
until the ordinance adoption procedure under Section 62.231, Wis. Stats., is
completed or otherwise terminated.
24.07 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. Any development, building or structure or
accessory building or structure constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or
replaced or any use or accessory use established after the effective date of this ordinance
in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, by any person, firm, association,
corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a violation.
The Building Inspector shall refer violations to the City Planning agency and the district
attorney, corporation counsel or municipal attorney who shall prosecute such violations.
Any person, firm, association, or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any
of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $1.00
nor more than $100.00 per offense, together with the taxable costs of such action. Each
day of continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
15
ordinance is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the
maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the City, the State, or any citizen
thereof pursuant to Section 87.30(2), Wis. Stats.
24.08 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this ordinance, the terms or words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the singular number include the plural number; words in the plural number
include the singular number. The word “shall” is mandatory, not permissive. All
districts unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.
(a) The following terms used in this ordinance mean:
1. “Accessory structure or use” means a detached subordinate structure or
a use which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection
with, the principle structure or use to which it is related and which is
located on the same lot as that of the principle structure or use.
2. “Boathouse” as defined in Section 30.12(1), Wis. Stats., means a
permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated
materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs
or walls or any combination of structural parts.
3. “Department” means the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
4. “Development” means any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of
buildings, structures or accessory structures; the construction of additions
or substantial alterations to buildings, structures or accessory structures;
the placement of buildings or structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the
deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
5. “Drainage system” means one or more artificial ditches, tile drains or
similar devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it
to a point of discharge.
6. “Environmental control facility” means any facility, temporary or
permanent, which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the
prevention, measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water
pollutants, solid waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants,
including facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace
existing property or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting
acceptable pollution control standards or which are to be supplemented or
replaced by other pollution control facilities.
7. “Fixed houseboat” as defined in Section 30.12(1), Wis. Stats., means a
structure not actually used for navigation which extends beyond the
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
16
ordinary high-water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in place
either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the
bed of the waterway.
8. “Navigable waters” means Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural
inland lakes with Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages
and other waters within the territorial limits of this state, including the
Wisconsin portion of boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws
of this state. Under Section 144.26(2)(d), Wis. Stats., not withstanding
any other provision of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder,
shoreland ordinances required under Section (61.351/62.231), Wis. Stats.,
and Chapter NR 117, Wis. Adm. Code, do not apply to lands adjacent to
farm drainage ditches if;
(a) Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or
river;
(b) Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands
were not navigable streams before ditching; and
(c) Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
9. “Ordinary high-water mark” means the point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristic.
10. “Planning Agency” means the City Plan Commission created under
Section 62.23(1), Wis. Stats., a board of public land commissioners or a
committee of the municipality’s governing body which acts on matters
pertaining to planning and zoning.
11. “Regional flood” means a flood determined to be representative of
large floods known to have generally occurred in Wisconsin and which
may be expected to occur or be exceeded on a particular stream because of
like physical characteristics, once in every 100 years.
12. “Shorelands” means lands within the following distances from the
ordinary high-water mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake,
pond or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landward
side of the flood plain, whichever distance is greater.
13. “Shoreland-wetland district” means the zoning district, created in this
shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance, comprised of shorelands that are
designated as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been
adopted and made a part of this ordinance as described in Section 24.02(2)
of this ordinance.
City of Chilton Ch. 24 Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
17
14. “Special exception or conditional use” means a use which is permitted
by this ordinance provided that certain conditions specified in the
ordinance are met and that a permit is granted by the Board of Appeals or,
where appropriate, the planning agency designated by the City Council.
15. “Unnecessary hardship” means that circumstance where special
conditions, which were not self-created, affect a particular property and
make strict conformity with the restrictions governing area, setbacks,
frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in
light of the purpose of this ordinance.
16. “Variance” means an authorization granted by the Board of Appeals
to construct, alter or use a building or structure in a manner that deviates
from the dimensional standards of this ordinance.
17. “Wetlands” means those areas where water is at, near or above the
land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and
which have soils indicative of wet conditions.
18. “Wetland alteration” means any filling, flooding, draining, dredging,
ditching, tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures
or dike and dam construction in a wetland area.